CODE OF ORDINANCES OF 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Adopted: January 12, 1988 
Effective: January 12, 1988 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
Republication published by Order of the City Council, 1999 
____________ 
 
OFFICALS 
of the 
CITY OF CEDAR HILL, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
W. S. Permenter 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mike Wright, Mayor Pro Tem 
T. W. "Turk" Cannady 
Larry Wright 
Larry Gwinn 
Bill Perry, Jr. 
Jim Cate 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Lewis Sifford 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Greg Vick 
City Manager 
____________ 
Frankie Lee 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Cedar Hill of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1976 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1976 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the sixteenth section of Chapter 10 is 10-16. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 4-2 and 4-3 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-2.1, 4-2.2 and 4-2.3, respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into this Code, may be cited as a part hereof. 
Successfully maintaining this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of James S. Vaught, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Rick Wieland, Director of Community Services, and Mr. Lewis Sifford, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 88-948 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Cedar Hill, Texas; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing for an Effective Date. 
Now, Therefore, Be It Ordained by the City Council of Cedar Hill, Texas: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of Cedar Hill, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 22, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, enacted on or before October 14, 1986, and not included, recognized or continued in force by reference in the Code, are repealed. Notwithstanding any provisions contained herein, Ordinance No. 77-439, as amended by Ordinance No. 85-777 and any subsequent amendments thereto, shall remain in full force and effect. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in all cases arising under the ordinances of the city that govern fire safety, zoning and public health and sanitation, other than vegetation and litter violations, and not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) in all other cases. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 14, 1986, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. Because of the nature of the interest and safeguard sought to be protected by this ordinance, and in the interest of health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, this ordinance shall take effect immediately after passage, approval and publication, as required by law. 
PASSED, ADOPTED AND APPROVED by the City Council of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, on this the 12th of January, 1988. 
Approved: 
/s/  W.S. Permenter 
Mayor 
Attest: 
/s/  Frankie Lee 
City Secretary 
Approved as to form: 
Lewis Sifford 
City Attorney  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— This Part contains the Home Rule Charter of the City, adopted by the voters, as set out in that certain pamphlet entitled "Charter of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas." Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. Material in brackets [ ] has been added by the editor for purposes of clarification or correction, except that obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. A uniform style of capitalization has been instituted. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CORPORATE NAME 
 
Section 1. - Corporate name. 
All of the inhabitants of the City of Cedar Hill, in Dallas and Ellis counties, in the State of Texas, as the boundaries and limits of said city are herein established, shall be body politic, incorporated under and to be known by the name and the style of the "City of Cedar Hill", with such powers, rights and duties herein provided. 
(As amended 1-4-1980)  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL BOUNDARIES 
 
Section 1. - Municipal boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Cedar Hill shall be the same as have been heretofore established and now exist.  
Section 2. - Extension of boundaries. 
The City Council shall have power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the City of Cedar Hill; and to provide for the alteration and the extension of said boundary limits and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to the City, with or without the consent of the territory and the inhabitants annexed. However, upon the annexation of any additional territory the City of Cedar Hill must, within a reasonable time after such annexation, wherever reasonable and practical, make available sewer and water lines in designated streets and alleys of such territory so annexed. Upon the introduction of any such ordinance in the City Council, it shall be published in the form in which it may be finally passed, in the official newspaper of the City of Cedar Hill, at least one time, and said ordinance shall not thereafter be finally acted upon until at least thirty days have elapsed after the first publication thereof; and upon the final passage of any such ordinance, the boundary limits of the City shall thereafter be fixed in such ordinance; and when any additional territory has been so annexed, same shall be a part of the City of Cedar Hill and the property situated therein shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the City and the inhabitants shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of all the citizens, and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City. 
State Law reference— Annexations, V.T.C.A., Local Gas Code, § 43.021 et seq.  
Section 3. - Platting of property. 
Should any property situated within the city limits, as herein established or as may hereafter be established or within five miles of such corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill, as herein established or as may hereinafter be established, be hereafter platted into blocks and lots, the owner or owners of said property shall comply with all of the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 212.001 et seq.; the provisions of which act and article are herewith especially and specifically adopted by the vote of the qualified voters of said City of Cedar Hill in compliance with Section 10 of said Act. The owner or owners of property shall also comply with the existing requirements for platting of property as set forth in the platting ordinances of the City of Cedar Hill. 
State Law reference— Extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 42.001 et seq.; subdivision of land, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 212.001 et seq.  
ARTICLE III. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT 
 
Section 1. - Form of government. 
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "Council-Manager Government". Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution, the statutes of this state and by this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective Council, hereinafter referred to as the "City Council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the City Manager, who in turn shall be responsible to the City Council for the execution of the laws and the administration of the government of the City. All power of the City shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance, the State Constitution or the Statutes of the State.  
ARTICLE IV. - CORPORATE POWERS 
 
Section 1. - General. 
(a)  The City of Cedar Hill, made a body politic and corporate by the legal adoption of this Charter, shall have perpetual succession; may use a common seal; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; impleaded and be impleaded in all courts and places and in all matters whatever; may take, hold and purchase such lands, within or without the City limits, as may be needed for corporate purposes of said City, and may sell any real estate or personal property owned by it; perform and render all public service, and when deemed expedient may condemn property for corporate use, and may hold, manage and control the same; and shall be subject to all duties and obligations now pertaining to or incumbent upon said City as a corporation, not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter; and shall enjoy all rights, immunities, powers, privileges and franchises now possessed by said City and herein conferred and granted; and except as prohibited by the Constitution of the State of Texas or restricted by this Charter, the City of Cedar Hill shall have and may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. In addition to the powers herein otherwise granted, the City shall have all powers enumerated in Article 1175, Revised Statutes of Texas, 1925, as heretofore amended, as though such statutes were set forth herein. 
(b)  The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but, in addition to the powers enumerated therein or implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the City of Cedar Hill shall have, and may exercise, all powers which under the Constitution and Statutes of the State of Texas it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. All powers of the City, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter or, if not prescribed therein, then in the manner provided by ordinance or resolution of the Council.  
Section 2. - Powers of ordinances. 
The City of Cedar Hill shall have the power to enact and enforce all ordinances necessary to protect health, life and property, and to prevent and summarily abate and remove all nuisances, and preserve and enforce good government and order and security of the City and its inhabitants; and to enact and enforce ordinances on any and all subjects; provided that no ordinance shall be enacted inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, or Constitution of the State of Texas; it being the intention to obtain by the adoption of this Charter, full power of local self government, and the City of Cedar Hill shall have and exercise all the powers of local self government granted to cities having more than five thousand inhabitants by what is known as the Home Rule Amendment to the Constitution of the State of Texas, and to the Home Rule Enabling Act passed by the legislature of Texas, and now known as Chapter 13 of Title 28 of the Revised Civil Statutes of this State [V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, §§ 26.001 et seq., 51.001 et seq.]  
Section 3. - Style of ordinances. 
The style of all ordinances of the City of Cedar Hill shall be: "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Cedar Hill," but the same shall be omitted when the ordinances of the City are codified and published in book or pamphlet form by the City of Cedar Hill, or under the authority of its governing body.  
Section 4. - Real estate, etc., owned by the city. 
All real estate owned in fee simple title, or held by lease, sufferance, easement or otherwise, all public buildings, fire stations, parks, airports, streets and alleys; and all property, whether real or personal, of whatever kind, character or description now owned or controlled by the City of Cedar Hill shall vest in, inure to, remain and be the property of said City of Cedar Hill under this Charter; and all causes of action, choses in action, rights or privileges of every kind and character and all property of whatsoever character or description which may have been held and is now held, controlled or used by said City of Cedar Hill for public uses or in trust for the public, shall vest in and remain and inure to the City of Cedar Hill under this Charter, and all suits and pending actions to which the City of Cedar Hill heretofore was or now is a party, plaintiff or defendant, shall in no wise be affected or terminated by the adoption of this Charter, but shall continue unabated.  
Section 5. - Acquisition of property. 
The City of Cedar Hill shall have the power and authority to acquire by purchase, gift, devise, deed, condemnation or otherwise any character of property, within or without its municipal boundaries, including any charitable or trust funds.  
Section 6. - Public property exempt from execution. 
No public property or any other character of property owned or held by the City of Cedar Hill shall be subject to any execution of any kind or nature.  
Section 7. - City funds not subject to garnishment. 
No funds of the City of Cedar Hill shall be subject to garnishment, and the City of Cedar Hill shall never be required to answer any garnishment proceeding.  
Section 8. - Liability for negligence. 
The City of Cedar Hill is only liable for negligence insofar as provided for by the Texas Tort Claims Act, Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code, Section 101.001, et seq., and as the same may be hereinafter amended. 
(As amended 5-7-91(91-1))  
Section 9. - City not required to give bond. 
It shall not be necessary in any suit or proceeding in which the City of Cedar Hill is a party for any bond, undertaking or other security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of the City in any of the State courts, but all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond had been given, and the City of Cedar Hill shall be liable as if the security or bond had been duly executed.  
Section 10. - Right of eminent domain. 
The City of Cedar Hill shall have the right of eminent domain for public purposes whenever the governing authority shall deem it necessary; and to take any private property, within or without the City limits, and to acquire lands, within or without the City for any municipal purposes that may be authorized by law. The power herein granted for the purpose of acquiring private property shall include the power of improvement and enlargement of water works, including water supply, riparian rights, standpipes, water sheds, dams, the construction of supply reservoirs, wells, parks, squares, and pleasure grounds, airports, and for the purpose of strengthening or improving the channel of any stream, branch, draw or drain, or the straightening or widening or extension of any street, alley, avenue, boulevard or other public highway. In all cases where the City seeks to exercise the power of eminent domain it shall be controlled as nearly as practicable by the laws governing the condemnation of property by railroad corporations in any such cases. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of governing authority of the City, when so expressed, to take the fee in the land so condemned, and such power authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purpose.  
Section 11. - Street powers. 
The City of Cedar Hill shall have the power to lay out, establish, open, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, abandon and improve streets, alleys, sidewalks, squares, parks, public places and bridges and regulate the use thereof. The City shall further have the power to require the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property or places all obstructions, telegraph, telephone, or other poles, carrying electric wires or signs, show cases and encroachments of every nature or character upon any said streets and sidewalks, and to vacate and close private ways for maintenance[,] repairs and construction; provided that the expense of relocation or removal of all obstructions and encroachments of every nature and easements for the purpose of maintenance, repairs and construction of streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public places or property shall be borne by the owner and/or the person who owns the right to use such encroachments, obstructions and easements. When a street or alley has been vacated or abandoned the City shall have the right to sell the same as now provided by the General Laws of the State of Texas. 
State Law reference— VTCA Transportation Code § 311.001.  
Section 12. - Street improvements and assessments therefor. 
The act passed by the Legislature of the State of Texas in 1927 and shown as Chapter 106, Acts of the First Called Session of the Fortieth Legislature, together with all amendments thereof, said Act with amendments being shown as V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.091 et seq., is hereby embraced in and made a part of this Charter.  
Section 13. - Regulation of vehicles. 
The City Council shall have the power by ordinance or otherwise to operate and control the operation of all character of vehicles using public streets, including motorcycles, bicycles, automobiles, trucks, trailers, buses, or like vehicles; and to prescribe the speed of the same, the routing of the same, and the lighting of the same by night. 
(As amended 5-2-98(98-1))  
Section 14. - Railroads. 
The City Council shall have the power by ordinance or otherwise to direct and control, within the City limits, the speed of engines, locomotives and motor cars operating on railroad tracks, the construction of railroad tracks, turnouts and switches, and the regulation of the grade thereof and the use of streets, and regulating unusual and excessive noises, and to regulate by ordinance all signal lights and safety devices at street crossings.  
Section 15. - Regulation of public utilities. 
(a)  The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to determine, fix and regulate the charges, fares or rates of compensation to be charged by any person, firm or corporation enjoying a franchise in the City of Cedar Hill, and shall in determining, fixing and regulating such charges, fares or rates of compensation, base the same upon fair value of the property of such person, firm or corporation devoted to furnishing service to such City or the inhabitants thereof. The City Council may prescribe the character, quality and efficiency of service to be rendered and shall have the power to regulate and require the extension of lines or services of such public utility within such City by such person, firm or corporation and from time to time may alter or change such rules, regulations, and compensation, provided that, in adopting such regulations and in fixing or changing such compensation or determining the reasonableness thereof, no stock or bonds authorized or issued by any corporation enjoying such franchise shall be considered unless on proof that the same have been actually issued by the corporation for money paid and used for the development of the corporate property, labor done or property actually received, in accordance with the Laws and Constitution of this State applicable thereto. In order to ascertain all facts necessary for a proper understanding of what is or should be a reasonable rate or regulation, the City Council shall have full power to inspect the books of such franchise holder and compel the attendance of witnesses for such purpose. 
(b)  Any company, corporation or person who may be engaged in furnishing to the inhabitants of the City of Cedar Hill any light, power or gas, telephone service, or refuse collection service shall[,] on or before the 1st day of March of each year, file with the Mayor of the City of Cedar Hill a sworn written report, including all information required to be set forth by ordinance of the City of Cedar Hill, pertaining to their operations insofar as same pertain to their operations within the City limits of the City of Cedar Hill. 
(As amended 5-7-91(91-2))  
Section 16. - Public utilities. 
The City shall have the power to build, construct, purchase, own, lease, maintain and operate, within or without the City limits, light and power systems, water systems, sewer systems or sanitary disposal equipment and appliances, natural gas systems, parks and swimming pools, fertilizer plants, and any other public service or utility; power to mortgage and encumber such system or systems in the manner provided in Article[s] 1111 to 1118, inclusive, of the 1925 Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, as amended, and any other laws of the State of Texas applicable thereto; and all the powers which the City might exercise in connection with such public utilities and public services under Article 1175 of the 1925 Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, and any amendments thereto now hereafter in effect, as well as under any other General Laws of the State of Texas pertinent or applicable thereto, including the power to demand and receive compensation for service furnished for private purposes, or otherwise, and with full and complete power and right of eminent domain proper and necessary efficiently to carry out said objects.  
Section 17. - The power to buy and sell gas, etc. 
The City shall have the power to purchase water, electricity, gas, oil, or any other article or service essential to a proper conduct of all of the affairs of the City and of its inhabitants on such terms as the City Council may deem proper, for sale and distribution to the inhabitants of the City or adjacent territory.  
Section 18. - Franchises and special privileges. 
(a)  The right to control easement, use and ownership and title to the streets, highways, public thoroughfares and property of the City, its avenues, parks, bridges and all other public places and property, are hereby declared to be inalienable except by ordinance duly passed by a majority of all members of the City Council, and no grant of any franchise or lease, or right to use the same, either on, through, along, across, under or over the same, by any private corporation, association or individual shall be granted by the City Council for longer period than thirty (30) years unless submitted to the vote of the legally qualified voters of the City at an election called by the City as set forth herein. The City shall call such an election when a petition requesting such an election signed by at least ten percent (10%) of the registered qualified voters of the City is filed requesting such an election. If the majority of the votes cast at said election shall be in favor of making the grant as applied for, said grant shall be made for a term of years as specified in the ordinance calling said election. 
(b)  No franchise shall ever be granted until it has been approved by a majority of the City Council. The City may extend a franchise for one (1) year increments; however, aggregate extensions may not extend beyond five (5) years. As a prerequisite to any action by the City Council, a request for a franchise shall be caused to be published in the official newspaper of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. Said publication shall be entitled "Notice of a Requested Franchise in the City of Cedar Hill" and shall be published once a week for two (2) weeks. The caption of the franchise shall be read at two (2) regular meetings of the City Council and the full text of the franchise shall be maintained on file in the City Secretary's office for public review. No action may be taken by the City Council before the expiration of thirty (30) days from the initial submission of the franchise request to the City, and under no circumstances may the City waive any of the franchise requirements herein. 
(c)  No franchise, grant, or special privilege shall ever be made unless it provides for adequate compensation or consideration thereof to be paid to the City. 
(d)  Every such franchise or grant shall make adequate provision, by way of forfeiture of the grant or otherwise, to secure efficiency of public service at reasonable rates and to maintain the property devoted to the public service in good repair throughout the term of the grant of said franchise. 
(e)  No franchise grant shall ever be exclusive. 
(f)  No special privilege shall ever be granted until it has been approved by a majority of the City Council, after said request for special privilege has been read in full at two regular meetings of the City Council; provided that in the event of an emergency or the necessity for an immediate effect of a franchise, the City may waive the reading as regards a request for a special privilege only. 
(g)  The City Council may prescribe the forms and methods of the keeping of accounts of any grantees under franchise, provided that the forms and methods of keeping such accounts have not already been prescribed by a State or Federal Agency. 
(h)  All expenses in connection with the acquisition of a franchise grant or special privileges shall be borne by the applicant and the City shall in no way be responsible for any of the expenses in connection therewith. 
(As amended 5-7-91(91-3); 5-11-93(93-1); As amended 5-23-00(00-01), (00-02)) 
State Law reference— Franchises, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.071 et seq.  
Section 19. - Airports. 
The City Council shall have the power to establish, maintain and operate an airport or airports, within or without the City limits, and landing fields, radio beams, beacons and other apparatus, buildings, equipment and appurtenances necessary or convenient, therefor, and to make suitable charges for their use.  
Section 20. - Parks, playgrounds, etc. 
(a)  The City of Cedar Hill shall have exclusive control of all City parks and playgrounds, whether within or without the City limits, and to control, regulate and remove all obstructions and prevent all encroachments thereupon; to provide for raising, grading, filling, terracing, landscape gardening, erecting buildings, swimming pools and wading pools, and other structures, providing amusements therein, for establishing walks and paving driveways around, in and through said parks, playgrounds, and other public grounds, speedways or boulevards owned by it, and lying both outside and inside the municipal boundaries. 
(b)  In the event the City of Cedar Hill becomes a joint owner of property, the right of exclusive control as set forth above shall be governed by the terms of the contract or agreement of ownership. If said contract or agreement is silent as to the exclusive control, then the City shall be deemed pursuant to Section (a) above to have the exclusive control of the property. 
(c)  The cost of maintaining the aforementioned property shall be shared proportionately between the joint owners in the exact proportion of that owner's interest in the property.  
Section 21. - Underground construction. 
The City Council may require the placing of all wires or overhead construction of public utilities within the business area or fire limits of the City under the surface of the ground under such regulations as may be prescribed by the City Council from time to time.  
Section 22. - Fires. 
The City Council shall have power by ordinance or otherwise to provide means for protection against conflagrations and for the establishment, maintenance and support and regulation of a Fire Department and for guarding against fires. It may prescribe fire limits, stipulate and provide for minimum requirements for construction of buildings within such fire limits, regulate or prohibit the erection, building, replacing or repairing of wooden buildings within such limits; may prescribe that the buildings within such fire limits be made or constructed of fireproof material; and may prohibit the repairing of wooden buildings within such limits when the same have been damaged to within fifty percent (50%) of the value thereof; and may declare all dilapidated, buildings to be nuisances and direct the same to be repaired, removed or abated in such manner as the City Council may prescribe; and may further prescribe limits within which only fireproof roofing may be used; it may also by ordinance regulate, prescribe, govern or forbid the storage of lumber, building material of any kind or inflammable or explosive goods, wares and merchandise of any and every kind within certain limits and prescribed [prescribe] limits within which such materials may be stored, housed or carried.  
Section 23. - Health. 
The City Council shall have the power to provide for a Health Department and to establish all necessary rules and regulations protecting the health of the City and for the establishment of quarantine stations, pest houses, emergency hospitals and hospitals and to provide for the adoption of necessary quarantine laws to protect the inhabitants against contagious or infectious diseases. Such general laws shall include, but not to the exclusion of other powers, the following powers: 
(a)  The City Council shall have the power by ordinance or otherwise to regulate, license and inspect persons, firms, corporations, common carriers, or associations operating, managing, or conducting any hotel or any other public sleeping or eating place, or any place or vehicle where food or drink or containers therefor, of any kind is manufactured, prepared, stored, packed, served, sold or otherwise handled within the City limits of said City, or any manufacturer or vendor of candies or manufactured sweets; and shall have the power to prescribe health regulations with reference to any and all workers or employees hired or used in any of said places or vehicles, or about said places and vehicles; or who deliver products to and from said places and vehicles; and shall have the power to inspect, license and regulate the sanitary condition of said places and vehicles and to condemn all articles not wholesome or fit for human consumption. 
(b)  The City Council of the City of Cedar Hill shall have the power to license barbers and beauticians and to prescribe health regulations with respect to their places of business, their persons and their workers and employees, and shall have the power to prescribe health regulations with respect to porters, hotel maids, and domestic servants. 
(c)  To define all nuisances and prohibit the same within the City and outside the City limits for a distance of 5,000 feet; to have power to police all parks or grounds, speedways, or boulevards owned by said City and lying both outside and inside said City; to prohibit the pollution of any stream, draw, drain or tributaries thereof, water deposits and reservoir, whether above or below the ground, which may constitute the source of storage of water supply, and to provide for policing the same, as well as to provide for the protection of any watershed and the policing of same, to inspect, license and regulate dairies, slaughter pens and slaughter houses inside or outside the limits of the City from which meat or milk is furnished to the inhabitants of the City; to require property owners to make connection to the sewer system, if and when available, with their premises, and to provide for fixing a lien against the property owners who fail or refuse to make it a personal liability. 
(d)  To provide for fixing of penalties for failure of any person, firm, corporation or association to comply with any such rules and regulations so prescribed by the City Council under the provisions of this section; it being the intention to vest in the City Council not only the powers expressly enumerated in this section, but all other powers reasonably necessary for the protection of the health of the City of Cedar Hill and its inhabitants.  
Section 24. - Police department. 
There shall be established and maintained a Department of Police to preserve order within the City and to secure the residents of said City from violence and the property therein from injury or loss. The Chief of Police shall be the chief administrative officer of the Department of Police. He shall, with the approval of the City Manager, appoint and remove the employees of said department and shall perform such duties as may be required of him by the City Council. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City Manager, with the approval of the City Council, for an indefinite term, as provided in Article 998, Chapter 3, Title 28, of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas of 1925, as now and hereafter amended. The Chief of Police shall be responsible to the City Manager for the administration of his department and the carrying out of the directive of the City Council.  
Section 25. - Power to compromise and settle claims and law suits. 
The City Council of the City of Cedar Hill shall have the power and authority to compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against the said City, including suits by said City to recover delinquent taxes.  
Section 26. - Contracts. 
(a)  No contract shall ever be made which binds the City to pay for personal services to be rendered for any stated period of time; but all contracts for personal services shall be restricted to the doing of some particular act or thing, and upon its completion no further liability shall exist on the part of the City, with the exception of officers and heads of departments specifically mentioned herein. 
(b)  Nor shall the City or anyone acting for it make any contract for goods, materials, services, or supplies for the current use of any department of the municipality for more than five (5) years except as this Charter may hereinafter provide. 
(c)  What is known as "Bond and Warrant Law," the same being Article 2368a of Vernon's Civil Statutes of Texas, and being the Acts of 1931 Legislature, page 269, Chapter 163, and all amendments thereafter made or that may be hereafter made, which are applicable to Cities and Towns, are hereby adopted by the City of Cedar Hill. 
(As amended 1-4-80)  
Section 27. - Zoning. 
The City Council shall have full power and authority to zone the City of Cedar Hill and to pass all necessary ordinances, rules and regulations governing the same under and by virtue of the authority given to cities and legislative bodies thereof by Sections "A" and "H" of Article 1011 of the 1925 Revised Civil Statutes of Texas as amended, being Acts of 1927 40th Legislature, page 424, Chapter 283, and all amendments thereto and amendments which may hereafter be made thereto.  
Section 28. - Other enumerated powers of the City Council. 
All powers of the City and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the City Council. Without limitation of the foregoing and among the other powers that may be exercised by the City Council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty: 
(a)  To license any lawful business, occupation or calling that is susceptible to the control of the police power. 
(b)  To license, regulate, control or prohibit the erection of signs or billboards within the corporate limits of the said City. 
(c)  To provide for a public library and the maintenance thereof. 
(d)  To provide for the regulation and control of electricians, plumbers and gas fitters and electrical and plumbing works, and to require efficiency of the same. 
(e)  To provide for the inspection of weights, measures and meters and fix a standard of such weights, measures and meters, and to require conformity with such standards, and to provide penalties for failure to use or conform to the same. 
(f)  To provide for inspection fees. 
(g)  To provide for the issuance of permits for erecting all buildings, for the inspection of the construction of buildings in respect to the proper wiring for electric lights and other electrical appliances, piping for gas, flues, chimneys, plumbing and sewer connections; and to enforce the proper regulations in regard thereto. 
(h)  To require the construction of fire escapes for all public buildings, and to determine the sufficiency and regulate the safety of all exits and fire escapes provided for public buildings of every kind and character. 
(i)  To inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the City and make investigations as to municipal affairs. 
(j)  To provide for such additional boards and commissions, not otherwise provided in this Charter, as may be deemed necessary, and appoint members of all such boards and commissions. Such boards and commissions shall have all powers and duties now or hereinafter conferred and created by this Charter, by city ordinance, or by law. 
(k)  To provide for enforcement of all ordinances of the City by a fine in an amount up to and including the limits prescribed for a like offense by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(As amended 5-11-93(93-2))  
ARTICLE V. - OFFICERS AND ELECTIONS 
 
Section 1. - Governing body. 
The governing and lawmaking body of the City of Cedar Hill shall consist of six Councilmen and a Mayor, and said body shall be known as the "City Council of the City of Cedar Hill."  
Section 2. - Elective officers. 
The members of the City Council of the City of Cedar Hill, which includes the six Councilmen and a Mayor, shall be the only elective officers of the City, and they shall be elected and hold office as herein provided. Said Councilmen and Mayor shall be elected from the City at large.  
Section 3. - City Council: how nominated and elected. 
(a)  A candidate for a place on the City Council or for Mayor of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, must be a qualified voter residing in the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, and must be eligible in all respects to hold such office under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. Candidates for places on the City Council and for Mayor for the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, shall prepare a sworn application that shall conform to the general requirements for such applications pursuant to the Texas Election Code, Subsection 141.031 et seq. and as such Statute may be amended. 
(b)  The sworn application must be presented and filed with the City Secretary not later than 5:00 p.m. of the forty-fifth (45th) day prior to election day and not earlier than the thirtieth (30th) day before the date of the filing deadline. 
(c)  In addition to the sworn application, a candidate for a place on the City Council or for Mayor of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, must submit a petition which contains a number of signatures of qualified voters of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas at least equal to the number of voters required for such petitions by the Texas Election Code § 143.005 et seq. and as such statute may be amended. 
(d)  The petition filed in connection with this section and with the candidate's application for a place on the ballot must comply with all of the requirements prescribed by the Texas Election Code § 141.061 et seq. and as such may be amended. 
(e)  If signatures on a petition that is required to contain more than one thousand (1,000) signatures are to be verified by the authority with whom the candidate's application is required to be filed, the authority may use any reasonable statistical sampling method as the basis for the verification. However, the sample may not be less than twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of signatures appearing on the petition or one thousand (1,000), whichever is less. 
(f)  After the petition has been duly certified by the City Secretary as valid, such candidate's name shall be placed upon the official ballot of the City. 
(As amended 11-5-85; 5-9-89(89-1); 5-11-93(93-3); 5-4-96(96-1); 5-4-96(96-2); 5-4-96(96-3); 5-2-98 (98-2))  
Section 4. - Candidates: residency requirements. 
(a)  Candidates for City Council positions, Place 1 and Place 4, and candidates for Mayor may reside in any precinct within the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, and shall be voted upon and elected accordingly by the majority of the qualified voters of the City at large. 
(b)  Candidates for City Council positions, Place 2 and Place 3, must reside in Cedar Hill Precinct No. 1 but shall be voted upon and elected by the majority vote of the qualified voters of the City at large. 
(c)  Candidates for City Council positions, Place 5 and Place 6, must reside in Cedar Hill Precinct No. 2 but shall be voted upon and elected by the majority vote of the qualified voters of the City at large. 
(As amended 11-5-85; 5-9-89(89-2)) 
Cross reference— City election precincts established; designated; boundaries; residency requirements; polling places, § 2-18.  
Section 5. - Candidates: when and how elected. 
An election for the purpose of electing the elective officers of the City of Cedar Hill shall be held each year on the date herein prescribed. The Mayor and Place Number 1, Place Number 3, and Place Number 5 shall be elected in odd numbered years. Place Number 2, Place Number 4 and Place Number 6 shall be elected in even numbered years. The candidate receiving the majority number of votes of the entire City cast for the place which he seeks shall be elected to the respective office for which he was a candidate.  
Section 6. - Place Number 5: when first elected. 
The first election of Place Number 5 shall constitute a special instance in which place Number 5 shall be elected at the regular municipal election of 1976 for a term of one year and thereafter elected in odd numbered years as prescribed by this Charter and for the term of office provided under "Term of Office" in this Charter.  
Section 7. - Judge of election. 
The City Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its own members and of the mayor, subject to review of the courts in case of contest. The City Council shall, as soon as practical after an election either at a call meeting called for that purpose or at its next regular meeting date of said Council after each regular or special election, canvass the return and declare the results of such election. 
(a)  Should any candidate running for Mayor or Councilman fail to receive a majority of all the votes cast for said office, then in that event, it shall be the duty of the Mayor to order a second election for the candidate or candidates failing to receive a majority vote, said election to be held on the next to last Saturday in May, or in the case of a special election, said second election shall be held not earlier than the twentieth (20th) day or later than the thirtieth (30th) day after the final canvass of the main election is completed. 
(b)  In the said second election only those can run who were candidates in the first election and they shall run for the Place that they ran for in the first election, and the two candidates receiving the highest vote where no one received a majority vote shall be candidates against each other. Should the candidate receiving the second highest number of votes for the Place sought die or refuse to have his name placed on the ballot, in said second election, then in that event the candidate receiving the next highest number of votes shall be entitled to be a candidate against the person receiving the highest number of votes. Should all the candidates die or refuse to run in said second election, the City Council may declare a vacancy; said vacancy shall be filled by a majority vote at a special election called for such purposes within one hundred twenty (120) days after the vacancy occurs. 
(c)  In the event all candidates except one for any office dies or refuses to have his name placed on the ballot, the one not having withdrawn shall be declared elected without the necessity of a runoff. 
(d)  Newly elected officials shall be installed at a called meeting or a regular meeting within ten days after the votes are canvassed. 
(As amended 5-9-89(89-3); 5-4-96(96-4); 5-4-96(96-5); 5-2-98(98-3); As amended 5-23-00(00-03))  
Section 8. - Date of election. 
The regular municipal election of the City of Cedar Hill shall be held on the first Saturday of May of each year, and the same shall be conducted and the results canvassed and announced by the election authorities prescribed by the election laws of the State of Texas, and said general election laws shall control in all municipal elections except as otherwise herein provided. 
(As amended 5-9-89(89-4))  
Section 9. - Officers. 
All officers of the City, whether elective or appointive, shall qualify by taking the oath prescribed by the Constitution of this State and by executing such bond as may be required under the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances and resolutions of the City.  
Section 10. - Term of office. 
The term of office for all elective officers of the City of Cedar Hill shall be for a period of three years or until their successors are elected and installed according to the provisions of this Charter, except when this Charter provides that the term of office shall be for less duration due to special circumstances. The three year terms of office shall be implemented on a staggered basis as follows: 
a.  Beginning in 2001 and thereafter, City Council Place 3, Place 5, and the Mayor's office shall be for three year terms. 
b.  In 2001, City Council Place 1 shall be for a two year term until 2003 at which time Place 1 will be for a three year term. 
c.  Beginning in 2002 and thereafter, City Council Place 2 and Place 6 shall be for three year terms. 
d.  City Council Place 4 shall remain a two year term until 2006 at which time Place 4 will be for a three year term. 
(As amended 5-23-00(00-03)  
Section 11. - Vacancies. 
Any vacancy or vacancies existing in the office of the Mayor or any Council Member from any cause whatsoever shall be filled by a majority vote at a special election called for such purpose within one hundred twenty (120) days after such vacancy or vacancies occurs. 
(As amended 1-4-80; 5-9-89(89-5); 5-4-96(96-6); 5-2-98(98-4); As amended 5-23-00(00-03))  
Section 12. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
The Mayor Pro Tem shall be elected by a majority of the City Council from among the members of the Council and shall perform all duties of the Mayor in his absence or disability.  
Section 13. - Compensation of Mayor and City Councilman [Councilmen]. 
(a)  The Mayor shall receive the sum of $1.00 per year for and in consideration and compensation of his services as the Mayor of the City of Cedar Hill. 
(b)  Each City Councilman shall serve without compensation. 
(c)  The Mayor and the City Councilman [Councilmen] shall be reimbursed by the City for all reasonable expenses incurred while engaged in or on city business. 
(d)  All reimbursed expenditures of the Mayor or any member of the City Council shall be reviewed by the entire City Council at a regular meeting of the Council. 
(As amended 5-9-89(89-6))  
ARTICLE VI. - DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURES 
 
Section 1. - Duties of Mayor. 
The Mayor of the City of Cedar Hill shall preside over the meetings of said City Council and perform such other duties consistent with the office as may be imposed upon him by this Charter and ordinances and resolutions passed in pursuance hereof. He may participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the Council and shall be entitled to vote as a member thereof on all legislative and other matters, but shall have no veto power, and provided further that he shall have no power to initiate motions or to second motions. He shall sign all contracts and conveyances made or entered into by the City and all bonds issued under the provisions of this Charter, and shall be the chief executive officer of the City. He shall be recognized as the official head of the City by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process, by the Governor for the purpose of enforcing military law, and for all ceremonial purposes. In time of danger or emergency, the Mayor may with the consent of the Council take command of the police and govern the City by proclamation and maintain order and enforce all laws.  
Section 2. - Duties of City Council. 
(a)  The City Council shall have all powers necessary and incident to the proper discharge of the duties imposed upon it and is hereby vested with all power necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this Charter; it being intended that the City Council and Mayor shall have and exercise all powers enumerated in this Charter or implied thereby and all powers that are or hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the Constitution or laws of the State of Texas. 
(b)  The compensation of all appointive officers and employees shall be fixed by the City Council, who may increase or diminish such compensation at will or abolish any appointive office entirely at any time. The City Council may dispense with the services of any employee at any time upon a majority vote of the members of the City Council.  
Section 3. - Meetings of the Council. 
At the first regularly scheduled City Council meeting following the City Council election held in May, the City Council shall set its meeting calendar for the next twelve (12) months. The schedule of said meetings shall be published in the official newspaper of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, having a general circulation and posted on the meeting board at the City Hall of the City of Cedar Hill or such other public place as deemed appropriate or necessary by the City Council. 
(As amended 5-9-89(89-7))  
Section 4. - Rules of the City Council. 
The City Council shall determine its own rules of procedure and may compel the attendance of its members.  
Section 5. - Legislative procedure. 
A majority of the City Council shall constitute a quorum to do business, and the affirmative vote of at least four of those attending any meeting at which there is a quorum present shall be sufficient to adopt any ordinance or resolution. Every regular, special or called meeting of the City Council of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, shall be open to the public, except as provided by the Texas Government Code § 551.001 et seq. The vote upon passage of all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by a show of hands and entered upon the minutes, and every ordinance or resolution, upon its final passage, shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the person performing the duties of City Secretary. 
(As amended 5-4-96(96-7))  
Section 6. - Ordinances, enactment of. 
Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing [written] or printed form and shall not contain more than one subject which shall be clearly expressed in the title, except ordinances or resolutions making appropriations or authorizing the contracting of indebtedness or issuance of bonds or other evidence of indebtedness. No ordinance, unless it be declared an emergency measure, shall ever be passed at a called meeting, but may be passed at any regular meeting of the Council unless otherwise provided. All resolutions or orders may be passed at any regular meeting or may be passed at any special or call meeting called for that purpose.  
Section 7. - Emergency measures defined. 
An emergency measure is an ordinance for the immediate preservation of the public business, property, health or safety, or providing for the usual daily operation of municipal department in which the emergency is set forth in such ordinances. Ordinances appropriating money to defray current or other expenses of the City where an emergency exists or for any other purposes where an emergency exists may be passed as emergency measures, except that no ordinance making a grant, renewal or extension of a franchise or other special privilege shall be passed as an emergency measure, nor shall such ordinance be finally passed on the date it is introduced, but such ordinance must have its caption read, be voted upon and passed at two (2) regular meetings of the City Council. 
(As amended 5-7-91(91-5); 5-4-96(96-8))  
Section 8. - Ordinances now in effect. 
All ordinances of the City of Cedar Hill now in existence and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall remain in full force and effect until altered, amended or repealed by the City Council.  
Section 9. - Ordinances, pleading of, and admissibility as evidence. 
It shall be sufficient in all judicial proceedings to plead any ordinance of the City by caption without embodying the entire ordinance in the pleadings, and all pleaded ordinances or codes of ordinances shall be admitted in evidence in any suit and shall have the same force and effect as the original ordinances. Certified copies of the ordinances may also be used in evidence in lieu of original ordinances.  
Section 10. - Depository. 
The City Council is authorized to select a depository for City Funds by accepting applications in accordance with the Local Government Code, Section 105.001 et seq. and as the same may be hereinafter amended, and to follow all the terms and provisions of same. 
(As amended 5-7-91(91-6))  
Section 11. - Ordinances, codification of. 
The City Council or City Manager if one should be appointed under the provisions of Article 1175, Section 1, as hereinafter provided for, as soon as practical after the adoption of this Charter may cause to be codified and properly entered and published in pamphlet form for public distribution or for anyone desiring same, the ordinances of the City of Cedar Hill, and they may annually thereafter revise same and keep it up to date.  
Section 12. - Ordinances, publication of. 
Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine or forfeiture shall, after passage thereof, be published in one issue of the official newspaper, which said newspaper shall be so designated the official newspaper by ordinance and shall meet the requirements of the laws of the State of Texas; and proof of publication shall be made by the printer or publisher of such newspaper, making affidavit before some officer authorized by law to administer oaths, and filed with the person performing the duties of City Secretary, and shall be prima facie evidence of such publication and promulgation of such ordinance so published shall take effect and be in force from and after five days after publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not required to be published shall take effect and be in force from and after the passage thereof, unless otherwise provided.  
Section 13. - City Secretary. 
The City Council or City Manager, if one should be appointed, shall appoint a City Secretary. He shall be a qualified voter residing in the City for at least one year preceding his appointment. He shall receive for his services such compensation as the City Council may fix. Unless excused by the City Council for good cause, he shall attend all meetings of the City Council and keep accurate minutes of its proceedings; he shall preserve and keep in order all books, papers, documents, records and files of the City Council and of the executive departments. He shall keep a record of all commissions and licenses issued and shall countersign the same. He shall have custody of the seal of the City and shall affix same to such documents and obligations of the City only as he may be legally authorized so to do, and shall also countersign all checks and vouchers given by the City and perform any other duties required by the General Laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 14. - Nepotism. 
No person related within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity to the Mayor or any member of the City Council shall be appointed to any office, position or clerkship or other service of the City.  
Section 15. - Official bond for appointive officers. 
The City Council of the City of Cedar Hill shall have the right to require bond from all appointive officers or employees of the City in such amounts as said City Council may from time to time fix by ordinance or resolution and conditioned by the faithful discharge of the duties of his office and accounting for all monies, credits and things of value coming into the hands of such officers or employees; and all such bonds shall be signed as surety by some surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the State, and the premiums accruing thereon shall be paid by the City of Cedar Hill.  
Section 16. - Audit and examination of the city books and accounts. 
The City Council shall cause a continuous audit to be made of the books of accounts of each and every department of the City. Such audit shall be made by competent public accountant who shall be selected by the City Council, and a contract entered into from year to year; and such contract shall provide that the books of the City shall be audited at least annually, and such auditor's report to the City Council shall be accessible to the public or for publication.  
Section 17. - Budget. 
The City Council shall annually prepare its budget in conformity with the provisions of Chapter 102 of the Local Government Code as hereafter amended. No public money shall ever be spent or appropriated, except in the case of an emergency or public calamity, unless funds are currently or to be in the possession of the City within the then-current fiscal year to cover said expenditures or appropriation. No expenditure shall ever be made by the City except upon checks drawn upon the account for which a previous appropriation shall have been made. 
(As amended 5-9-89(89-10))  
ARTICLE VII. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Section 1. - City Manager. 
The Council may, if they so elect, appoint a City Manager who shall be the administrative head of the municipal government, and shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments.  
Section 2. - Compensation. 
The City Manager, if one is appointed, shall receive a salary as set by the City Council.  
Section 3. - Powers and duties of City Manager. 
The City Manager, if one is appointed, shall see that the laws and ordinances of the City are enforced. He shall appoint all appointive officers, or employees of the City (except as heretofore provided otherwise in this Charter),and may remove any officers or employees appointed by him. All such appointments made by the City Manager are to be made upon the basis of merit and fitness alone. He shall exercise control and supervision over all departments and offices that may be created by the Council, and all officers and employees appointed by him. He shall attend all meetings of the Council with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote. He shall recommend in writing to the Council such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. He shall keep the Council fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City, and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or which may be required of him by ordinance or resolution of the Council.  
Section 4. - Nepotism. 
No person related within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity, to the City Manager, shall be appointed to any official position, clerkship or service of the City.  
Section 5. - Official bond. 
The City Manager, if one is appointed, shall give an official bond in the sum to be set by the City Council, payable to the City of Cedar Hill, conditioned as may be prescribed by resolution or ordinance of the Council, but in no circumstances shall bond be less than Twenty Thousand Dollars. Such bond shall be procured from some regularly accredited surety company, authorized to do business under the laws of the State of Texas, and the premiums to such surety company shall be paid by the City of Cedar Hill.  
ARTICLE VIII. - MUNICIPAL COURT AND JUDICIAL PROCESS 
 
Section 1. - Municipal Court, creation and jurisdiction, fines. 
There is hereby created and established a court to be the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, which court shall have jurisdiction within the territorial limits of said City of all criminal cases arising under the ordinances of the City, and shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the Justice of the Peace of the precinct in which the City is or may be situated of all criminal cases arising under the criminal laws of the State, where the offense is committed within the territorial limits of said City [or] within such other limits as may be authorized by law and the punishment is by fine only and the maximum of said fine, under the laws of this State, may not exceed Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000.00) or any other maximum fine that may be authorized by law. Said Court shall have no civil jurisdiction, except for the forfeiture and collection of bonds given in proceedings herein. It shall also have jurisdiction of violations of ordinances of the City and the violation of any nuisance within five thousand feet of the corporate lines of the City, outside of the City limits. 
(a)  The Judge of said Court may be designated as Recorder or City Judge as may be provided by ordinance of the City Council, and his salary may be fixed by ordinance. 
(b)  The Judge of said Municipal Court, regardless of what his title may be, shall have power to punish for contempt to the same extent and under the same circumstances as the Justice of the Peace may punish for contempt of criminal cases. 
(c)  The Judge of said Court shall be a qualified voter of the City and shall be appointed by the City Council and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. In the event that the Judge is unable to serve for any reason, an alternate Judge may be appointed by the City Council. 
(d)  [Reserved.] 
(e)  The Clerk of said Court and his deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of any Court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary by clerks of courts in issuing process of said court and conducting the business thereof. 
(As amended 5-9-89(89-11); 5-7-91(91-8); 5-2-98(98-5))  
Section 2. - Municipal Court, Chapter 45 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
All complaints, prosecutions, the service of process, commitment of those convicted of offenses, the collection and payment of fines, the attendance and service of witnesses and juries, punishment for contempt, bail and the taking of bonds shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 45 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the State of Texas as applies to Justice and Municipal Courts.  
Section 3. - Appeals. 
Appeals from conviction in the Municipal Court shall lie to the County Criminal Court, and such appeals shall be governed by the same rules of practice and procedure as are provided by law in cases of appeals from the Justice Court to said County Criminal Court, as far as said rules are applicable.  
ARTICLE IX. - RECALL 
 
Section 1. - Recall. 
(a)  The Mayor or any other member of the City Council may be removed from office in the following manner: Any qualified voter of the City may make and file with the City Secretary an affidavit containing the name of any member of the City Council whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal. The City Secretary shall promptly deliver to the voter making such affidavit copies petition blanks for demanding such removal, printed forms of which the City Secretary shall keep on hand. Such blanks shall be issued by the City Secretary, and they shall be addressed to the City Council, indicate the person to whom issued, and state the name of the person whose removal is sought. The date the petition forms were obtained shall appear on each page of the recall petition. A copy of the petition shall be recorded in a record book for that purpose to be kept in the office of the City Secretary. To be effective, a recall petition must be returned and filed with the City Secretary within thirty (30) days after obtaining the petition forms from the City Secretary and must bear the signatures of twenty-five percent (25%) of the number of qualified registered voters of the City of Cedar Hill as of the date the recall petition is filed with the City Secretary. 
(b)  Signatures to a recall petition shall comply with state law requirements as set forth in Section 277.002 of the Election Code of the State of Texas, as such section may be amended or recodified, and any other requirements that may be imposed by state law. The affidavit of a circulator of a recall petition shall comply with Section 141.065 of the Election Code of the State of Texas, as such section may be amended or recodified, and any other requirements that may be imposed by state law. 
(c)  All papers and affidavits comprising a recall petition shall be assembled and filed with the Secretary as one instrument, with a statement attached thereto giving the names and addresses of three qualified voters, who, as a committee of the petitioners, shall be officially regarded as filing the petition. Within ten days of the date of filing a recall petition the Secretary shall determine the sufficiency thereof and attach thereto a certificate showing the result of his examination. If he shall certify that the petition is insufficient, he shall set forth in the certificate the particulars in which it is defective and shall at once notify the committee of the petitioners of his findings. 
(d)  A recall petition may be amended at any time within twenty days after the making of the certificate of insufficiency by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers issued, signed and filed as provided herein for an original petition. The Secretary shall within five days after such an amendment is filed, make examination of the amended petition and, if his certificate shall show the petition still to be insufficient, he shall file the petition in his office and notify the committee of the petitioners of his findings. The finding of the insufficiency of a recall petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
(e)  If a recall petition, or amended petition shall be certified by the Secretary to be sufficient, he shall at once submit it to the City Council with his certificate to that effect and shall notify the member whose removal is sought of such action. If the member whose removal is sought does not resign within five days of such notice the City Council shall thereupon order and fix for holding a recall election. Any such election shall not be held less than forty nor more than sixty days after the petition has been submitted to the City Council, and it may be held at the same time as any other general or special election within such period; but, if no such election is held within such period, the City Council shall call a special recall election to be held within the time aforesaid. 
(f)  The question of recalling any number of members of said City Council may be submitted at the same election, but as to each member whose removal is sought a separate petition shall be filed and there shall be an entirely separate ballot. Candidates to succeed any members of the City Council whose removal is sought shall be placed in nomination by petition signed, filed and verified as provided for nominating petitions for a regular municipal election; except that each petition paper shall specify that the candidate named therein is a candidate to succeed the particular member whose removal is sought. 
(g)  The ballots used in a recall election shall submit the two following propositions in the order indicated: 
"For the recall of (name of Mayor or Council Member)" 
"Against the recall of (name of Mayor or Council Member)" 
Under the propositions shall appear the word "candidates" and in the direction "Vote for one" and beneath this the names of the candidates nominated as hereinabove provided. The person whose recall is sought shall not have his name printed on the ballot as a candidate. Except that the space left for the names and date shall be filled by the correct names and date, the ballots used in a recall election shall be in form substantially as follows: 
RECALL ELECTION 
CITY OF CEDAR HILL 
______________(Month and day of Month)______________,;yr;_______ 
_____
For the recall of _____ 
Against the recall of _____ 
CANDIDATES 
Vote for one 
______________ 
______________ 
Except as provided for in this section, ballots used in recall elections shall comply with the provisions of this Charter regarding ballots for a regular municipal election. 
(h)  If a majority of the votes cast on the question of recalling the Mayor or a City Councilman be against recall, he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, but subject to recall as before. If a majority of such votes be for the recall of the officer on the ballot, he shall, regardless of any defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office. When the Mayor or Councilman is removed from office by recall, the candidate to succeed such officer who receives the highest vote shall be declared elected to fill the unexpired term. 
(i)  If a Mayor or City Council Member in regard to whom a sufficient recall petition is submitted to the City Council shall resign within five days thereof, the place thus made vacant in the office of the Mayor or on the City Council shall be filled in the same manner as hereinabove provided for filling vacancies arising from other causes. 
(j)  No recall shall be filed against the Mayor or Councilman within three (3) months after he takes office. In the event the Mayor or Councilman is subjected to a recall election after that time, no Mayor or Councilman shall be re-subjected to another recall election within a period of less than one (1) year from the date of the last recall election. 
(As amended 5-9-89(89-12); 5-11-93(93-4, 93-5); As amended 5-23-00(00-06), (00-07), (00-08))  
ARTICLE X. - TAXES AND TAXATION 
 
Section 1. - Taxation. 
All real, personal and mixed property held, owned or situated in the City of Cedar Hill, which is not exempt by the Constitution or General Laws of the State of Texas, shall be liable for all taxes due by the owner thereof, including taxes on real estate, franchise, personal and mixed property, except that the homestead of any person within the City of Cedar Hill shall never be liable for any taxes other than the tax upon such homestead.  
Section 2. - Tax levies. 
(a)  The City Council shall have the power and it is hereby authorized and made its duty to levy annually for general purposes and for the purpose of paying interest and providing the sinking fund on the bonded indebtedness of the City of Cedar Hill now in existence or which may hereafter be created an ad valorem tax on all real, personal or mixed property within the territorial limits of said City and upon all franchises granted by the City to any individuals or corporations of not exceeding a total of Two Dollars and Fifty cents ($2.50) on the One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) assessed valuation of said property. If for any cause the City Council shall fail, neglect or refuse to pass a tax ordinance for any one year, levying taxes for that year, then and in that event the tax levying ordinance last passed shall and will be considered in force and effect as the tax levying ordinance for the year which the City Council failed, neglected or refused to pass such ordinance, and the failure so to pass such ordinance for any year shall in no wise invalidate the tax collections for that year. 
(b)  The City Council may determine and provide when taxes shall be due and payable by corporations or individual incorporators and all persons owning property. It shall have the right to fix the time and terms of payments of taxes, prescribe penalties for the nonpayment thereof upon the expiration of the time fixed by the said City Council, may provide discounts for advance payments of taxes. 
(c)  The City Council or any other officer of the City shall never extend the time for the payment of taxes or remit, discount or compromise any tax legally due the City, nor waive the penalty that may be due thereon to any person, but the City Council may by ordinance provide for the remission, discount, compromise or waiver of penalty to all persons legally owing any taxes where such remission, discount, compromise or waiver of penalty is for any particular and specified year or years and applies equally to all persons, firms or corporations owing taxes to the City for such year or years; provided, however, that this provision shall not prevent the compromise of any tax suit.  
Section 3. - Liens. 
The tax levied by the City is hereby declared to be a lien, charge or encumbrance upon the property upon which the tax is due, which lien, charge or encumbrance the City is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction over the same, and the lien, charge and encumbrance on the property in favor of the City for the amount of the taxes due on such property is such as to give the State Courts jurisdiction to enforce and foreclose said lien on the property on which the tax is due, not only as against any resident of this State or person whose residence is unknown, but also as against the unknown heirs of any person who owns the property upon which the tax is due and also as against non-residents. All taxes upon real estate shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property upon which the taxes are due, which lien may be foreclosed in any court having jurisdiction.  
Section 4. - Rendition. 
This Section has been repealed in accordance with current state law as codified in the Property Tax Code, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Title 1, and as the same may be hereinafter amended. 
(As amended 5-7-91(91-9))  
Section 5. - Unrendered property. 
This Section has been repealed in accordance with current state law as codified in the Property Tax Code, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Title 1, and as the same may be hereinafter amended. 
(As amended 5-7-91(91-10))  
Section 6. - Collection of taxes. 
(a)  The City Council shall have full power, by ordinance, to provide for the prompt collection of all taxes levied, assessed and due or becoming due to said City and prescribed where property shall be assessed or rendered for taxes and when the taxes thereon shall become due and payable and to that end may and shall pass all ordinances and make all such provisions as may be necessary for levying, imposing, assessing and collecting said taxes, regulating the methods of making out tax lists and inventories, and fixing the duties and defining the powers of the assessor and collector of taxes or such other officer as may be designated therefor by the City Council. 
(b)  All taxes shall be payable at the office of the assessor and collector or such other officer as the City may prescribe, and no demand for payment thereof shall be requisite or necessary to enforcement of the collection thereof, nor for the collection of any taxes due, before the passage of this article. 
(c)  This subsection has been repealed in accordance with current state law as codified in the Property Tax Code, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Title 1, and as the same may be hereinafter amended. 
(As amended 5-7-91(91-11))  
Section 7. - Payment of taxes. 
All ad valorem taxes due or to become due upon real, personal or mixed property or upon franchises granted by the City of Cedar Hill to individuals or corporations and all license taxes, occupation taxes, permit fees, fines, forfeitures, penalties and other amounts of taxes accruing to the City of Cedar Hill shall be collectable and payable only in current money of the United States.  
Section 8. - Delinquent taxes. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes due or to become due to the City of Cedar Hill that are not paid within the time specified by the City Council in the ordinance providing the date of payment of said taxes shall be declared delinquent and shall be subject to the penalties prescribed by ordinance from time to time and may be collected by suits from delinquents, and foreclosure of the lien thereon may be had in any court having jurisdiction of the same, and any person who shall purchase or shall have purchased property encumbered by a lien for taxes or upon which taxes are due shall be deemed as to such taxes a delinquent taxpayer, and such purchaser take the property charged with lien, and he cannot interpose any defense which the person or corporation owning the property at the time of the assessment of said taxes so delinquent might not have interposed had he or it continued to be the owner, except that no personal judgment shall be rendered for same be rendered for same against said purchaser. 
(b)  All suits for delinquent taxes to the City of Cedar Hill shall be brought in the District Court of the County within which real estate lies. 
(c)  Upon filing of suit for the collection of delinquent taxes, there shall be collected, in addition to such taxes, penalty and interest, reasonable attorney's fees in an amount not to exceed fifteen (15) percent of such taxes, penalty and interest. Such attorney's fees shall be chargeable as costs in any suit for the collection of delinquent taxes. 
(As amended 5-7-91(91-12))  
Section 9. - Board of Equalization. 
This Section has been repealed in accordance with current state law as codified in the Property Tax Code, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Title 1, and as the same may be hereinafter amended. 
(As amended 5-7-91(91-13))  
Section 10. - Occupation tax. 
The City Council shall have the power to levy and collect taxes upon trades, professions, callings or other businesses carried on to the full extent permitted by the General Laws of the State of Texas, to prescribe penalties for non-payment thereof, and to regulate the operation of any business, trade or calling or profession.  
Section 11. - Contract for collection of delinquent taxes. 
The City Council shall have the power to contract with any attorney-at-law for the collection of delinquent taxes owing to the City.  
ARTICLE XI. - BONDS, WARRANTS AND OTHER EVIDENCES OF INDEBTEDNESS 
 
Section 1. - [Authority to issue.] 
In keeping with the Constitution of Texas, and not contrary thereto, the City of Cedar Hill, shall have the right to issue all tax bonds, revenue bonds, funding and refunding bonds, time warrants and other evidences of indebtedness as now authorized or as may hereafter be authorized to be issued by cities and towns by the General Laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 2. - [Manner of issuance.] 
Bonds and warrants of the City of Cedar Hill, shall be issued in the manner provided by the General Laws of Texas applicable to cities and towns.  
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 1. - Qualified voter. 
A "qualified voter", except as herein elsewhere defined within the meaning of the terms of this Charter is one who possesses the qualifications required by the General Laws of the State of Texas. In the event state law does not provide qualifications for voting in city elections, then the term "qualified voter" shall mean one who has resided in the State of Texas for twelve months and within the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill for six months prior to the election in which he offers to vote.  
Section 2. - Jurors. 
In any action or proceeding in which the City of Cedar Hill may be party at interest, no person shall be an incompetent judge, justice, witness or juror by reason of his being an inhabitant, freeholder or taxpayer of the City of Cedar Hill.  
Section 3. - Voting machines. 
At all times when they are available, and in the opinion of the City Council their use is practicable, mechanical or electronic voting machines shall be used for voting in such elections. 
(As amended 5-11-93(93-6))  
Section 4. - Singular includes plural and masculine feminine. 
The use of the singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular, and words in the masculine gender include the feminine also, unless by reasonable construction, it appears that such was not the intention of the language.  
Section 5. - Public act. 
This Charter must be deemed a public act and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts.  
Section 6. - Effect of any provision hereof being declared invalid. 
If any provision of this Charter violates any Statutes or the Constitution of the State of Texas, or if any court holds such provisions for naught for any reason, the remaining provisions shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in effect.  
ARTICLE XIII. - AMENDMENTS 
 
Section 1. - Amendments. 
This Charter may be amended at any time in accordance with the provisions applicable thereto contained in Chapter 13 of Title 28 of the Revised Civil Statutes of 1925 of the State of Texas or any amendments thereto or any amendments that may be made hereafter thereto.  
ARTICLE XIV. - VOTE ON PROPOSED CHARTER 
 
Section 1. - Vote on proposed Charter. 
(a)  This Charter shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City of Cedar Hill for adoption or rejection on May 31, 1975, at which election, if a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter, it shall then immediately become the Charter and governing law of the City of Cedar Hill until amended or repealed. 
(b)  It being impractical to submit this Charter by sections, it is hereby prescribed that the form of ballot to be used in such election shall be as follows, to wit: 
FOR THE ADOPTION OF 
THE CHARTER 
AGAINST THE ADOPTION OF 
THE CHARTER 
(c)  The present City Council of the City of Cedar Hill shall call an election in accordance with the provisions of the General Laws of the State governing such elections, and the same shall be conducted and the returns made and results declared as provided by the laws of the State of Texas governing municipal elections, and in case a majority of the votes cast at such elections shall be in favor of the adoption of such Charter, then an official order shall be entered upon the records of said City by the City Council of Cedar Hill declaring the same adopted, and the City Secretary shall record at length upon the records of the City, in a separate book to be kept in his office for such purpose, such Charter as adopted, and such Secretary shall furnish to the Mayor a copy of the Charter, which copy of the Charter shall be forwarded by the Mayor as soon as practical, to the Secretary of State under the seal of the City together with a certificate showing the approval of the qualified voters of such Charter.  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited; formal parts of ordinances continued in effect. 
(a)  The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Cedar Hill, Texas," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Cedar Hill Code." 
(b)  This Code shall not be deemed to repeal any preamble, recital or finding of fact contained in any ordinance included in this Code, but all such matters shall be deemed incorporated in the sections in this Code derived from such respective ordinances. 
State Law reference— Authority to publish a code of civil and criminal ordinances, V.A.C.S. art. 1176a.  
Sec. 1-2. - Catchlines of sections; chapter, article and division headings. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type and the headings of chapters, articles and divisions are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the chapter, article, division or section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the chapter, article, division or section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such chapters, articles, divisions or sections, including the headings or catchlines, are amended or reenacted.  
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules contained in this section shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council: 
City. The term "city," "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Cedar Hill, in Dallas and Ellis Counties, Texas. 
City secretary, manager, chief of police or other city officers or departments. The words "city secretary," "chief of police" or words designating any other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city secretary, city manager, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
Code. The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean the "Code of Ordinances, City of Cedar Hill, Texas." 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding or step in a proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given, or such act is done, shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding or step in a proceeding is to be had shall not be counted; except as otherwise expressly provided in this Code. 
Council. The words "the council" or "the city council" shall mean the mayor and councilmen acting as the city council of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
County. The word "county" shall mean Dallas and Ellis Counties, Texas. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Highway. The term "highway," when used in this Code, shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month, except as otherwise specified in this Code. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in the city. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land, except as otherwise defined in this Code. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to natural persons, corporations (private and public), partnerships, and all other unincorporated organizations, trusts, estates, government agencies, and other legal entities. 
Personal property. The words "personal property" include every species of property, except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Property. The word "property" includes real and personal property, and "mixed" if the sense used so indicates. 
Real property. The words "real property" include land, tenements and hereditaments. 
Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, all or a part of which is intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Sidewalk area. The term "sidewalk area" shall mean the space between the lateral line of the roadway and the boundary separating the public right-of-way and the adjacent private property. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, culvert, underpass, overpass, tunnel, causeway or other public way in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
V.A.C.S., V.A.T.S., V.T.C.S., V.A.P.C., V.T.P.C., V.A.C.C.P., V.T.C.C.P. Such abbreviations shall mean and include Vernon's Annotated Civil Statues, Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, Vernon's Annotated Penal Code, Vernon's Texas Penal Code, Vernon's Annotated Code of Criminal Procedure, Vernon's Texas Code of Criminal Procedure and other portions of such codification of the Texas Statutes as indicated, as they are now or as they may be amended to be. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation, other than oral, of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
(Code 1976, §§ 10-1—10-5)  
Sec. 1-4. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(2)  Containing any administrative provisions of the city council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise and establishing any rates therefor; 
(4)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(5)  Making any appropriation; 
(6)  Levying or imposing taxes not inconsistent with this Code; 
(7)  Establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(8)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(9)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(10)  Adopting, extending or contracting the boundaries of the city; 
(11)  Prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(12)  Prescribing specific traffic regulations for specific streets, locations or portions thereof; 
(13)  Establishing utility rates such as, but not limited to, garbage, water and sewer, and providing procedures for the collection thereof, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(14)  Pertaining to zoning; 
(15)  Any ordinance adopted after October 14, 1986; 
(16)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office.  
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section in this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1976, § 10-11)  
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, when necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required, other than duties of city officers and employees, or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) in all cases arising under the ordinances of the city that govern fire safety, zoning and public health and sanitation, other than vegetation and litter violations, and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) in all other cases; provided, however, that, where the offense is one for which a penalty is fixed by state law, the penalty for such offense shall be the same as fixed by law. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city shall continue shall constitute a separate offense unless otherwise provided. 
Editor's note— Pursuant to the adoption of Ord. No. 87-924 on Sept. 22, 1987, § 1 of which specifically adopted the provisions of Senate Bill 920 allowing for an increase in the maximum punishment by fines in the municipal court of the city, at the direction of the city attorney, the fines of $1,000.00 and $200.00 formerly contained in § 1-7(a) have been increased to $2,000.00 and $500.00 respectively. 
Cross reference— Civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 5; imposition of fine for illegal dumping, § 9-1; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11; municipal court, Ch. 12; police, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference— Creation and jurisdiction of municipal court, V.T.C.A. Government Code, § 29.001 et seq., V.A.C.C.P. arts. 4.01, 4.14, 43.09.  
Sec. 1-8. - Liability of corporate officers for penalty. 
Whenever a corporation or association violates any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city, the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, manager or any agent or employee of such corporation or association shall be severally liable for the penalty prescribed for such violation; provided, however, this section shall not be construed to apply to officers or employees of this city in the manner of performing their duties as municipal officers and employees.  
Sec. 1-9. - Use in evidence of copies of Code provisions. 
In any prosecution for a violation of any provision of this Code, the Code or a copy of such provision, certified by the city secretary, may be admitted in evidence without further proof and shall be prima facie evidence of the existence and regular enactment of such provision, without the necessity of introducing in evidence the entire Code.  
Sec. 1-10. - Burden of proving exception; excuse, etc., in prosecution for violation of Code. 
In any prosecution for a violation of any provision of this Code, upon proof of the provision of the Code, it shall not be necessary to negate any exception, excuse, proviso or exemption contained in the Code and the burden of proof of any such exception, excuse, proviso or exemption shall be upon the defendant.  
Sec. 1-11. - Injunction to enforce Code. 
Any violation of this Code can be enjoined by a suit filed in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to any penal provision in this Code or any other ordinance of the city.  
Sec. 1-12. - Relief from personal liability in enforcement of Code. 
All of the regulations provided in this Code are hereby declared to be governmental and for the health, safety and welfare of the general public. Any member of the city council or any city official or employee charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alarm systems, Ch. 2.5; building appeals and advisory board, § 4-21 et seq.; building inspector, § 4-41 et seq.; administrative liability for enforcement of dangerous building regulations, § 4-141; municipal disaster emergency service committee, § 5-16 et seq.; fire marshal, § 6-46 et seq.; emergency ambulance service, § 6-71 et seq.; administration of flood damage prevention and control regulations generally, § 7-26 et seq.; municipal court, Ch. 12; park board, § 15-21 et seq.; park regulations, § 15-71 et seq.; environmental improvement and beautification commission, § 16-21 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, § 16-51 et seq.; police, Ch. 17; park land dedication, § 20-41 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 21. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Meeting attendance for board, committee and commission members; removals and appointments of board, committee and commission members. 
(a)  The city council hereby establishes that any member of any board, committee or commission of the city who misses three (3) regular meetings of such board, committee or commission in a twelve (12) month period shall have their position considered and deemed as vacant. 
(b)  The city council is empowered to remove, appoint or reappoint any member to any board, committee or commission of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas for any cause deemed by the city council to be necessary, reasonable and in the interest of public service. The vacancy of any position of any board, committee or commission of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term of the member whose position becomes vacant for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 88-975, §§ 2—4, 5-24-88; Ord. No. 2002-96, § 1, 1-22-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 88-975, §§ 2—4, adopted May 24, 1988, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as § 2-1 at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 2-2—2-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Powers and duties of mayor, art. VI, § 1; mayor and councilmen and election, art. V, § 1 et seq., art. VI, § 1 et seq.; recall of mayor and councilmen, art. IX. 
 
Sec. 2-16. - Meetings of city council; schedule; notice. 
At the first regularly scheduled city council meeting following the city council election held in May, the city council shall set its meeting calendar for the next twelve (12) months. The schedule of said meetings shall be published in the official newspaper of the city having a general circulation and posted on the meeting board at the city hall or such other public place as deemed appropriate or necessary by the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1; Ord. No. 88-962, §§ 2, 3, 2-23-88) 
Editor's note— Former, § 2-16, regularly called meetings of city council; scheduled times; notice, has been deleted and replaced by the provisions set out herein at the discretion of the city in order to conform § 2-16 with art. VI, § 3 of the charter, the provisions of which were approved by the voters of the city May 9, 1989. For the former provisions of § 2-16, refer to Ord. No. 88-962, §§ 2, 3, adopted Feb. 23, 1988, on file in city offices. 
Charter reference— Meetings of the council, art. VI, § 3. 
State Law reference— Open meetings, V.A.C.S. art. 6252-17.  
Sec. 2-17. - Filing procedure for candidate for offices of mayor and councilmembers. 
(a)  The city council finds, determines and orders that the following procedures as set forth in this section henceforth govern the filing procedures for candidates for places on the city council or for mayor prior to the placement of the candidate's name on the official election ballot of the city. 
(b)  A candidate for a place on the city council or for Mayor of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, must be a qualified voter residing in the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, and must be eligible in all respects to hold such office under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. Candidates for places on the city council and for Mayor of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, shall prepare a sworn application that shall conform to the general requirements for such applications pursuant to the Texas Election Code, Subsection 141.031 et seq. and as such statute may be amended. 
(c)  The sworn application must be presented and filed with the city secretary in accordance with the filing period established by the Texas Election Code, Subsection 143.007 et seq. and as such statute may be amended. 
(d)  in addition to the sworn application, a candidate for a place on the city council or for mayor must submit a petition which contains a number of signatures of qualified voters at least equal to one-half of one (1) percent of the entire vote cast for mayor in the preceding mayoral election, or twenty-five (25) signatures, whichever is greater. 
(e)  The petition filed in connection with this section and with the candidate's application for a place on the ballot must comply with all of the requirements prescribed by the Texas Election Code, Subsection 141.061 et seq. and as such Statute may be amended. 
(f)  If signatures on a petition that is required to contain more than one thousand (1,000) signatures are to be verified by the authority with whom the candidate's application is required to be filed, the authority may use any reasonable statistical sampling method as the basis for the verification. However, the sample may not be less than twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of signatures appearing on the petition or one thousand (1,000) whichever is less. 
(g)  After the petition has been duly certified by the city secretary as valid, such candidate's name shall be placed upon the official ballot of the city. 
(h)  Candidates for the city council positions, place 1 and place 4, and candidates for mayor may reside in any precinct within the corporate limits of the city and shall be voted upon and elected accordingly by the majority of the qualified voters of the city at large. 
(i)  Candidates for city council positions, place 2 and place 3, must reside in Cedar Hill Precinct No. 1 but shall be voted upon and elected by the majority vote of the qualified voters of the city at large. 
(j)  Candidates for city council positions, place 5 and place 6, must reside in Cedar Hill Precinct No. 2 but shall be voted upon and elected by the majority vote of the qualified voters of the city at large. 
(Ord. No. 85-827, §§ 1, 2, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 2005-224, § 1, 2-8-05) 
Editor's note— Former § 2-17, subsections (b)—(h), pertaining to filing procedure for candidates for offices of mayor and councilmembers, have been deleted and replaced by the provisions set out herein as (b)—(j) at the direction of the city in order to conform § 2-17 with art. V, §§ 3 and 4 of the charter, the provisions of which were approved by the voters of the city May 9, 1989. For the former provisions of § 2-17(b)—(h), refer to Ord. No. 85-827, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 12, 1985, on file in the city offices. 
Charter reference— City council: how nominated and elected, art. V, § 3; candidates: residence requirements, art. V, § 4. 
State Law reference— Candidates for city office, V.T.C.A. Election Code, § 143.001 et seq.  
Sec. 2-18. - City election precincts established; designated; boundaries; residency requirements; polling places. 
(a)  Order of adoption. The city council finds, determines and orders that subsections (b) through (e) of this section shall henceforth govern the residency requirements for city council candidates, establish boundaries for city election precincts and provide for polling places for any city election held by the city and pursuant to Section 42.061 of the Texas Election Code of the State of Texas. 
(b)  Creation of city election precincts. The city council hereby establishes that Dallas County Precincts Numbers 4100, 4104, 4106, 4107 and 4108 shall hereafter be designated as Cedar Hill Precinct Number 1; that Dallas County Precincts Numbers 4101, 4102, 4103, 4105, 4109 and 4110, and Ellis County Precinct Numbers 101 and 137 shall hereafter be designated as Cedar Hill Precinct Number 2. 
(c)  Boundaries established. The city council further finds that the geographic boundaries for Cedar Hill Precinct Number 1 shall be identical to those precincts which were formerly designated as Dallas County Precincts Numbers 4100, 4104, 4106, 4107 and 4108, respectively, and that the geographic boundaries for Cedar Hill Precinct Number 2 shall be identical to those precincts which were formerly designated as Dallas County Precincts Numbers 4101, 4102, 4103 and 4105, and Ellis County Precinct Number 101 and 137, respectively, and all as located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  Residency defined. For purposes of complying with the city council residency requirements as prescribed by Article V, Section 4 of the Charter, a city council candidate for either place 2 or place 3 shall be deemed to reside in Cedar Hill Precinct Number 1 if such candidate resides in Dallas County Precinct Number 4100, 4104, 4106, 4107 or 4108 within the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill. In addition, city council candidates for either place 5 or place 6 shall be deemed to be a resident of Cedar Hill Precinct Number 2 if said candidate resides in Dallas County Precinct Number 4101, 4102, 4103, 4105, 4109 or 4110, or Ellis County Precinct Number 101 or 137, within the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill. 
(e)  Polling places. The city election polling place for the combined county election precincts designated as City Precinct Number 1, as established in section 2-18, subsection (b), is hereby designated to be Bray Elementary School, 218 North Broad Street, Cedar Hill, Texas. The city election polling place for the combined county election precincts designated as City Precinct Number 2, as established in section 2-18, subsection (b), is hereby designated to be the Belt Line Intermediate School, 504 East Belt Line Road, Cedar Hill, Texas. Said polling places shall remain at these locations for all municipal elections conducted by the city unless designated and ordered otherwise by the city council of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(f)  Joint election polling places. In the event the city enters into a joint election agreement with one or more political subdivisions for the conduct of any municipal election, polling places may be established outside the boundaries of the designated city election precincts, if the locations can adequately and conveniently serve the affected voters and will facilitate the orderly conduct of the election in accordance with the provisions of Section 271.003 of the Texas Election Code. The polling places shall be designated in the joint election agreement. 
(Ord. No. 89-1005, §§ 2—6, 1-24-89; Ord. No. 90-013, s; 2, 3-27-90; Ord. No. 92-107, § 2, 2-25-92; Ord. No. 94-176, § 2, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 94-178, § 2, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 96-259, § 2, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 96-264, § 2, 2-27-96; Ord. No. 97-310, § 2, 2-25-97; Ord. No. 97-350, § 2, 12-9-97; Ord. No. 2002-95, § 2, 1-22-02; Ord. No. 2002-99, § 2, 2-26-02; Ord. No. 2008-344, § 2, 1-8-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-10005, §§ 2—6, adopted Jan. 24, 1989, and Ord. No. 90-013, § 2, adopted Mar. 27, 1990, not specifically amendatory of this Code, have been codified as § 2-18 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-19. - Date of election. 
(a)  General election. The City of Cedar Hill General Election shall be held on the first Saturday in May beginning in the year 2016 and thereafter. 
(b)  Run-off election. If a run-off election is ordered, the run-off election shall be held not earlier than the twentieth day or not later than the forty-fifth day after the date of the final canvass of the general election. 
(Ord. No. 2005-267, § 1, 11-8-05; Ord. No. 2015-577, § 1, 12-8-15)  
Sec. 2-20. - Regulations for campaign contributions. 
(a)  A candidate for the office of mayor or city council shall not accept any political contribution(s) or loan(s) for a total of more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) from any individual, entity or specific-purpose committee in a single city election. 
(b)  A candidate for the office of mayor or city council shall not accept any political contribution(s) or loan(s) from any specific-purpose committee that has accepted contribution(s) or loan(s) in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) from any individual or entity in a single city election. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, an initial election and run-off election are separate elections. 
(d)  It shall be an offense for any candidate to accept a political contribution or loan in excess of the amount authorized under this section. 
(e)  It shall be an offense for any candidate to accept a contribution or loan from any specific-purpose committee that has accepted a contribution or loan from any individual or entity in excess of the amount authorized under this section. 
(f)  Any person found committing an offense under this section shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be subject to a fine up to the maximum allowed by law. 
(g)  It is not the intent of the city to enact any provision in conflict with or in derogation of the Texas Election Code. The requirements set out in this article are cumulative of those in the Texas Election Code, and nothing in this article shall be construed to limit obligations imposed by the Texas Election Code. Any offense for violation of a criminal provision of this ordinance shall be separate from and in addition to any criminal offense under the Texas Election Code. 
(h)  No action of the city council which is otherwise legal shall be invalidated merely by reason of a violation of this section by a member of the city council or the failure of a member to disclose a campaign contribution. 
(Ord. No. 96-262, § 3, 2-27-96; Ord. No. 97-308, § 1, 1-28-97; Ord. No. 2017-611, § 3, 1-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-611, § 3, adopted January 24, 2017, renumbered § 2-203 as § 2-20.  
Secs. 2-21—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency management director; coordinator, § 5-16; general authority of city council regarding traffic regulations, § 11-3. 
Charter reference— Provisions relating to city manager, art. VII, § 1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-31. - Emergency action. 
Every officer, agent or employee of the city, while responding to emergency situations, is hereby authorized to act in such a manner as to most effectively deal with the emergency. This provision shall prevail over every other ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the employee shall be liable for any failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. 
(Code 1976, § 1-7; Ord. No. 86-853, § 1, 6-10-86)  
Secs. 2-32—2-45. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 2-46—2-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - RETIREMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Municipal Retirement System, V.A.C.S. Title 110B, § 61.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-56. - City to participate; effective date. 
(a)  On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments now existing or hereafter established participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in Revised Civil Statutes, Title 110B, section 61.001 et seq., as amended, and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees. 
(b)  Participation of such employees in the state municipal retirement system shall become effective on October 9, 1976. 
(Code 1976, §§ 1-60.51, 1-60.56; Ord. No. 76-430, §§ 1, 6, 9-28-76)  
Sec. 2-57. - Employees to become members. 
Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall become a member of the state municipal retirement system as a condition of his employment. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such system, but shall never discontinue as to any participants. 
(Code 1976, § 1-60.53; Ord. No. 76-430, § 3, 9-28-76)  
Sec. 2-58. - Municipal contributions. 
In accordance with the provisions of the statutes, the deposits to be made to the state municipal retirement system on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of seven (7) percent of the earnings of each employee of such departments, and in determining the deposits to be made on account of such service the maximum earnings of this city is full salary. 
(Code 1976, § 1-60.54; Ord. No. 76-430, § 4, 9-28-76; Ord. No. 99-454, 10-12-99)  
Sec. 2-59. - Remittance and reports to board of trustees. 
The city secretary or other proper official is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by such board under the provisions of the Revised Civil Statutes, Title 110B, section 61.001 et seq., as amended, and such official is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city the prior service compensation received by each and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the cit under the provisions of the Revised Civil Statutes, Title 110B, section 61.001 et seq., as amended, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system. 
(Code 1976, § 1-60.55; Ord. No. 76-430, § 5, 9-28-76)  
Sec. 2-60. - City to contribute to current service annuity reserve of each member. 
Effective January 1, 1981, for each month of current service thereafter rendered by each of its employees who are members of the state municipal retirement system, the city will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his retirement a sum that is two hundred (200) percent of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and such sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality current service accumulation fund. 
(Code 1976, § 1-60.81; Ord. of 10-28-80, § 1) 
State Law reference— Authority, V.A.C.S. Title 110B, § 65.501.  
Sec. 2-61. - Authorization of updated service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.401 through 853.404 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS ACT"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who has current service credit or prior service credit in the System in force and effect on the first day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least thirty-six (36) months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act.) 
(b)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the firs day of January of the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in said Section 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section. 
(c)  The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be one hundred (100) percent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in subsection (c) of Section 853.402 of the TMRS Act). 
(d)  Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(e)  In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of Section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the effective date of this section on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-869, § 1, 9-23-86; Ord. No. 87-930, § 1, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 88-988, s; 1, 9-27-88; Ord. No. 89-1042, § 1, 10-10-89; Ord. No. 90-026, § 1, 8-14-90; Ord. No. 91-091, § 1, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 98-396, § 1, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 99-454, § 1, 10-12-99)  
Sec. 2-62. - Increase in retirement annuities. 
(a)  On terms and conditions set out in Section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the cit under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of this section. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  IF a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereunder. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 86-869, § 2, 9-23-86; Ord. No. 87-930, § 2, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 88-988, § 2, 9-27-88; Ord. No. 89-1042, § 2, 10-10-89; Ord. No. 90-026, § 2, 8-14-90; Ord. No. 91-091, § 2, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 98-396, § 2, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 99-454, § 2, 10-12-99)  
Sec. 2-62.1. - Dates of allowances and increases. 
The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be effective on January 1, 2000, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this ordinance ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in subsection (d) of Section 853.404 of the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 91-091, § 3, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 98-396, § 3, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 99-454, § 3, 10-12-99) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 91-091, adopted Aug. 27, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code, and therefore has been codified as § 2-62.1 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-63. - Former members allowed to reenter system. 
Pursuant to section 63.003 of subtitle G of Title 110B of the Revised Civil Statutes, 1925, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow any member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who was an employee of this city on October 13, 1992, who has terminated a previous membership in such system by withdrawal of deposits while absent from service, but who has at least twenty-four (24) months of credited service as an employee of this city since resuming membership to deposit with the system in a lump sum the amount withdrawn, plus a withdrawal charge of five (5) percent of such amount for each year from date of such withdrawal to date of redeposit, and thereupon such member shall be allowed credit for all service to which the member had been entitled at date of termination of the earlier membership, with like effect as if all such service had been rendered as an employee of this city, whether so rendered or not. The city agrees to underwrite and hereby assumes the obligations arising out of the granting of all such credits, and agrees that all such obligations and reserves required to provide such credits shall be charged to this city's account in the municipality accumulation fund. The five (5) percent per annum withdrawal charge paid by the member shall be deposited to the credit of the city's account in such municipality accumulation fund; and the deposits of the amount previously withdrawn by the member shall be credited to his or her individual account in the employees' saving fund of the system. 
(Ord. No. 85-820, § 1, 11-12-85; Ord. No. 92-134, § 1, 10-13-92)  
Sec. 2-64. - Supplemental disability benefits fund. 
(a)  Election to participate. The city, by its city council, hereby elects to have the employees of all participating departments of the city participate in and be covered by the supplemental disability benefits fund of the state municipal retirement system, as provided by sections 65.313 and 65.408 of Title 110B of the Revised Civil Statutes; and all the benefits and obligations of participation in such fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees. 
(b)  New employees to be included. Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department in such fund shall as a condition of his employment be covered into the supplemental disability benefits fund to such system. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such fund, but shall never discontinue as to any members who are covered into the fund. 
(c)  City secretary to remit to board. The city secretary is hereby directed to remit monthly to the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system at its office in Austin, Texas, as the city's contributions to the supplemental disability benefits fund of the state municipal retirement system, such percentage of earnings of the above-mentioned employees of the city as may be fixed by the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system; provided that, the rate of contribution to such fund shall not exceed one-half of one (1) percent of the earnings of the employees of the city who are covered under such fund, and such official shall make for the city such reports as the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system may prescribe. 
(d)  Effective date. Participation of the above-mentioned employees in the supplemental disability benefits fund shall be effective October 9, 1976. 
(Code 1976, §§ 1-60.61, 1-60.63—1-60.65; Ord. No. 76-431, §§ 1, 3—5, 9-28-76) 
State Law reference— Authority, V.A.C.S. Title 110B, §§ 65.313, 65.408.  
Sec. 2-65. - City's election to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund. 
(a)  The city hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund of the state municipal retirement system beginning on the first day of the calendar month following written notification to the system of the adoption of Ordinance No. 80-547, for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits in the amounts and on the terms provided for in Revised Civil Statutes, Title 110B, sections 64.601 to 64.605, 65.314 and 65.502 for each of the city's employees who are members of such system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits as provided in such statutes for annuitants whose last covered employment was as an employee of this city. 
(b)  Participation of the above-mentioned employees and annuitants in the supplemental death benefits fund shall be effective on March 1, 1980. 
(Code 1976, § 1-60.73; Ord. No. 80-547, §§ 1, 3, 2-26-80)  
Sec. 2-66. - Additional rights, credits and benefits. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 854.202(g) of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government code, as amended, which subtitle shall herein be referred to as the "TMRS Act," the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, adopts the following provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (herein referred to as the "system"): 
(1)  Any employee of the city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least twenty (20) years of credited service in the system performed for one (1) or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under Section 854.202(g) of the TMRS Act. 
(2)  Prior to adopting this section, the governing body of the City has: (1) requested an actuarial analysis of member retirement annuities at twenty (20) years of service; and (2) held a public hearing pursuant to the notice provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551, Texas Government Code. 
(3)  The rights herein above authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the TMRS Act. 
(Ord. No. 87-931, §§ 1, 2, 11-10-87; Ord. No. 98-397, § 1, 11-10-98) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-931, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 10, 1987, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as § 2-66 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-67. - Credit for active military service. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 853.502, Subchapter F of Chapter 853 Title 8, Government Code as amended, the city hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the state municipal retirement system for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in Sections 853.502(b) and 853.503 of Subchapter F, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in section 853.505. 
(b)  In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the state municipal retirement system (in that member's individual account in the employees saving fund), an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by fifteen dollars ($15.00). The city agrees that its account in the municipality accumulation fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member applies for such military service credit. 
(Ord. No. 90-027, §§ 1, 2, 8-14-90) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-027, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 14, 1990, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as § 2-67 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-68. - Authorization of restricted prior service credit. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the "TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "system") who is now or who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in said Section 853.305 provided that (1) the person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service, and (2) the service meets the requirements of said Section 853.305. 
(b)  The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits. 
(c)  A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action required under said Section 853.305 while still an employee of this city. 
(Ord. No. 96-268, § 1, 3-26-96) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-268, § 1, adopted March 26, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 2-68 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 2-69. - Health benefits coverage for city retirees. 
(a)  Purpose. The city hereby elects to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees through the city's selected insurance carrier. 
(b)  Definition. The city hereby adopts the following definition of "retiree" for purposes of this ordinance: A City of Cedar Hill employee who has applied for and is receiving a monthly benefit under Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(c)  Benefits. The city hereby adopts the following benefits plans to be provided to its retirees: 
(1)  The same medical and dental plan(s) offered to active employees 
(2)  Medicare Supplement for over age sixty-five (65) retirees 
(3)  Retiree life. 
(d)  The City of Cedar Hill elects to have under age sixty-five (65) retiree medical contribution be the same as active employees, as long as the city's elected insurance carrier offers this rate structure. The City of Cedar Hill elects to have the retiree medical contribution for over age sixty-five (65) retirees be the Medicare Supplement Rate. 
(e)  Effective date. This section will only apply to individuals retiring after its effective date. For individuals retiring after the effective date of this section to qualify they must enroll for this coverage within thirty (30) days of their retirement. 
(f)  Repeal; modifications. This section may be repealed or modified at any time, but will remain in effect for any employee retiring while it is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2001-66, §§ 2—7, 5-29-01; Ord. No. 2003-150, 3-25-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-66, §§ 2—7, adopted May 29, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code, hence; inclusion as § 2-69 was at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 2-70—2-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SOCIAL SECURITY 
 
Sec. 2-81. - Agreement with state authorized. 
The city council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state department of public welfare for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of article 695g of the Revised Civil Statutes and Public Law 734, 81st Congress, chapter 809, 2d, H. R. 6000. 
(Code 1976, § 1-61)  
Sec. 2-82. - Mayor designated as agent to sign agreements. 
The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and on behalf of the city council and city. 
(Code 1976, § 1-62)  
Sec. 2-83. - Duties of city secretary. 
The city secretary is hereby directed to be the person responsible for making assignments, collections, payments, and reports as required by the state department of public welfare. 
(Code 1976, § 1-63)  
Sec. 2-84. - Fund established. 
A sufficient sum of money is allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the above-mentioned acts, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the City of Cedar Hill Social Security Fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Code 1976, § 1-64)  
Secs. 2-85—2-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARD OF DEVELOPMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Attendance of board, commission members at meetings, etc., § 2-1; environmental improvement and beautification commission, § 16-21 et seq.; planning and zoning commission, § 16-41 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-101. - Board created. 
There is hereby created a citizens' advisory committee to be known as the board of development. 
(Code 1976, § 1-49.51; Ord. No. 77-447, § 1, 1-25-77)  
Sec. 2-102. - Membership. 
The board of development shall consist of five (5) members with each to serve a two-year term, and all terms shall run concurrently. 
(Code 1976, § 1-49.52; Ord. No. 77-447, § 2, 1-25-77)  
Sec. 2-103. - Advisory; no compensation. 
Members appointed to the board of development shall serve in an advisory capacity only, and shall receive no monetary compensation for their service. 
(Code 1976, § 1-49.53; Ord. No. 77-447, § 3, 1-25-77)  
Sec. 2-104. - Duties. 
The board of development shall investigate the desirability of various methods of advertising and promoting the city, and shall make appropriate recommendations to the city council as to the best method of expending funds which may be budgeted each year for that purpose. 
(Code 1976, § 1-49.54; Ord. No. 77-447, § 4, 1-25-77)  
Sec. 2-105. - City manager to serve as secretary, etc. 
The city manager is appointed to serve ex officio as the secretary of the board of development, and shall administer the promotional or development activities recommended by the board which are approved by the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 1-49.55; Ord. No. 77-447, § 5, 1-25-77)  
Secs. 2-106—2-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CAPITAL IMPACT FEE ADVISORY COMMITTEE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-195, §§ 1—8, adopted October 11, 1994, repealed Art. V, §§ 2-121—2-128, and added a new Art. V, §§ 2-121—2-128. Former Art. V, pertained to the capital improvement board, and derived from Ord. No. 85-825, adopted November 26, 1985. 
 
Sec. 2-121. - Establishment of advisory committee. 
There is hereby established an advisory committee to the city council and named the "Capital Impact Fee Advisory Committee of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas." 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § 1, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 2-122. - Membership compliance and appointment. 
(a)  The advisory committee shall be composed of not less than five (5) members who shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council, not less than forty (40) percent of which must be representatives of the real estate, development, or building industries who are not employees or officials of a political subdivision or governmental entity. 
(b)  The city council reserves the right to appoint additional members or to replace members to the advisory committee at its sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § 2, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 2-123. - Terms of members. 
Members of the advisory board shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § 3, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 2-124. - Conduct of the advisory committee. 
(a)  The advisory committee is to conduct committee business only when a quorum is present. A quorum is defined as at least four (4) members being present. 
(b)  The advisory committee is to be directed by a chairperson appointed by the city council of the city to guide the committee activities, schedule meetings and conduct other such activities as commonly prescribed in Robert's Rules of Order and other city policies. 
(c)  The advisory committee shall meet at sufficient intervals to accomplish the functions enumerated in section 2-127. 
(d)  The advisory committee shall provide a committee report to the city council that includes comments and recommendations regarding the land use assumptions and the capital improvements plan. 
(e)  The committee report shall be filed before the fifth business day before the date of the public hearing on: 
(1)  The proposed amendments to the land use assumptions; 
(2)  The proposed amendments to the water and wastewater capital improvements plan; 
(3)  The proposed amendments to the water and wastewater impact fee; 
(4)  The proposed roadway capital improvements plan; or 
(5)  The proposed roadway impact fee. 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § 4, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 2-125. - Chairperson. 
The chairperson of the advisory committee shall be as follows: 
(1)  The chairperson of the advisory committee shall be a member of the city council who has been appointed to the advisory committee. 
(2)  The chairperson of the advisory committee shall be appointed by the city council on an annual basis. 
(3)  The chairperson of the advisory committee shall be a voting member of the advisory committee, but shall not initiate nor second any motion made by the advisory committee. 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § 5, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 2-126. - City manager to serve as ex officio member. 
The city manager shall serve as the ex officio member of the advisory committee but shall have no vote in connection with any of the determinations or recommendations of the advisory committee. 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § 6, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 2-127. - Functions and duties. 
(a)  The advisory committee serves in an advisory capacity. 
(b)  The advisory committee is established: 
(1)  To advise and assist the city in adopting land use assumptions; 
(2)  To review the capital improvements plan and file written comments; 
(3)  To monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plan; 
(4)  To file semi-annual reports with respect to progress of the capital improvements plan and report to the city any perceived inequities in implementing the plan or imposing the impact fee; and 
(5)  To advise the city of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan, and impact fee. 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § 7, 10-11-94)  
Sec. 2-128. - Responsibilities of the city government. 
The city council and city staff shall make available to the advisory committee any professional reports prepared in the development or implementation of land use plans, capital improvements plans, utility financial reports or any other information relevant to the development of impact fees under the Chapter 395 process. 
(Ord. No. 94-195, § 8, 10-11-94)  
Secs. 2-129—2-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LIBRARY BOARD[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-918, §§ 1—6, adopted Aug. 11, 1987, did not expressly amend this Code, thus, its inclusion as Art. VI, §§ 2-141—2-144, was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Attendance of board, commission members at meetings, etc., § 2-1; offenses relative to borrowed library materials, § 14-61 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-141. - Created. 
There is hereby created a library board. 
(Ord. No. 87-918, § 1, 8-11-87)  
Sec. 2-142. - Membership; term; eligibility; compensation. 
(a)  The members of the library board shall be appointed by a majority of the city council, and the library board shall consist of ten (10) members. 
(b)  The term of office of members of the board shall be two (2) years from the date of their appointment, until the date of reappointment and until their successors shall have been appointed and qualified. 
(c)  No person shall be eligible for appointment to the library board who is not a citizen of the United States and a resident of the city. The members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 87-918, §§ 2—4, 8-11-87; Ord. No. 96-278, § 1, 6-11-96)  
Sec. 2-143. - Powers, duties; election and term of officers; meetings. 
The library board shall act as and be advisory to the city council relative to present and future needs of the library, as well as matters relating to library policies. It shall organize itself by electing from its membership a president, vice-president and secretary, who shall hold office for one (1) year and until their successors are elected and qualified. It shall hold regular meetings at least once every month and shall establish rules and regulations for its government and for the performance of its duties. The president shall preside over meetings of the board and shall represent the board before the city council or the city administration on matters which have majority vote approval of the board. The vice-president shall assist the president in directing the affairs of the board. In the absence of the president, the vice-president shall assume the duties of the president. 
(Ord. No. 87-918, § 5, 8-11-87)  
Sec. 2-144. - Removal from board. 
The members of the library board shall be subject to removal from office by the city council for any cause deemed by the council sufficient for their removal in the interest of the public service. Any vacancy in the membership of the board shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term of the member whose place becomes vacant for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 87-918, § 6, 8-11-87)  
Secs. 2-145—2-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-046, §§ 1—16, adopted Nov. 13, 1990, amended this Code but did not specify the manner of codification. Such provisions have been included as Art. VII, §§ 2-161—2-175, of this chapter at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-161. - Definitions. 
[As used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows:] 
City records. All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is upon or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. The term city records does not include: 
(1)  Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of reference or research by officers or employees of the city; 
(2)  Notes, journals, diaries and similar documents created by an officer or employee of the city for the employee's personal convenience; 
(3)  Blank forms; 
(4)  Stocks and publications; 
(5)  Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purposes of reference or display; or 
(6)  Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are entitled under article 6252-17a, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes or other state law. 
Department director means the officer who by ordinance, order or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records liaison officers means the persons designated under section 2-169 of this article. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-166 of this article. 
Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-164 of this article. 
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-167 of this article. 
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-162. - City records declared public property. 
All city records as defined in section 2-161 are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records, even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 3, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-163. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 4, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-164. - Records management officer—Designated. 
The office of city secretary and the successive holders of such office shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the officer shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 5, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-165. - Same—Duties. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article; the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department directors in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department directors, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the city council and department directors information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program; 
(11)  Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article; 
(12)  In cooperation with department directors, ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition of city government records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition. 
(14)  Report annually to the city council on the program effectiveness; 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the city manager noncompliance by department directors or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 8, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-166. - Establishment of records management committee; duties. 
A records management committee consisting of the finance director, city manager and mayor is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program; 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed; 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer; 
(4)  Given final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules; and 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 6, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-167. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees or similar entities of the city, and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department director do not exempt the department director or the records in the department director's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department director as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 7, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-168. - Duties and responsibilities of department directors. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department directors shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with there records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs and duties for which the department director and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 9, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-169. - Records liaison officers—Designation. 
Each department director shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the implementation of the records management program in the department. If the records management officer determines that, in the best interests of the records management program, more than one (1) records liaison officer should be designated for a department, the department director shall designate the number of records liaison officers specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records liaison officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal or removal by action of the department director of a person designated as a records liaison officer, the department director shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department director may serve as records liaison officer for his or her department. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 10, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-170. - Same—Duties and responsibilities. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules; 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their departments; and 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 11, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-171. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department directors and records liaison officers, shall prepare records control schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department director, the city attorney and the members of the records management committee. Schedules shall be adopted by a majority vote of the records management committee. The records management officer shall designate a certain number of days for review and approval of the schedule. Failure of the officers and the committee to review and approve the schedule within the designated time may result in the automatic adoption of the schedule. 
(d)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 12, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-172. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-167 shall be implemented by department directors and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee. Such approval shall be by a majority vote of the records management committee. The records management officer shall designate a certain number of days for review and approval, and failure of the records management committee to approve the destruction of a record within the designated time period may result in the automatic destruction of such record. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 13, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-173. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 14, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-174. - Records center. 
If a records center is developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-167, it shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-167. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 15, 11-13-90)  
Sec. 2-175. - Micrographics. 
When practical and economically feasible, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. A micrographic program in a department may be specifically exempted by order of the city council or the records management plan. All microfilming service contracts shall also be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer in cooperation with department directors. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of city records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost effectiveness, administrative efficiency and compliance with commission rules. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, § 16, 11-13-90)  
Secs. 2-176—2-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - HUMAN RELATIONS COMMITTEE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 92-123, adopted May 9, 1992, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1—6 of said ordinance as §§ 2-181—2-186 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 2-181. - Created. 
There is hereby created an advisory committee to be known as the human relations committee. 
(Ord. No. 92-123, § 1, 5-9-92)  
Sec. 2-182. - Membership. 
The human relations committee shall consist of seven (7) voting members and two (2) nonvoting ex officio members, and all members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council. As nearly as is reasonably possible, the membership shall be fairly representative of all of the several economic, religious, cultural, ethnic and racial groups which comprise the population of the City of Cedar Hill. The members of the human relations committee shall have the following affiliations at the time of appointment: 
Voting members 
(1)  Seat one (1) and seat two (2) shall be members of the city council at the time of appointment to the committee; 
(2)  Seat three (3), seat four (4), seat five (5), seat six (6) and seat seven (7) shall be residents of the City of Cedar Hill. 
Nonvoting ex officio members 
(1)  Seat eight (8) and seat nine (9) shall be members of the city staff at the time of appointment to the committee. 
(Ord. No. 92-123, § 2, 5-9-92)  
Sec. 2-183. - Terms of members. 
Each member of the committee shall be appointed to serve a term of two (2) years; provided, however, that on the initial committee, five (5) members shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year and four (4) shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years. In the event any member of the committee resigns or terminates service for any cause, the city council shall appoint a qualified successor for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 92-123, § 3, 5-9-92)  
Sec. 2-184. - Advisory; no compensation. 
Members appointed to the human relations committee shall serve in an advisory capacity only, and shall receive no monetary compensation for their service. 
(Ord. No. 92-123, § 4, 5-9-92)  
Sec. 2-185. - Duties and powers of the committee. 
The human relations committee shall act as and be advisory to the city council relative to matters involving age, sex, racial, religious, or ethnic discrimination except in cases involving litigation or potential litigation. The committee shall promote and encourage communications between and cooperation of all groups interested in bettering community relations. 
(Ord. No. 92-123, § 5, 5-9-92; Ord. No. 92-138, § 1, 12-8-92)  
Sec. 2-186. - Organization of committee. 
Members of the Cedar Hill Human Relations Committee shall be sworn to uphold the Constitution and the laws of the United States and the State of Texas. The two (2) city council members appointed to the committee shall serve as chairman and vice-chairman. The commission shall adopt rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the city council, pertaining to the performance of its duties and the time and frequency of its meetings. 
(Ord. No. 92-123, § 6, 5-9-92)  
Secs. 2-187—2-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CODE OF CONDUCT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-262, §§ 1—10, adopted February 27, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. IX, §§ 2-201—2-210, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Policy. 
It is the policy of the city that the proper operation of democratic government requires that: 
(1)  Public officials be impartial and loyal to the citizens of Cedar Hill in a performance of the duties of their offices or appointed positions; 
(2)  Governmental decisions and policy be made using the proper procedures of the governmental structure; 
(3)  That no official permits any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engage in any business, transaction or professional activity to incur any obligation of any nature which is in conflict with the proper discharge of his or her duties in the public interest to conflict; 
(4)  Public office not be used for personal gain; and 
(5)  The city council at all times be maintained as a nonpartisan body. To implement such a policy, the city council deems it advisable to enact a code of conduct for all officials, whether elected, appointed or hired, paid or unpaid, to serve not only as a guide for official conduct of the city's public servants, but also as a basis for discipline for those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 96-262, § 1, 2-27-96; Ord. No. 2017-611, § 2, 1-24-17)  
Sec. 2-202. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article the following words, terms and phrases when used herein shall have the following meanings subscribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Benefit means anything reasonably regarded as economic gain or economic advantage, including a benefit to any other person in whose welfare the officer or employee may be interested. 
Business means any person, entity, corporation (whether for-profit or nonprofit), general or limited partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, unincorporated association or firm, institution, trust, foundation, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, or other entity whatsoever, whether or not organized for profit, which has an economic interest, or seeking such, in conducting business with the city. 
City means the City of Cedar Hill, in Dallas and Ellis Counties, Texas. 
City body means the city council and any agency, board, committee, commission, corporation, nonprofit development corporation, or other similarly related body established by City Charter, ordinance/resolution or state/federal law vested with either advisory or rule making authority of the city. 
City council means the legislative and governing body of the city consisting of the mayor and individual council members. 
Code of conduct means the procedures, regulations, rules and standards contained herein and as may be amended. 
Confidential information means all information, whether transmitted orally or in writing, which may be exempted from disclosure pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, which has not been authorized pursuant to any law; or is of such a nature that it is not, at the time, a matter of public record or public knowledge. 
Employee means a person employed and paid a salary by the city including those individuals on a part-time basis. It shall not include independent contractors or volunteers performing such work or services directly or indirectly to the benefit and on behalf of the city. It shall refer to any paid employee appointed specifically by the city council under authority of the City Charter, ordinance or resolution. 
Gift means anything of value, regardless of form, offered or given in the absence of adequate and lawful consideration. It does not include the receipt or acceptance of campaign contributions which are regulated by federal, state and/or local laws or ordinances. 
Interests means any direct or indirect (but not remote or incidental) financial or material impact to an officer or official as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or actions by or with the city, except for such contracts or transactions that by their terms and by the substance of their provisions confer the opportunity and right to realize the accrual of similar benefits to all other persons and/or property similarly situated. An interest is remote or incidental if its value will not increase or decrease materially by reason of the action or decision of the city concerning the contract or transaction. An interest in real estate and related improvements shall be specifically excluded from this definition whenever the city's acquisition of the property may be acquired for a public purpose and just compensation may be paid in accordance with state law. 
Official means any member of a city body, or otherwise, that acts as an instrumentality of the city established by City Charter, ordinance, resolution, state/federal law or otherwise, on a temporary or permanent basis. For purposes of this article only, officer shall also mean any paid employee, whether full-time or part-time, appointed by the city council pursuant to the City Charter, ordinance or resolution. 
Relative means any person related to an officer or employee within the first degree by consanguinity or affinity as determined under Chapter 573 of the Texas Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 96-262, § 2, 2-27-96; Ord. No. 2017-611, § 2, 1-24-17)  
Sec. 2-203. - Code of conduct. 
No official shall: 
(1)  Represent or appear on behalf of the private interests of others before a city body of which he is a member, or before the city council or other city board concerning such matter, nor represent any private interests of others, except relatives, in any action or proceeding involving the city. 
(2)  Accept any gift, from any person that might reasonably tend to influence the discharge of one's duties, or grant in the discharge of such duties any improper favor, service or thing of value. If an official has accepted any such item by way of gift or use of materials or equipment, whether temporary or permanent, pursuant to duties provided to the city, such gift or use of materials or equipment must promptly be reported to the city manager who shall cause such to be inventoried as city property. The foregoing provisions shall not apply: 
a.  The acceptance of a gratuitous provision(s), not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00), for travel, lodging, entertainment, food or beverage paid for by a person or business seeking to do, or currently conducting business with the city, other than a public agency. 
b.  A campaign contribution pursuant to and in compliance with the applicable provisions as provided in chapter 2, article II, section 2-20 of this Code; 
c.  At or in connection with the illness or death of a family member, or a tragedy; 
d.  A gift as an honorarium or as a reward for meritorious service, professional recognition, or public service; 
e.  Loan(s) made in accordance with the ordinary course of the lender's business; 
f.  Copies of trade publications and other related materials; 
g.  Attendance at hospitality functions at local, regional, state, or national association meeting(s)/conference(s); 
(3)  Use his or her official position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others. 
(4)  Grant any special consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizens, individual, business or group. 
(5)  Disclose information that could adversely affect the property, or affairs of the city, directly or indirectly, understood to be confidential and which was gained by reason of his or her official position or employment for his or her own personal gain or benefit or for the private interest of others. No official shall disclose to anyone the substance, contents or subject discussed or deliberated upon during a closed or executive session. 
(6)  Accept additional employment incompatible with the full and proper discharge of one's duties and responsibilities with the city, or which might impair the independent judgment in the performance of such public duty for the city. 
(7)  Receive any fee or compensation for one's services to the city from any source other than the city, except as may otherwise be provided by law. This shall not prohibit performing the same or other services for another organization if there is no conflict with primary duties and responsibilities to the city. 
(8)  Solicit or accept other employment to be performed or compensation to be received while serving in a position with the city, if the service, employment, or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair independence in judgment or performance of such city duties. 
(9)  Act as surety for a business that has a contract, work or business with the city. Additionally, he or she shall not act as a surety on any official bond required of any officer or employee of the city. 
(10)  Accept, solicit, or otherwise entertain any offer of future employment or business from a person or entity which has an economic interest in a person, business, or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official or officer might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise or make a recommendation. In such case, the officer shall disclose such fact to the city body upon which he serves. No further action shall be undertaken by an officer or official regarding any matter(s) concerning the potential future employer or business client/customer. This subsection shall apply to situations where the official or the official's relative is to be a future employee of another and also to situations where the official or relative is to be self-employed or a business owner or manager. 
(11)  Knowingly perform or refuse to perform any act in order to deliberately thwart the execution of the city ordinances, rules or regulations or the achievement of official city programs. 
(Ord. No. 96-262, § 4, 2-27-96; Ord. No. 2017-611, § 2, 1-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-611, § 3, adopted January 24, 2017, renumbered the former § 2-204 as § 2-203.  
Sec. 2-204. - Disclosure on interest. 
Chapter 171 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, being the statute which regulates conflicts of interest for municipalities, is hereby adopted and made a part of this article for all purposes. 
(Ord. No. 96-262, § 5, 2-27-96; Ord. No. 2017-611, § 2, 1-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-611, § 2, adopted January 24, 2017, renumbered § 2-205 as § 2-204.  
Sec. 2-205. - Additional requirements—City council members. 
In any zoning matter which may come before the city council, any city council member who owns a financial interest in any property within two hundred (200) feet of the zoning request shall disclose the existence of such interest to the other council members and thereafter abstain from voting in the matter. 
(Ord. No. 96-262, § 7, 2-27-96; Ord. No. 2017-611, § 2, 1-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-611, § 2, adopted January 24, 2017, renumbered § 2-207 as § 2-205.  
Sec. 2-206. - Complaints against mayor/council member. 
(a)  All complaints or allegations of a violation of the code of conduct against a council member shall be made in writing, sworn to before a notary public, and filed of record with the city secretary, who will forward the complaint to the city council. Such complaint shall describe in detail the acts or acts complained of and the specific section(s) of this code of conduct alleged to have been violated. 
(b)  The failure of any city council member to comply with or who violates one (1) or more standards of conduct in this code, which apply to him or her, shall warrant a reprimand. The nature and extent of such reprimand shall be determined by the city council by a two-thirds (?) vote of the other council members. 
(Ord. No. 2017-611, § 2, 1-24-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-611, § 1, adopted January 24, 2017, repealed § 2-206 and renumbered § 2-208 as § 2-206. Former § 2-206 pertained to contracts with the city affidavit and derived from Ord. No. 96-262, adopted February 27, 1996.  
Sec. 2-207. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-611, § 2, adopted January 24, 2017, renumbered § 2-207 as § 2-205.  
Sec. 2-208. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-611, § 2, adopted January 24, 2017, renumbered § 2-208 as § 2-206.  
Sec. 2-209. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-611, § 1, adopted January 24, 2017, repealed § 2-209. Former § 2-209 pertained to interpretation of content and derived from Ord. No. 96-262, adopted February 27, 1996.  
Sec. 2-210. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-611, § 1, adopted January 24, 2017, repealed § 2-210. Former § 2-210 pertained to adoption of state statute and derived from Ord. No. 96-262, adopted February 27, 1996.  
Chapter 2.5 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, adopted April 25, 2006, repealed the former Ch. 2.5, §§ 2.5-1—2.5-9, and enacted a new Ch. 2.5 as set out herein. The former Ch. 2.5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 89-1044, §§ 1—9, 10-24-89; Ord. No. 92-112, § 1, 3-10-92; Ord. No. 96-270, § 1, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 2002-125, §§ 1, 2, 9-24-02. 
Charter reference— Corporate powers, art. II, § 1 et seq.; police department, art. II, § 24; city manager, art. VII, § 1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; building, electrical, etc., permit fees, § 4-1 et seq.; electrical code, § 4-81 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; fire marshal, § 6-46 et seq.; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10; police, Ch. 17. 
 
Sec. 2.5.1. - Definitions. 
In this chapter the following terms and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Act of God as used in this chapter means an unpredictable natural disaster which causes a natural event such as a flood, earthquake, tornado or hurricane resulting in widespread damage or loss of life. 
Alarm administrator means a person or persons designated by the governing authority to administer, control and review false alarm and false burglar alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this chapter. 
Alarm installation company means a person in the business of selling, providing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an alarm system in an alarm site. 
Alarm dispatch request means a notification to the city that an alarm has been activated at a particular alarm site and that city emergency service is requested. 
Alarm permit means authorization granted by the alarm administrator to an alarm user to operate an alarm system. 
Alarm permit application means the written application for and alarm permit filed by an alarm user with the alarm administrator. 
Alarm site means a single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or systems. Each unit, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-unit building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm site, and is further defined by the following categories: 
(a)  Residential site means a single family residence and each residential unit of multi-unit building or complex which is served by an alarm system. 
(b)  Commercial site means every premises or location where any business activity is regularly conducted and which is served by an alarm system. Each unit of a business premises or business location, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-unit building or complex, shall be considered a separate commercial alarm system site. 
(c)  Financial site means every premises or location of a financial institution which is required to have an alarm system pursuant to the Bank Protection Act of 1968 (12 U.S.C. §1882). 
(d)  Educational/government site means every premises or location of a public or private school or school administrative office and every premises or location of any federal, state, county or municipal governmental office. 
Alarm system means a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, hardwired systems and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon a city emergency service response, including local alarm systems. Alarm system does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle or on someone's person unless the vehicle or the personal alarm is permanently located at a site. 
Alarm systems monitor means a person or entity who acts as an alarm systems company under section 1702.105 of the Texas Occupations Code. 
Alarm user means any person who (which) owns or operates an alarm system at an alarm site. 
Arming station means a device that allows control of an alarm system. 
Automatic voice dialer means any electrical, electronic, mechanical, or other device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to a city emergency service requesting dispatch. 
Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when an alarm systems monitor (designated by the alarm user) for the alarm site notifies the responding city emergency service that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring a response after an alarm dispatch request. 
City means the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
City emergency service means any emergency service provided by the city, including police, fire, and emergency medical services. 
City manager means the City Manager of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, or the city manager's designee. 
Duress alarm means a silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of a designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm user is being forced to turn off the system and requires law enforcement response. 
False alarm means an alarm dispatch request, other than a false burglar alarm, that has generated a city emergency service response or when no emergency condition is found at the alarm site. 
False burglar alarm means a notification of possible criminal activity reported to law enforcement: (A) that is based solely on electronic information remotely received by an alarm systems monitor; (B) that is uncorroborated by eyewitness, video, or photographic evidence that an emergency exists; and (C) concerning which the Cedar Hill Police Department has verified that no emergency exists after an on-site inspection of the location from which the notification originated. 
Holdup alarm means a silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a robbery in progress. 
Local alarm system means any alarm system, which is not monitored, that emits an audible alarm only at the alarm site. 
Monitoring means the process by which a monitoring company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the municipality for the purpose of summoning city emergency services to the alarm site. 
Panic alarm means an audible alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring emergency response. 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or similar entity. 
Responder means an individual capable of reaching the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes and having access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm system and the authority to approve repairs to the alarm system. 
Senior citizen means, for purposes of this chapter, a person of the age of sixty-five (65) or older who owns or rents, and resides at, a residential dwelling at which an alarm system is operated. 
SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01 means the ANSI—American National Standard Institute approved Security Industry Association—SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce the incidence of false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by Underwriters Laboratory (UL), or other nationally recognized testing organizations, will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard features for false alarm reduction". 
Transfer means the transaction or process by which an alarm user takes over control of an existing alarm system, which was previously controlled by another alarm user. 
Verify means an attempt by the alarm systems monitor, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting city emergency service dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this chapter, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum, that a second call be made if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting an emergency response. 
Zones means division of devices into which an alarm system is divided to indicate the general location from which an alarm system signal is transmitted. 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 2016-583, § 1, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 2.5-2. - Permit required; application: fee; transferability; false statements. 
(a)  No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system at its alarm site without a valid alarm permit. A separate alarm permit is required for each alarm site. 
(b)  The fee for an alarm permit or an alarm permit renewal is set forth below and shall be paid by the alarm user. No refund of a permit or permit renewal fee will be made. The initial alarm permit fee must be submitted to the alarm administrator within five (5) days after the alarm system installation or an alarm system transfer. 
(1)  Permit fees: (See appendix C, fines and fees). 
(2)  Renewal fees: (See appendix C, fines and fees). 
(c)  Upon receipt of a completed alarm permit application form and the alarm permit fee, the alarm administrator shall register the applicant unless the applicant has: 
(1)  Failed to pay a fine assessed under section 2.5-7; or 
(2)  Had an alarm permit for the alarm site suspended and the violation causing the suspension has not been corrected. 
(d)  Each alarm permit application must include the following information: 
(1)  If for an individual: the name, complete address (including apt/suite number), telephone numbers, and driver's license number or a state issued identification card number of the person who will be the permit holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this article. If for a corporate entity, partnership or other organization: the name of the entity, complete address (including suite number), telephone numbers, tax identification number, and the name and title of any and all contact persons. 
(2)  The classification of the alarm site as either residential (includes apartment, condo, mobile home, etc.) commercial, financial, or educational/government. 
(3)  Mailing address, if different from the address of the alarm site. 
(4)  Any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm site. 
(5)  Names and telephone numbers of at least two (2) individuals who are able and have agreed to: (a) receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time; (b) respond to the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes at any time; and (c) upon request can grant access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm system if necessary. 
(6)  Type of business conducted at a commercial alarm site. 
(7)  Signed certification from the alarm user stating the following: 
a.  The date of installation or transfer of the alarm system, whichever is applicable. 
b.  The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm installation company or companies performing the alarm system installation or transfer and of the alarm installation company responsible for providing repair service to the alarm system. 
c.  The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm systems monitor if different from the alarm installation company. 
d.  That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm system, including written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms and false burglar alarms, have been left with the applicant by the alarm installation company. 
e.  An acknowledgment that the alarm installation company has trained the applicant in proper use of the alarm system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms and false burglar alarms. 
f.  An acknowledgment that the alarm user understands and agrees that a city emergency service response may be influenced by factors including, but not limited to the availability of city emergency service units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, etc. 
(e)  Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm permit shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a permit or for suspension of an existing permit. 
(f)  An alarm permit cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator of any change that alters any of the information listed on the alarm permit application within five (5) business days of such change. 
(g)  All fines and fees owed by an applicant must be paid before an alarm permit may be issued or renewed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 2016-583, § 2, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 2.5-3. - Alarm permit duration and renewal. 
An alarm permit shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, and must be renewed annually by submitting an updated application and a permit renewal fee to the alarm administrator. It is the responsibility of the alarm user to submit an application prior to the permit expiration date. Failure to renew will be classified as use of a non-permitted alarm system and fines shall be assessed. A ten dollar ($10.00) late fee may be assessed if the renewal is more than thirty (30) days late. 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 2.5-4. - Duties of the alarm user. 
(a)  An alarm user shall: 
(1)  Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms and false burglar alarms; 
(2)  Make every reasonable effort to have a responder arrive at the alarm system's location within thirty (30) minutes when requested by a city emergency service in order to: 
a.  Deactivate an alarm system; 
b.  Provide access to the alarm site; and/or 
c.  Provide alternative security for the alarm site. 
(3)  Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(b)  An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will sound for no longer than ten (10) minutes after being activated. 
(c)  An alarm user shall not use automatic voice dialers. 
(d)  An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site, a set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. 
(e)  All alarm users shall review with their alarm installation company and/or alarm systems monitor the customer false alarm and false burglar alarm prevention checklist (see appendix B) or an equivalent checklist approved by the alarm administrator and acknowledge their understanding of false alarm and false burglar alarm prevention procedures by signing and dating same. A fully executed copy of the customer false alarm and false burglar alarm prevention checklist shall be filed with the original application for an alarm permit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 2016-583, § 3, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 2.5-5. - Duties of alarm installation company and alarm systems monitor. 
(a)  The alarm installation company shall provide written and oral instructions to each of its alarm users in the proper use and operation of their alarm systems. Such instructions will specifically include all instructions necessary to turn the alarm system on and off and to avoid false alarms and false burglar alarms. 
(b)  Upon the effective date of this chapter, alarm installation companies shall not install a device to activate a holdup alarm which is a single action, non-recessed button. 
(c)  Ninety (90) days after enactment of this chapter, the alarm installation companies shall, on new installations, use only alarm control panel(s) which meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01. 
(d)  An alarm company shall not use automatic voice dialers. 
(e)  After completion of the installation of an alarm system, an alarm installation company employee shall review with the alarm user the customer false alarm and false burglar alarm prevention checklist (appendix B) or an equivalent checklist approved by the alarm administrator. 
(f)  After completion of the installation of an alarm system, an alarm installation company employee shall complete, sign and date the installer false alarm and false burglar alarm prevention program checklist (appendix A) or an equivalent checklist approved by the alarm administrator. The alarm installation company shall maintain a copy of each completed, signed and dated installer false alarm and false burglar alarm prevention program checklist for a period of two (2) years. 
(g)  An alarm systems monitor shall: 
(1)  Report alarm signals and dispatch requests by using telephone numbers or an alternate method designated by the alarm administrator; 
(2)  Verify alarm signal activations, except for duress/panic, medical, fire or holdup alarm activations, before requesting a city emergency service response to an alarm system signal; 
(3)  Communicate cancellations to the city in a manner and form determined by the alarm administrator; 
(4)  Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a duress, holdup or panic alarm are given adequate training as to the proper use of the duress, holdup or panic alarm; 
(5)  Communicate any available information (north, south, front, back, floor, etc.) about the location on all alarm signals related to the alarm dispatch request; 
(6)  Communicate type of alarm activation (silent or audible, interior or perimeter); 
(7)  Provide the address of the alarm site; 
(8)  After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the responding city emergency service if the alarm systems monitor knows that the alarm user or the responder has or has not been contacted; 
(9)  Alarm systems monitors must maintain for a period of at least one (1) year from the date of an alarm dispatch request, records relating to the alarm dispatch request. Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the alarm user, the alarm system zone(s) activated, the time of alarm dispatch request and evidence of an attempt to verify. The alarm administrator may request copies of such records for individually named alarm users. If the request is made within sixty (60) days of an alarm dispatch request, the alarm systems monitor shall furnish requested records within ten (10) business days of receiving the request. If the records are requested between sixty (60) days to one (1) year after an alarm dispatch request, the alarm systems monitor shall furnish the requested records within thirty (30) days of receiving the request. 
(h)  An alarm installation company and/or alarm systems monitor that purchases alarm system accounts from another person shall notify the alarm administrator of such purchase and provide details as may be reasonably requested by the alarm administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 2016-583, § 4, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 2.5-6. - Duties and authority of the alarm administrator. 
(a)  The alarm administrator shall: 
(1)  Designate a manner, form and telephone numbers for the communication of alarm dispatch requests; and 
(2)  Establish a procedure to accept cancellation of alarm dispatch requests. 
(b)  The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure to record such information on alarm dispatch requests necessary to permit the alarm administrator to maintain records, including, but not limited to, the information listed below: 
(1)  Identification of the permit number for the alarm site. 
(2)  Identification of the alarm site. 
(3)  Date and time alarm dispatch request was received. 
(4)  Date and time of the city emergency service arrival at the alarm site. 
(c)  The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure for the notification to the alarm user of a fineable false alarm and false burglar alarm. 
(d)  The alarm administrator may require a conference with an alarm user and the alarm installation company and/or alarm systems monitor responsible for the repair or monitoring of the alarm system to review the circumstances of each false alarm and false burglar alarm. 
(e)  The alarm administrator may create and implement an alarm user awareness class. The alarm administrator may request the assistance of associations, alarm companies and law enforcement agencies in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and false burglar alarms and teach alarm users how to avoid generating false alarms and false burglar alarms. 
(f)  The alarm administrator may require an alarm user to remove a holdup alarm that is a single action, non-recessed button, if a false holdup alarm has occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 2016-583, § 5, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 2.5-7. - Fines. 
(a)  An alarm user shall be subject to fines, depending on the number of false alarms within any twelve-month period based upon the schedule set forth in appendix C, fines and fees. 
(b)  In addition, any person operating a non-permitted alarm system will be subject to a fine (see appendix C, fines and fees) for each false alarm and each false burglar alarm in addition to any other fines. The alarm administrator may waive this additional fine for a non-permitted system if the alarm user submits an application for alarm permit within ten (10) days after notification of such violation. 
(c)  Notice of the right of appeal under this chapter will be included with any fines. 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 2016-583, § 6, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 2.5-8. - Suspension. 
(a)  The alarm administrator may suspend any alarm permit upon the occurrence of any of the following conditions: 
(1)  If the alarm user provides any false information in, or in connection with, an alarm permit application; 
(2)  If an alarm site has more than twelve (12) false alarms or false burglar alarms in any twelve-month period; or 
(3)  If any fines assessed by the alarm administrator become ninety (90) days or more past due. 
(b)  An alarm user may appeal the suspension of an alarm permit in accordance with the provision for appeals set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  The alarm administrator will notify the alarm user in writing after the alarm permit has been suspended and the reason for the suspension. The notice of suspension may also include the amount of the fine for each false alarm or false burglar alarm, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 2016-583, § 7, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 2.5-9. - Appeals. 
(a)  If the alarm administrator assesses a fine or denies the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of an alarm permit, the alarm administrator shall send written notice of the action and a statement of the right to an appeal to either the affected applicant or alarm user. 
(b)  The alarm user may appeal an assessment of a fine or the suspension of an alarm permit to the alarm administrator by setting forth in writing the reasons for the appeal within ten (10) business days after receipt of the fine or notice of suspension and by submitting a the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to the city to cover the cost of processing the appeal. The payment for the cost of the appeal will not be refunded. 
(c)  The alarm user may appeal the decision of the alarm administrator by requesting, within ten (10) business days from the date of the decision, that the alarm administrator forward the appeal to the city manager. The alarm administrator will, within five (5) business days of such a request, provide the city manager with notice of the appeal. The city manager shall, within a period of thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice of appeal from the alarm administrator, hear the appeal and the facts as presented by the appellant and the alarm administrator, affording both parties a reasonable and equal amount of time for the presentation of facts, evidence, and the questioning and cross-examination of witnesses. Within ten (10) business days of the hearing, the city manager shall render a final, written decision affirming or reversing the decision of the alarm administrator. Such written decision shall be filed with the city secretary. 
(d)  Filing of a notice of appeal shall stay the action by the alarm administrator suspending an alarm permit or requiring payment of a fine, until the city manager has rendered a decision. If a request for an appeal to the city manager is not made within the required ten (10) business day period, the action of the alarm administrator is final. 
(e)  The alarm administrator may adjust the count of false alarms and false burglar alarms based on: 
(1)  Evidence that a false alarm was caused by an Act of God; 
(2)  Evidence that a false alarm was caused by action of the telephone company; 
(3)  Evidence that a false alarm was caused by a power outage lasting longer than four (4) hours; 
(4)  Evidence that the alarm dispatch request was not a false alarm; and/or 
(5)  Evidence that a city emergency service response was not completed in a timely fashion. 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 2016-583, § 8, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 2.5-10. - Reinstatement. 
(a)  A person whose alarm permit has been suspended may, at the discretion of the alarm administrator, have the alarm permit reinstated by the alarm administrator if the person: 
(1)  Submits a new application and pays a reinstatement fee (see appendix C, fines and fees); 
(2)  Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding fees and fines; and 
(3)  Submits a certification from an alarm installation company, stating that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the alarm installation company; 
(b)  In addition, the alarm administrator may require one (1) or more of the following as a condition to reinstatement: 
(1)  Proof that an employee of the alarm installation company or alarm systems monitor caused the false alarm; 
(2)  A certificate showing that the alarm user has successfully completed the alarm user awareness class as provided under section 2.5-6(e); 
(3)  Upgrade the alarm control panel to meet SIA Control Panel Standard CP-01; 
(4)  A written statement from an independent inspector that the alarm system has been inspected and is in good working order; 
(5)  Confirmation that all motion detectors are "dual technology" type; 
(6)  Confirmation that the alarm system requires two (2) independent zones to trigger before transmitting an alarm signal to the alarm systems monitor; 
(7)  Confirmation that the alarm system requires two (2) independent detectors to trigger before transmitting an alarm signal to the alarm systems monitor; 
(8)  Certification that the alarm systems monitor will not make an alarm dispatch request unless the need for a city emergency service is confirmed by a listen-in device; 
(9)  Certification that the alarm systems monitor will not request an alarm dispatch unless the need for a city emergency service response is confirmed by a camera device; or 
(10)  Certification that the alarm systems monitor will not make an alarm dispatch request unless the need for a city emergency service response is confirmed by a person at the alarm site. 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 2016-583, § 9, 4-12-16)  
Sec. 2.5-11. - Confidentiality. 
In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered through the alarm permit applications and applications for appeals shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the city and by any third-party administrator or employees of a third-party administrator with access to such information. 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 2.5-12. - Governmental immunity. 
An alarm permit is not intended to, nor will it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, for a city emergency response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the city's failure or inability to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm permit, the alarm user acknowledges that a city emergency response may be influenced by factors such as: The availability of city emergency service units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06)  
Sec. 2.5.13. - Exclusion of alarm system by owner. 
(a)  A property owner or agent of the property owner authorized to make decisions regarding the use of the owner's property may elect to exclude the city from receiving an alarm signal by an alarm system located on the property. 
(b)  The election to exclude the city from receiving an alarm signal shall be made in writing and filed with the city on a form prescribed by the city. 
(c)  An election to exclude the city from receiving an alarm signal shall not relieve the property owner of the duty to obtain an alarm systems permit; however, such a permit will be issued without charge to the owner. The election to exclude the city from receiving an alarm signal shall be noted on the permit. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the property owner or agent electing to exclude the city from receiving an alarm signal to inform the alarm system monitor of such election and to ensure that the city does not receive an alarm signal after the election is made. The city shall impose a fee of $250.00 for each response to a signal from the alarm system requested by an alarm systems monitor after the election is made. 
(Ord. No. 2016-583, § 10, 4-12-16) 
Appendix A: 
INSTALLER FALSE ALARM AND FALSE BURGLAR ALARM PREVENTION PROGRAM CHECKLIST 
Yes 	No 			
		1. 	If a duress feature was installed, I thoroughly explained it and I did not program the system so that the duress code is only one (1) digit different than the normal code. 
		2. 	I checked that the control panel has been programmed so that: 
			a. 	It will not transmit more than one (1) alarm signal from the same zone until manually restored at the premises; 
			b. 	It will delay at least fifteen (15) seconds before initiating dialing on intrusion alarm signals; 
			c. 	It has adequate delay time on entry/exit doors (delay of forty-five (45) seconds or more is recommended); and 
			d. 	A cancel code can be entered by the customer to cancel accidental alarms. 
		3. 	I checked that police and fire panic buttons cause a siren or speaker to sound and that medical panic buttons cause an audible signal. 
		4. 	I checked that the Arming Station(s) emit sound to inform occupants when an entry/exit door sensor has been triggered. 
		5. 	I installed and tested standby/backup power. 
		6. 	I reviewed the "Customer False Alarm Prevention Checklist" with the customer. 
		7. 	I determined whether the customer had special telephone features, such as call waiting or DSL, and took appropriate steps to allow proper control panel dialing and monitoring center verification. (Such as *70 for call waiting, etc.) 
 
Please explain if you answered "No" to any of the above items: 
Installation Technician 
Printed Name _______ 
Signature _______ 
Date ________ 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 2016-583, § 11, 4-12-16) 
Appendix B: 
CUSTOMER FALSE ALARM AND FALSE BURGLAR ALARM PREVENTION CHECKLIST 
Yes 	No 		
		1. 	I have been made aware of the applicable alarm ordinance and I will comply with its requirements. 
		2. 	I understand it is my responsibility to prevent false alarms and false burglar alarms, and I understand it is critical and my responsibility to assure that all users of the system (such as residents, employees, guests, cleaning people, and repair people) are trained on the proper use of the system. 
		3. 	I have been trained in the proper operation of the system and have been given an operating sheet summarizing the proper use of the system, as well as the security system operating manual. 
		4. 	I know how to turn off motion detectors while leaving other sensors on. (Residential Only) 
		5. 	I know how to test the system, including the communication link with the monitoring center. 
		6. 	I understand that my entry time is _______ and my exit time is_______ 
		7. 	I have the alarm company phone number to request repair service or to ask questions about the alarm system. 
		8. 	I know how to cancel an accidental alarm activation and have the system cancellation code or code word. 
		9. 	I understand that indoor pets can cause false alarms and false burglar alarms and I will contact my alarm company to adjust the system if I acquire any additional indoor pets. 
		10. 	I understand that the main control panel and transformer are located in _______. 
		11. 	I have received an alarm sheet, which describes how the alarm company will communicate with me in the event of various alarm signals. 
		12. 	I understand the importance of: 
			§ Keeping my emergency contact information updated and I know how to do this; 
			§ Immediately advising the alarm company if my phone number changes (including area code changes); and 
			§ Immediately advising the alarm company of any other changes to my telephone service such as call waiting or a fax line. 
		13. 	I will advise the alarm company if I do any remodeling (such as painting, moving walls, doors or windows). 
		14. 	I understand that certain building defects (such as loose fitting doors or windows, rodents, inadequate power, and roof leaks) can cause false alarms and false burglar alarms. I will correct these defects as I become aware of them. 
		15. 	The alarm company has given me written false alarm prevention techniques to help me prevent false alarms and false burglar alarms. 
 
Comments: 
ALARM COMPANY 		CUSTOMER 
_______ 		_______ 
Print Name(s) 		
		
By:_______ 		_______ 
	_______ 	
	Date 	
 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 2016-583, § 12, 4-12-16) 
Appendix C: 
FINES AND FEES 
Permit fee and permit renewal fee: 
Residential site .....$50.00 
Commercial site .....100.00 
Financial site .....200.00 
Educational/government site .....No fee 
Senior citizen discount .....A discount of 50% shall be applicable to qualifying residential sites 
Late fee .....10.00 
Alarm permit reinstatement fee .....25.00 
False alarm fines and false burglar alarm fines, per alarm 
4—5 within any 12-month period .....50.00 
6—7 within any 12-month period .....75.00 
8 or more within any 12-month period .....100.00 
Appeal fee, per appeal .....25.00 
Use of a non-permitted alarm system, per incident .....250.00 
Use of alarm system during alarm permit suspension, per alarm .....200.00 
Failure to comply with or violation of section 2.5-5, per incident .....200.00 
(Ord. No. 2006-289, § 1, 4-25-06; Ord. No. 2016-583, § 13, 4-12-16)  
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Food and food service establishments, Ch. 8; health and sanitation, Ch. 9; animals and pets in parks, § 15-76. 
State Law reference— Estrays, V.T.C.A. Agriculture Code, Ch. 142; fences, range restrictions, Ch. 143; cruelty to animals, V.T.C.A. Penal Code, § 42.11; rabies control, V.A.C.S. art. 4477-6a; animal shelters, V.A.C.S. art. 4477-6b. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 3-1—3-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS, CATS, AND OTHER SMALL ANIMALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-597, § 1, adopted September 27, 2016, repealed art. II, §§ 3-16—3-32 and enacted a new art. II, §§ 3-16—3-32 as set out herein. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2006-299, adopted August 29, 2006. 
 
Sec. 3-16. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Animal is any living creature, including but not limited to the following: dogs, cats, cows, horses, birds, fish, mammals, reptiles, fowl, and livestock, but specifically excluding human beings. 
Animal control officer shall mean any person designated by the City of Cedar Hill to act for the city to impound animals, control animals running at large, and as otherwise provided and required in this chapter. 
Animal shelter shall mean a sheltered kennel facility designated to keep abandoned, at large, quarantined, or other animals safe until claimed, adopted, or euthanized in accordance with this article. 
Animal shelter manager shall mean the person designated as the manager of the animal shelter or that person's designee. 
At large shall mean not completely confined by a building, wall, or fence of sufficient strength or construction to restrain the dog on the owner's property. The dog must be restrained by either a leash, chain, or appropriate type of restraint held in the hands of the owner or secured to a permanent fixture within the limits of the owner's private property. It shall be prima facie evidence that a dog is at large if the owner is physically unable to restrain the dog. 
Board means the Texas Board of Health. 
Bodily injury shall mean injury to a human or animal which produces pain, trauma, loss of blood or damage to tissue, and which further causes or reasonably should cause an owner of the injured animal or the injured human to seek medical treatment, and shall include injury resulting from the victim, whether human or animal, attempting to escape or prevent contact with the injuring animal(s). 
Cat shall mean felis catus. 
Cruelly treated includes tortured; seriously overworked; unreasonably abandoned; unreasonably deprived of necessary food, care, medical treatment, or shelter; cruelly confined; or caused to fight with another animal. 
Dangerous animal means: 
(1)  An animal, including a dog, that makes an unprovoked attack on a human, domestic animal or livestock, which causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  An animal, including a dog, that commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own, and those acts cause a person reasonably to believe that the animal will attack and cause bodily injury to that person. 
(3)  A police dog shall not be considered dangerous if the attack, bite, or mauling occurred during an arrest or other action of a peace officer while the peace officer was using the dog for law enforcement purposes. 
Dog shall mean canis familiaris. 
Domestic animal means any of various animals that have been tamed and made fit for a human environment. 
Euthanize shall mean to cause the death of an animal by a method which: 
(1)  Rapidly produces unconsciousness and death without visible evidence of pain or distress. 
(2)  Utilizes anesthesia produced by an agent that causes painless loss of consciousness and death following such loss of consciousness. 
Emergency euthanizing means the same as euthanize with the exception of the animal being in a non-controlled environment i.e., not located in the animal shelter. 
High risk rabies carrier animal species that is more prone to carry rabies (i.e. skunks, coyotes, raccoons, bats, and fox.) 
Licensed veterinarian shall mean a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State of Texas. 
Livestock shall mean horses, mules, cows, hogs, goats, sheep and llamas of any and all kind, and shall include both the male and female species of such animals, but not including swine or miniature swine. 
(1)  Small livestock shall mean goats, sheep, llamas of any and all kind, and shall include both the male and female species of such animals. 
(2)  Large livestock shall mean horses, mules, cows, and hogs of any and all kind, and shall include both the male and female species of such animals. 
Local animal control authority means the animal control department and animal control officer(s). 
Nuisance shall mean any action of ownership or control of an animal that unreasonably endangers the life, health, safety or welfare of any person or animal; or an action that would offend the senses of a reasonable person; or any action that unreasonably obstructs the comfortable use of another's property. 
Owner shall mean any person owning, keeping, or harboring an animal within the corporate limits of the city. 
Quarantine means strict confinement of an animal specified in an order by the local animal control authority or its designee: 
(1)  On the private premises of the animal's owner or at a facility approved by the local animal control authority or its designee; and 
(2)  Under restraint by closed cage or paddock or in any other manner approved by the local animal control authority. 
Rabies means an acute viral disease of man and animal affecting the central nervous system and usually transmitted by an animal bite. 
Rabies vaccination means an immunization against the rabies virus. 
Secure enclosure means a fenced area or structure that is: 
(1)  Locked; 
(2)  Capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children; 
(3)  Capable of preventing the escape or release of a dog; 
(4)  Clearly marked as containing a dangerous dog; and 
(5)  In conformance with the requirements for enclosures established by the local animal control authority. 
Shelter means a structure adequate in size to accommodate the animal's body height and weight; that is fully enclosed on three (3) sides; roofed; and that has a dry solid floor. The interior must remain dry and be protected from the elements at all times and which shall provide either natural or artificial shade for the animal to avoid the direct sunlight. 
Stray means roaming with no physical restraint beyond the premises of an animal's owner or keeper. 
Wild animal means an animal that is defined in chapter 3, article IV of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-17. - Reserved.  
Sec. 3-18. - Rabies vaccination. 
(a)  Rabies control authority. Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code § 826.017, as amended, the local animal control authority is hereby designated as the local rabies control authority. 
(b)  Vaccination required. 
(1)  For purposes of this section only, the term "animal" means any animal that is required by state law to have rabies vaccinations. 
(2)  The owner of each animal shall have such it vaccinated against rabies before four (4) months of age and shall obtain a booster for the animal within twelve (12) months of the initial vaccination. After the animal has received its booster, the animal shall be revaccinated: 
a.  No longer than every twelve (12) months thereafter for one-year-dose vaccinations; or, 
b.  No longer than every thirty-six (36) months thereafter for three-year-dose vaccinations. 
(3)  Any person moving into the city from a location outside the city, and has not had an animal vaccinated within the previous year, shall comply with this section within ten (10) days after having moved into the city. 
(4)  A person acquiring a dog or cat under section 3-21(a)(5) shall present to the animal shelter proof of vaccination within three (3) days of acquiring the dog or cat. 
(5)  No rabies vaccine shall be administered until the required observation period has expired whenever an animal has inflicted a bite on any person or another animal. 
(c)  Certificate of vaccination. Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall issue to the owner of the animal a certificate of vaccination. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy. The certificate shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated animal; 
(2)  The date of vaccination; 
(3)  The type of rabies vaccine used including lot and expiration date; 
(4)  The year and number on the rabies vaccination tag; and 
(5)  The breed, age, color, and sex of the vaccinated animal. 
(d)  Rabies vaccination tags. 
(1)  Upon vaccination, the veterinarian shall issue to the owner of the animal metal rabies vaccination tag. The tag shall: 
a.  Be made of a metal material; 
b.  Be serially numbered to correspond with the certificate of vaccination number; 
c.  Bear: 
1.  The year of issuance; and 
2.  The name, address and phone number of the issuing veterinarian. 
(2)  The rabies vaccination tag shall be affixed to a collar, which must be worn while in a public place. 
(3)  If a valid and current rabies vaccination tag is lost, stolen, or destroyed, the owner of the dog or cat shall obtain a duplicate tag. 
(4)  The certificate of vaccination and the rabies vaccination tag shall be valid only for the animal for which it was originally issued. 
(e)  Display proof of vaccination. No person who owns or harbors an animal shall refuse or fail to exhibit a copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand by the local animal control authority or peace officer. 
(f)  Harboring unvaccinated animal. No person shall harbor any animal that has not been vaccinated against rabies, as required by this article. 
(g)  Confidentiality of certain information in rabies vaccination certificate. 
(1)  Information contained in a rabies vaccination certificate or in any record compiled from the information contained in one (1) or more certificates that identifies or tends to identify an owner or an address, telephone number, or other personally identifying information of an owner of a vaccinated animal is confidential and not subject to disclosure under V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code Ch. 552. 
(2)  The information may be disclosed only to a governmental entity for purposes related to the protection of public health and safety. No person who receives the information shall disclose the information under V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code Ch. 552, and no person shall use the information for a purpose that does not directly relate to the protection of public health and safety. 
(3)  A person who violates this subdivision commits an offense under V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code § 826.0211, and is subject to the penalties described under that section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-19. - Dog or cat exposed to rabies. 
For any dog or cat known to have been exposed or is reasonably believed to have been exposed to rabies, the following is required: 
(1)  A dog or cat having current rabies vaccination must be re-vaccinated immediately and quarantined in accordance with section 3-25(d) through (i) for a period of not less than forty-five (45) days. 
(2)  A dog or cat not having current rabies vaccination should be humanely euthanized; or, the owner of such dog or cat may, at the owner's expense and in a manner prescribed by the local animal control authority, quarantine the dog or cat. The dog or cat must be vaccinated immediately following exposure and quarantined for a period of not less than ninety (90) days. The dog or cat shall be re-vaccinated no sooner than thirty (30) days prior to its release from quarantine. 
(3)  If the dog or cat is required to be quarantined under this section, the quarantine shall be at an approved veterinarian clinic at the owner's expense or, if authorized by the Local Control Authority, home quarantined. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-20. - Certain animals prohibited in public places; running at large. 
(a)  No person shall allow in a public place any animal of fierce, dangerous, or vicious propensity or any female animal in its estrus cycle. 
(b)  No person shall allow a dog to be at large within the city. 
(c)  If a dog or cat is found upon the premises of another person, the person may confine the dog or cat in a humane manner until the local animal control authority impounds the dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-21. - Impoundment of certain animals. 
(a)  Dog at large. 
(1)  The local animal control authority may impound a dog at large. 
(2)  The local animal control authority may impound a cat at the discretion of the owner or residence of the property in which the cat was found. 
(3)  A dog or that is impounded shall be placed in the animal shelter or at the discretion of the local animal control authority and for good cause shown may be released to the owner. Any dog or cat that is impounded two (2) or more times may be declared a nuisance. 
A hearing must be held within ten (10) days from the impound date, to determine if the dog or cat is a nuisance. If the dog or cat is declared a nuisance the dog or cat must be permanently removed from the corporate city limits of Cedar Hill within thirty (30) days of the date of finding. Failure to follow these procedures shall constitute another violation. 
(4)  When a dog or cat is impounded, the animal shelter shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of the impounded dog or cat, provided however any animal not claimed within seventy-two (72) becomes property of animal shelter. 
(5)  If the dog or cat has not been claimed within a reasonable time frame or has life threatening injuries, or illness after it has been impounded, the dog or cat shall, at the discretion of the animal shelter manager, be either euthanized, be made available for adoption, or be released to an organization approved by the animal shelter manager. 
(6)  An owner of a dog or cat that has been impounded shall be allowed to take custody of the dog or cat from the animal shelter once the following requirements have been met: 
a.  All applicable fees in article V, section 3-100 have been paid; and 
b.  If the owner could not provide proof of current rabies vaccination, the owner shall within three (3) days present to animal shelter proof that the dog or cat has been vaccinated. 
c.  The owner agrees to have the dog or cat spayed or neutered in accordance with section 3-22. 
(b)  Cruelly treated animal. 
(1)  The local animal control authority may, when it has reason to believe that an animal has been or is being cruelly treated, apply to the municipal court for a warrant to seize the animal, unless exigent circumstances exist and the animal must be seized immediately to avoid harm, injury, or death. 
(2)  On a showing of probable cause to believe that the animal has been or is being cruelly treated, the court shall issue the warrant and set a time within ten (10) calendar days of the date of issuance of the warrant for a hearing to determine whether the animal has been cruelly treated. 
(3)  The local animal control authority shall execute the warrant and cause the animal to be impounded. 
(4)  The municipal court shall give to the owner of the animal written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(5)  The hearing and disposition of the animal shall be in accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code Ch. 821, Subch. B. 
(c)  Dangerous dog. A dangerous dog shall be impounded in accordance with section 3-27. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-22. - Spay or neuter. 
(a)  All dogs and cats within the city are required to be spayed/neutered, unless they are under the control of an individual. 
(b)  All impounded dogs and cats are required to be spayed/neutered within thirty (30) days of release from impoundment; and 
(c)  Implanted with a microchip at the expense of the owner before release from the local animal shelter. 
(d)  It is an exception to the requirements in subsection (b) if the animal shelter manager determines that: 
(1)  The owner of the dog or cat is a member of a club which is associated with a national registry, national breed club or local all-breed club, and does not sell twelve (12) or more intact animals per year; 
(2)  The dog or cat was impounded due to force vis major; 
(3)  The dog or cat was impounded due to fire, criminal or negligent acts of a third party who does not reside at the animal owner's residence. Additionally, verification of the incident must be presented to the animal shelter manager in the form of a police or fire report, or the sworn testimony or affidavit of police or fire personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-23. - Limitation on number of dogs or cats kept. 
(a)  No person shall keep more than four (4) dogs, cats, or a combination thereof, that are older than four (4) months of age on a residential lot. 
(b)  Permit for additional dogs or cats. 
(1)  Any person who desires to keep more dogs, cats, or a combination thereof, than what is allowed by this section may apply to the local animal control authority for a permit to keep the additional animal(s). 
(2)  The applicant shall provide the local animal control authority satisfactory proof from adjoining property owners that there is no objection to the issuance of the permit. 
(3)  A permit may not be issued until the local animal control authority conducts an inspection of the premises to ensure the conditions are reasonably adequate to maintain the number of dogs and/or cats sought. The local animal control authority may specify conditions, limitations, and restrictions in the permit. 
(4)  The permit shall expire one (1) year after the issuance date. 
(5)  The local animal control authority may revoke the permit prior to its expiration if: 
a.  The conditions at the premises are no longer reasonably adequate to maintain the number of dogs and/or cats allowed by the permit; 
b.  The owner fails to comply with the conditions, limitations, and restrictions specified in the permit; or 
c.  A persistent nuisance occurs. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions in subsection (a), an owner may keep at any one (1) time one (1) litter of either puppies or kittens not older than four (4) months of age. 
(d)  All pens and enclosures where dogs or cats are kept shall be maintained and kept in such a manner as not to create a nuisance as defined in section 3-26. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-24. - Reporting animal bite or animal exposed to rabies. 
(a)  Any person having knowledge of a person bitten or scratched by a dog, cat, ferret or high risk rabies carrier shall report the incident or animal to the local animal control authority no later than twenty-four (24) hours after becoming aware of the incident or exposure. The report shall include the name and address of any victim and the owner of the animal, if known, and any other information that may help identify and locate the animal. 
(b)  The owner of an animal that has been exposed to rabies, or the owner of an animal the owner knows or reasonably believes to be rabid or to have been exposed to rabies, shall report the animal to the local animal control authority. 
(c)  Any dog, cat, or ferret that bites, scratches, or otherwise attacks any person within the city limits, shall be quarantined in accordance with section 3-25(d) through (i). 
(d)  The local animal control authority shall report and investigate any dog, cat, or ferret bite using standardized reporting forms provided by the Texas Department of Health and the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-25. - Animal quarantine. 
(a)  Any dog, cat, or ferret that bites, scratches, or otherwise creates a condition which may expose or transmit the rabies virus to a human being shall be impounded immediately unless the local animal control authority determines that circumstances exist which would not warrant quarantine. 
(b)  The owner shall voluntarily, or upon demand by the local animal control authority, submit for quarantine a dog, cat, or ferret that has bitten, scratched, or otherwise created a condition which may have exposed or transmitted the rabies virus to any human being. 
(c)  The quarantine period shall be for a minimum of ten (10) days beginning on the date the incident occurred, or longer as the local animal control authority may deem necessary. The animal shall be quarantined in accordance with the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
(d)  Quarantine shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The quarantined dog, cat, or ferret upon showing clinical signs of rabies, shall be immediately destroyed and the head submitted by the animal control officer to the nearest Texas Department of Health laboratory for testing. 
(2)  The dog, cat, or ferret placed in quarantine shall not be released without prior notification to and written approval from the local animal control authority. 
(3)  Home quarantine, if approved by the local animal control authority, must satisfy the following conditions: 
a.  A secure enclosure is available and is approved by the local animal control authority; 
b.  The dog or cat is currently vaccinated against rabies; 
c.  The animal control officer must observe the dog, cat, or ferret on the first and last day of the quarantine period; 
d.  The owner of the dog, cat, or ferret shall notify the animal control officer if the dog, cat, or ferret escapes, becomes or appears to be sick, or dies; and, in case of death of the dog, cat, or ferret while under quarantine, shall immediately surrender the dead dog, cat, or ferret to the animal control officer for diagnostic purposes; 
e.  The dog, cat, or ferret was not running at large at the time of the incident; and 
f.  The dog, cat, or ferret is isolated from all other animals and human beings, other than the individual(s) who owns the animal. 
g.  If the dog or cat was not in violation of any city ordinance or statue at the time of the bite. 
(e)  When submitted for quarantine, the owner shall provide the name, address and any other relevant information about the dog, cat, or ferret to the local animal control authority. 
(f)  The owner of a quarantined dog, cat, or ferret shall pay all reasonable costs of the quarantine or related fees within seventy-two (72) hours of notification to the owner or the dog, cat, or ferret becomes property of the animal shelter. 
(g)  A dog, cat, or ferret that has been quarantined may be released by the local animal control authority after a licensed veterinarian or local animal control authority has determined that the quarantined dog, cat, or ferret does not show clinical signs of rabies, and at the end of the of the observation period: 
(1)  The owner provides proof of current vaccination or within three (3) days, excluding ferrets; 
(2)  All applicable fees have been paid; and 
(3)  The dog or cat is not being held for legal proceedings. 
(h)  No person shall, without prior approval of the local animal control authority, destroy or remove from the city any dog, cat, or ferret that has bitten a person or that has been placed under quarantine. 
(i)  The carcass of a dead dog, cat, or ferret exposed to rabies or suspected of having been rabid shall, upon demand by the local animal control authority, be surrendered to the local animal control authority. 
(j)  No person shall fail or refuse to surrender a dog, cat, or ferret for quarantine or destruction when ordered by the local animal control authority. 
(k)  No person shall interrupt the observation period or interfere with quarantine process. 
(1)  Wild animals shall be humanely euthanized and shall be submitted to a certified Texas Department of Health laboratory for testing. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-26. - Nuisance. 
(a)  Defined. The following conditions are considered to be a nuisance to the citizens of Cedar Hill and are hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to cause, suffer, or permit: 
(1)  The keeping of any animal that causes loud, unusual or frequent barking, howling, or other noise that would disturb the peace and quiet of a person of ordinary sensibility; 
(2)  The keeping of any animal in such a manner as to endanger public health or cause an unsanitary condition due to the accumulation of animal waste that causes foul and offensive odors, or which is considered to be a hazard to any other animal or human being; 
(3)  The keeping of bees or any animal in such a manner as to deny the lawful use of adjacent property or endanger personal health and welfare; 
(4)  Any animal pens, stables, enclosures, and property not kept free from carrion or any putrid material; 
(5)  Any house, building, business, lot, yard, pen, enclosure, or ground in which an animal is kept that is unsanitary or offensive to a person of ordinary sensibility residing in the vicinity thereof, or to the public at large; 
(6)  The keeping of any animal that is tethered, chained, or fastened in a manner in which the animal has access to any public sidewalk or street. No animal shall be tethered, chained, or fastened in a manner as to cause injury or pain to the animal or to deny the animal access to food, water, or shelter; 
(7)  Any owned animal that deposits excreta on public or private property, not without retrieving and properly disposing of the excreta; 
(8)  Any pen or enclosure that emits an odor detectable from any adjacent property; or 
(9)  A pen or enclosure that is maintained or kept in any manner that breeds flies or in any manner that causes injury to the health of the public or to any person residing in the vicinity of the pen or enclosure; 
(10)  A dog or cat that has been impounded two (2) or more times; 
(11)  The keeping of an animal in a manner that is considered to be cruel treatment, which may include but not limited to: being tortured; seriously overworked; unreasonably abandoned; unreasonably deprived of necessary food, care, medical treatment, or shelter; cruelly confined or caused to fight with another animal. 
(b)  Determination. Each of the foregoing conditions is deemed to be a nuisance to the citizens of Cedar Hill (herein referred to as a "nuisance"). In addition to the foregoing nuisance, the local animal control authority may determine whether other conditions constitute a nuisance. 
(c)  Abatement. With the exception of subsection (1), (6), (10), and (11) above, a nuisance must be abated within ten (10) days of the notice to abate provided to the owner by the local animal control authority. Failure to abate the nuisance shall be prima facie evidence in the municipal court that the owner is in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-27. - Dangerous animals. 
(a)  Any animal that has caused bodily injury to or the death of a person, domestic animal or livestock or any animal at large that Animal Control observes to have a dangerous disposition, which may be harmful to humans or other animals shall be seized in accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code § 822.002 or as provided in this article. 
(b)  Any animal seized or impounded under this section shall be held in accordance with section 3-25, held at the animal shelter or held at an approved shelter or animal boarding facility at the animal owner's expense until the hearing that must be held no later than the tenth day after the date of seizure or impoundment, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code § 822.003 or as provided in this ordinance. If the dangerous animal is at large and not claimed within seventy-two (72) hours, at the discretion of the animal shelter manager, it may be either euthanized, be made available for adoption, or be released to an organization approved by the animal shelter manager. The term expense in this section refers to impoundment fees, citations, boarding fees and any other reasonable fees accrued during this process. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to pay all accrued expenses. 
(c)  If the animal is deemed dangerous, the court shall order the disposition of the animal in accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas Health and Safety Code, § 822.003. 
(d)  A dangerous animal ordered destroyed under this section shall be destroyed by either a licensed veterinarian, animal control officer, or an authorized person from the animal shelter. 
(e)  An animal that has been determined to be dangerous by another jurisdiction is prohibited from being kept or maintained within the corporate city limits of the City of Cedar Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-27-1. - Owners of dangerous animals. 
(a)  Requirements. 
(1)  Not later than the 10th day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous animal, the person shall: 
a.  Register the animal with the local animal control authority for the city in which the animal is kept; 
b.  Restrain the animal at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure as defined in this article; 
c.  Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to cover damages resulting from an attack by the animal causing bodily injury to a person or other animal and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to the animal control authority for the area in which the animal is kept; and 
d.  Comply with the following regulations in addition to those in this chapter: 
1.  That the animal shall be kept in a locked and secured enclosure; and 
2.  That the owner posts a conspicuous notice that a dangerous animal is located on the premises. 
(b)  The animal deemed dangerous shall remain in the possession of the animal shelter, local animal control, or its designee until all requirements have been met or all appeals exhausted. 
(1)  The owner of a dangerous animal who does not comply with subsection (a) shall deliver the animal to the animal control authority not later than the 10th day after the owner learns that the animal is dangerous. 
(2)  If, on application of any person, a justice court, county court, or municipal court finds, after notice and hearing as provided by section 822.0423 of the Texas Health and Safety Code that the owner of a dangerous animal has failed to comply with subsection (a)(1) or (a)(2) of this section 3-27-1, the court shall order the animal control authority to seize the animal and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The authority shall seize the animal or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the animal in secure and humane conditions. 
(3)  The owner shall pay any cost or fee assessed by the municipality or county related to the seizure, acceptance, impoundment, or destruction of the animal. The governing body of the municipality may prescribe by resolution the amount of the fees. 
(4)  The court shall order the animal control authority to humanely destroy the animal if the owner has not complied with subsection (1) no later than the 10th day after the date on which the animal is seized or delivered to the animal control authority. The court shall order the animal control authority to return the animal to the owner if the owner complies with subsection (1) no later than the 10th day after the date on which the animal is seized or delivered to the animal control authority. 
(5)  For purposes of this section, a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous animal when: 
a.  The owner knows of an attack described in this article; 
b.  The owner receives written notice that a justice court, county court, or municipal court has found that the animal is a dangerous animal under section 3-27; or 
c.  The owner receives written notice prepared by the animal control authority or police department that the animal is a dangerous animal under this article. 
d.  The term written notice in this section means an official report, citation or subpoena that is delivered to the owner in person, by mail or by any other means in which a reasonable person would believe they have been notified. 
(c)  Determination that animal is dangerous. 
(1)  If a person reports an incident described by this article, the animal control authority may investigate the incident. If, after receiving the sworn statements of any witnesses, the animal control authority determines the animal is a dangerous animal, it shall notify the owner of that fact. 
(2)  An owner, not later than the 10th day after the date the owner is notified that an animal owned by the owner is a dangerous animal, may appeal the determination of the animal control authority to a justice, county, or municipal court of competent jurisdiction. An owner may appeal the decision of the justice, county, or municipal court in the same manner as appeal for other cases from the justice, county, or municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-27-2. - Dogs or coyotes that attack animals. 
The City of Cedar Hill adopts and incorporates herein Texas Health and Safety V.T.C.A. Code § 822.013 as follows: 
(a)  A dog or coyote that is attacking or is about to attack, or has recently attacked livestock, domestic animals, or fowls may be killed by: 
(1)  Any person witnessing the attack; or 
(2)  The attacked animal's owner or a person acting on behalf of the owner if the owner or person has knowledge of the attack. 
(b)  A person who kills a dog as provided by this section is not liable for damages to the owner, keeper, or person in control of the dog. 
(c)  A person who discovers on the person's property a dog known or suspected of having killed livestock, domestic animals, or fowls may detain or impound the dog and return it to its owner or deliver the dog to the local animal control authority. The owner of the dog is liable for all costs incurred in the capture and care of the dog or coyote and all damage done by the dog. 
(d)  The owner, keeper, or person in control of a dog that is known to have attacked livestock, domestic animals, or fowls shall control the dog in a manner approved by the local animal control authority. 
(e)  A person is not required to acquire a hunting license under V.T.C.A. Parks and Wildlife Code § 42.002, to kill a dog or coyote under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-28. - Fencing requirements. 
(a)  Any person(s) owning a dog over the weight of thirty (30) pounds shall keep the dog in a fenced area with the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Minimum of six (6) feet in height, measured from the ground up. 
(2)  Constructed of durable materials. 
(3)  No more than two (2) inch gaps in chain links or gaps in wood fencing. 
(4)  Must be free from damage or defects. 
(5)  Contain entries/exits equipped with locking devices. 
(b)  Owners of dogs that dig, chew, or bite and escape from a fenced area may be required to bury the fencing under the ground. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the homeowner, tenants, or responsible parties occupying the residence to make certain fencing requirements are met. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-29. - Animal traps. 
(a)  The local animal control authority may issue a live trap to any person(s) requesting a trap within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Each person shall complete an animal trap application form prior to receiving the trap. 
(c)  Animal traps should not be set on the day before or the day of a city observed holiday, or during inclement weather. 
(d)  Once an animal has been trapped, the local animal control authority must be notified in a timely manner to prevent injury to the animal. 
(e)  Any person(s) requesting a trap will be responsible for keeping the trap in proper working order, and for the cost to repair or replace a damaged, destroyed, or lost trap. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-30. - Injured or dead animal; disposal fee. 
(a)  Medical costs. Medical costs for treating an injured animal that has been transported by the local animal control authority to a licensed veterinarian for emergency care shall be the responsibility of the owner. A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee shall be charged to an owner if the local animal control authority delivers the owner's injured animal to a veterinarian or veterinary facility. 
(b)  Destroying injured animal. Any person may humanely destroy an animal that is suffering from a life-threatening injury and no apparent treatment is reasonably available and the destruction is for the sole purpose of not prolonging the suffering. 
(c)  Disposal fees. All deceased animals disposed of by the local animal control authority shall be subject to a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee payable at the time the animal is picked up. 
(d)  Animal pick up and disposal. An owner, who desires the local animal control authority to pick up and dispose the owner's dead dog, cat, or other small animal, shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  The owner shall without unnecessary delay notify the local animal control authority of the animal's death and the owner's desire for the local animal control authority to pick up and dispose of the animal. 
(2)  Any dead dog, cat, or other small animal shall be double bagged in a plastic bag of sufficient size and strength to fully contain the animal. 
(3)  The bagged animal shall be placed at the curb on regular business days, excluding city holidays. 
(4)  The local animal control authority shall immediately pick up the dead animal if on duty, and, if not on duty, as soon as possible. 
(e)  Large animals. Large animals such as but not limited to cows, pigs, and horses, will require the use of a rendering service for removal. The owner of the animal shall be responsible for all costs associated with the disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-31. - Enforcement; powers and duties, 
(a)  The local animal control authority and the police department shall have the authority to enforce this article and issue citations for any violation of this article. 
(b)  If the person to be cited is not present, the local animal control authority or police department may deliver the citation to the alleged offender via certified mail. 
(c)  No person shall interfere with the duties performed by a local animal control authority or police department. 
(d)  The animal control officer or any peace officer shall have the authority to use a tranquilizer gun or electro-muscular interruption device in the lawful discharge of official duties. 
(e)  The animal control officer or any peace officer shall have the authority to use whatever reasonable force is necessary, including deadly force, to protect people, domestic animals or livestock from suffering bodily injury. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Sec. 3-32. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article may be issued a citation. Such violation shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall subject the offender to a fine in an amount not to exceed: 
(1)  Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) if the provision violated governs public health or sanitation; 
(2)  The amount fixed by state law if the violation is one for which the state has a fixed fine; or 
(3)  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for all other offenses. 
(b)  Each day the said violation is committed or continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 2016-597, § 2, 9-27-16)  
Secs. 3-33—3-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 3-46. - Definition. 
As used in this article, "adult age" shall mean the customarily accepted weaning age for a given animal. 
(Code 1976, § 3-43(5); Ord. No. 80-555, § 3, 3-25-80) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 3-47. - Certain farm animals may be kept for educational purposes. 
Certain farm animals including rabbits, poultry, sheep, swine, goats, horses and cattle may be housed, pastured and fed within the city limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city for certain educational purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 3-41; Ord. No. 80-555, § 1, 3-25-80)  
Sec. 3-48. - Eligibility to keep certain animals. 
In order to keep any of the farm animals listed in section 3-47 of this article for educational purposes, the person responsible for the care and feeding of the animal or animals shall be enrolled as a student in a vocational agriculture course sanctioned by the state education agency, and such animals must be maintained by the student as a vocational agriculture project the maintenance of which will affect that student's grade. 
(Code 1976, § 3-42; Ord. No. 80-555, § 2, 3-25-80)  
Sec. 3-49. - Number of animals that may be kept. 
The number of animals that may be kept for educational purposes shall be limited as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to maintain for educational purposes a total of more than four (4) adult swine and their immediate offspring, such offspring to be younger than adult age, within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to maintain for educational purposes a total of more than four (4) adult sheep and their immediate offspring per acre or fraction thereof within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to maintain for educational purposes a total of more than twenty-five (25) adult rabbits or poultry per acre or fraction thereof within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to maintain for educational purposes a total of more than four (4) horses or cattle of any age per acre or fraction thereof within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Code 1976, § 3-43(1)—(4); Ord. No. 80-555, § 3, 3-25-80)  
Sec. 3-50. - Not to be kept on certain property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any sheep, goats, swine, horses or cattle for educational purposes on any residentially zoned lot ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less in area in an approved subdivision development. 
(b)  The minimum lot size on which a project may be maintained on commercially or industrially zoned property shall be sufficient to meet the sanitary standards stated herein. 
(c)  Actual pen area shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of section 3-51 of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-44; Ord. No. 80-555, § 4, 3-25-80)  
Sec. 3-51. - Sanitary conditions to be maintained. 
All animals maintained for educational purposes shall be maintained in sanitary conditions that prevent excessive offensive odors from becoming a constant source of discomfort to persons living in the vicinity, and that prevent an inordinate amount of flies from existing and breeding. 
(Code 1976, § 3-45; Ord. No. 80-555, § 5, 3-25-80)  
Sec. 3-52. - Keeping animals at school facilities. 
Any animal kept for educational purposes may be kept at school facilities built for that purpose provided that standards established in section 3-51 of this article are met. 
(Code 1976, § 3-46; Ord. No. 80-555, § 6, 3-25-80)  
Sec. 3-53. - Immunizations. 
All animals maintained for educational purposes shall be given any immunizations ordinarily required for the responsible maintenance of that particular breed and species. Certification of such immunization shall be provided by the vocational agriculture instructor upon request by a city inspector. 
(Code 1976, § 3-47; Ord. No. 80-555, § 7, 3-25-80)  
Sec. 3-54. - Certification to be provided on request. 
Certification of any animal as a vocational agriculture project shall be provided at the request of a city inspector by the vocational agriculture instructor. 
(Code 1976, § 3-48; Ord. No. 80-555, § 8, 3-25-80)  
Sec. 3-55. - Animals exempt from other ordinances. 
Any animals kept for educational purposes in compliance with the sections of this article within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction are hereby declared to be exempt from enforcement of all other city ordinances or sections thereof regulating the keeping of animals. 
(Code 1976, § 3-49; Ord. No. 80-555, § 9, 3-25-80)  
Sec. 3-56. - Violations. 
Any violation of any section of this article shall be considered a violation of the whole article. Upon determination by a city inspector that a violation of this article exists such violation shall be ordered corrected or abated within ninety (90) days of receipt by the violator of written notice from the inspector that a violation exists. Failure to correct or abate the violation within the time allowed will result in the declaration in writing to the violator and the vocational agriculture instructor by the city inspector that this article does not apply to the animals in question. At such time as nonapplication of this article is declared appropriate, existing ordinances regulating the keeping of animals in the city shall be applied. This article shall be enforced on a citizen complaint basis. 
(Code 1976, § 3-50; Ord. No. 80-555, § 10, 3-25-80)  
Secs. 3-57—3-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WILD ANIMALS AND DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-104, § 1, adopted March 26, 2002, amended art. IV in its entirety, §§ 3-71—3-77, and added §§ 3-78—3-80. Formerly, said sections pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 3-71. - Definition. 
Animal registration agency means the Animal Control Office of the City of Cedar Hill, and any of its agents, having authority over the area where a dangerous wild animal is kept. 
Board means the Texas Board of Health. 
Commercial activity means: 
(1)  An activity involving a wild animal or dangerous wild animal conducted for profit that is not inherent to the animal's nature; 
(2)  An activity for which a fee is charged and that is entertainment using or an exhibition of the animal; or 
(3)  The selling, trading, bartering, or auctioning of a wild animal or dangerous wild animal or an animal's body parts. 
Dangerous wild animal means a lion, tiger, ocelot, cougar, leopard, cheetah, jaguar, bobcat, lynx, serval, caracal, hyena, bear, coyote, jackal, baboon, chimpanzee, orangutan, gorilla, or any hybrid of an animal listed in this section. 
Own means to own, harbor, or have custody or control of. 
Owner means any person who owns, harbors, or has custody or control of a dangerous wild animal. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, trust, estate, joint stock company, foundation, or association of individuals. 
Primary enclosure means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal to a limited amount of space, including a cage, pen, run, room, compartment, or hutch. 
Wild animals shall include all types of animals, which commonly exist in a natural unconfined state and are usually not domesticated. This shall apply regardless of the state or duration of captivity. Such animals shall include, but are not limited to: skunks, raccoons, bats, weasels, squirrels, opossums, lesser pandas, binturongs, wolves, hybrids of wolves and canines, elephants, rhinoceroses, foxes, alligators, crocodiles, monkeys, ostriches, emus, prairie dogs, boas, pythons, anacondas, and all forms of poisonous or constrictive reptiles and other like animals. 
(Ord. No. 2002-104, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 3-72. - Wild animals and dangerous wild animals prohibited. 
(a)  Except as provided by subdivisions (b) and (c), a person may not own a wild animal or a dangerous wild animal inside the city. 
(b)  A person may own a dangerous wild animal: 
(1)  Owned by and in the custody and control of a person performing a commercial activity for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days; 
(2)  While in the temporary custody or control of a television or motion picture production company during the filming of a television or motion picture production in this city for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days; 
(3)  While being transported in interstate commerce through the state in compliance with the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. Section 2131 et seq.) and its subsequent amendments and the regulations adopted under that Act; 
(4)  In the control and custody of a person whose only business is supplying nonhuman primates directly and exclusively to biomedical research facilities and who holds a Class "A" or Class "B" dealer's license issued by the secretary of agriculture of the United States under the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. Section 2131 et seq.) and its subsequent amendments; and 
(5)  That is: 
a.  Owned by or in the possession, control, or custody of a person who is a participant in a species survival plan of the American Zoo and Aquarium Association for that species; and 
b.  An integral part of that species survival plan. 
(6)  While in the temporary custody or control of a person who holds a current Wildlife Rehabilitation permit issued by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, where the sole purpose of possessing the animal is for rehabilitation, and the animal is released from the city upon being rehabilitated. 
(c)  A person may own a wild animal: 
(1)  Under the same provisions of subdivision (b); or 
(2)  After obtaining a wild animal permit issued by the animal registration agency. The permit must be renewed annually from the issuance date. 
(Ord. No. 2002-104, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 3-72.1. - Sell or transfer of wild animal or a dangerous wild animal prohibited. 
A person may not sell or otherwise transfer ownership of a wild animal or a dangerous wild animal to another person from within city, except as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2002-104, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 3-73. - Liability insurance. 
An owner of a wild animal or dangerous wild animal shall maintain liability insurance coverage in an amount of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each occurrence for liability for damages for destruction of or damage to property and death or bodily injury to a person caused by the dangerous wild animal. 
(Ord. No. 2002-104, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 3-74. - Attack by animal; escape of animal; liability. 
(a)  An owner of a wild animal or a dangerous wild animal shall notify the animal registration agency of any attack of a human by the animal within twenty-four (24) hours of the attack. 
(b)  An owner of a wild animal or dangerous wild animal shall immediately notify the animal registration agency and the local law enforcement agency of any escape of the animal. 
(c)  An owner of a wild animal or dangerous wild animal that escapes is liable for all costs incurred in apprehending and confining the animal. 
(d)  The animal registration agency, the police department, or any of its agents shall not be liable to an owner of a wild animal or dangerous wild animal for damages arising in connection with the escape of a dangerous wild animal, including liability for damage, injury, or death caused by the animal during or after the animal's escape, or for injury to or death of the animal as a result of apprehension or confinement of the animal after escape. 
(Ord. No. 2002-104, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 3-75. - Caging requirements and standards. 
(a)  The board by rule shall establish caging requirements and standards for the keeping and confinement of a dangerous wild animal to ensure that the animal is kept in a manner and confined in a primary enclosure that: 
(1)  Protects and enhances the public's health and safety; 
(2)  Prevents escape by the animal; and 
(3)  Provides a safe, healthy, and humane environment for the animal. 
(b)  An owner of a dangerous wild animal shall keep and confine the animal in accordance with the caging requirements and standards established by the board. 
(c)  An animal registration agency may approve a deviation from the caging requirements and standards established by the board, only if: 
(1)  The animal registration agency has good cause for the deviation; and 
(2)  The deviation: 
a.  Does not compromise the public's health and safety; 
b.  Does not reduce the total area of the primary enclosure below that established by the board; and 
c.  Does not otherwise adversely affect the overall welfare of the animal involved. 
(d)  The animal registration agency may establish separate caging requirements and standards for wild animals. 
(Ord. No. 2002-104, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 3-76. - Care, treatment, and transportation of animal. 
(a)  For each wild animal and dangerous wild animal, the owner shall comply with all applicable standards of the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. Section 2131 et seq.) and its subsequent amendments and the regulations adopted under that Act relating to: 
(1)  Facilities and operations; 
(2)  Animal health and husbandry; and 
(3)  Veterinary care. 
(b)  An owner of a wild animal and dangerous wild animal shall maintain a separate written log for each animal documenting the animal's veterinary care and shall make the log available to the animal registration agency or its agent on request. The log must: 
(1)  Identify the animal treated; 
(2)  Provide the date of treatment; 
(3)  Describe the type or nature of treatment; and 
(4)  Provide the name of the attending veterinarian, if applicable. 
(c)  When transporting a wild animal or dangerous wild animal, the owner of the animal, or a designated carrier or intermediate handler of the animal, shall comply with all transportation standards that apply to that animal under the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. Section 2131 et seq.) and its subsequent amendments or the regulations adopted under that Act. 
(d)  A person is exempt from the requirements of this section if the person is caring for, treating, or transporting an animal for which the person holds a Class "A" or Class "B" dealer's license or a Class "C" exhibitor's license issued by the secretary of agriculture of the United States under the Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. Section 2131 et seq.) and its subsequent amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2002-104, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 3-77. - Inspection; permit required; fees. 
(a)  A person authorized to own a dangerous wild animal under subsection 3-77(b) may not own a dangerous wild animal in the city without first obtaining an inspection and possession permit from the animal registration agency. A person authorized to have a wild animal under subsection 3-72(c), may not own a wild animal in the city without first obtaining a wild animal permit from the animal registration agency. 
(b)  A permit may not be issued to a person who is not in compliance with sections 3-73, 3-75, and 3-76 of this article. A permit issued under this article may only be issued to the person who will have possession, custody, and control of the wild animal or dangerous wild animal. 
(c)  At the time a person obtains a permit application, the animal registration agency shall furnish to the applicant a written copy of the requirements to obtain a permit. 
(d)  The animal registration agency may revoke an owner's permit at any time the owner of the animal is in violation of this article. A person may not own a wild animal or dangerous wild inside the city during the period the person's permit is revoked. The animal registration agency may re-issue a permit upon satisfaction that the owner is in compliance with this article. 
(e)  An owner of a wild animal or dangerous wild animal, at all reasonable times, shall allow the animal registration agency or a designated licensed veterinarian to enter the premises where the animal is kept and to inspect the animal, the primary enclosure for the animal, and the owner's records relating to the animal to ensure compliance with this article. 
(f)  The fee charged for obtaining a permit for a wild animal or for a dangerous wild animal shall be established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-104, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 3-78. - Offenses and penalty. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person violates any provision of this article. 
(b)  Each day a person violates a provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  An offense under this article is misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00.) 
(Ord. No. 2002-104, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 3-79. - Civil penalty. 
(a)  The city may sue to collect a civil penalty assessed under this article. 
(b)  The city may also recover the reasonable costs of investigation, reasonable attorney's fees, and reasonable expert witness fees incurred by the animal registration agency in the civil action. Costs or fees recovered under this article shall be credited to the operating account from which payment for the animal registration agency's expenditures was made. 
(Ord. No. 2002-104, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 3-80. - Effects of article on other law. 
This article does not affect the applicability of any other law, rule, order, ordinance, or other legal requirement of this city, state or a political subdivision of this state. 
(Ord. No. 2002-104, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Secs. 3-81—3-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ANIMAL SHELTER 
 
Sec. 3-100. - Animal shelter fees. 
(a)  Impoundment and boarding fees. The Tri-City Animal Shelter will charge the following impoundment and other fees: 
First offense, per animal .....$30.00 
Second offense, per animal .....60.00 
Third and subsequent offenses, per animal .....100.00 
(b)  Boarding fees. The owner of an animal that has been impounded at the Tri-City Animal Shelter will be charged a boarding fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per night, including weekends and holidays. 
(c)  Rabies observation fee. The owner of animal that has been quarantined at the Tri-City Animal Shelter for rabies observation will be charged a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per night, including weekends and holidays. 
(d)  Adoption fees and procedures. The fee for the adoption of a dog or cat from the Tri-City Animal Shelter shall be one hundred five dollars ($105.00) for each such animal adopted. Each dog and cat adopted from the Tri-City Animal Shelter shall be sterilized, vaccinated for rabies and implanted with a microchip prior to adoption. If an animal cannot be sterilized prior to adoption, the person adopting the animal shall have the animal sterilized within thirty (30) days from the date of the adoption. If an animal cannot be vaccinated for rabies prior to adoption, the person adopting the animal shall have the animal vaccinated before the animal reaches sixteen (16) weeks of age. 
(e)  Surrender fee. 
(1)  Any person not a resident of Cedar Hill, DeSoto, or Duncanville who wishes to surrender a dog or cat older than four (4) months of age may do so for a twenty dollar ($20.00) fee. 
(2)  A litter of four (4) or less dogs or cats that are under four (4) months of age will be accepted for a thirty dollar ($30.00) fee. Additional animals from the same litter will be accepted at a rate of five dollars ($5.00) per animal. 
(f)  Veterinarian disposal fee. A veterinarian who disposes a dog or cat or other small animal carcass at the Tri-City Animal Shelter will be charged a five dollar ($5.00) disposal fee per carcass. The Tri-City Animal Shelter may refuse to accept an animal carcass. 
(g)  Space limitations. The animal shelter manager is authorized to suspend acceptance of animals from non-residents or animals from outside Cedar Hill, DeSoto or Duncanville due to space limitations or other considerations. 
(Ord. No. 2006-299, § 2, 8-29-06; Ord. No. 2007-337, § 1, 9-25-07; Ord. No. 2008-351, § 2, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 2013-500, § 2, 1-8-13)  
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Board of development, § 2-101 et seq.; capital improvement board, § 2-121 et seq.; alarm systems, Ch. 2.5; civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7; planning, Ch. 16; public utilities, Ch. 18; industrial waste and sewage disposal, § 18-141 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19; subdivision regulations, Ch. 20; park land dedication, § 20-41 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to prescribe fire limits and regulate construction therein, V.A.C.S. art. 1175(25). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Building permits. 
The rates to be charged for building permits on structures herein designated shall be inclusive of fees for electrical, plumbing and heating and air conditioning permits and shall be as follows: 
A.  One- and two-family dwelling units: ;hg;$400.00 for the first one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet. 
$400.00 plus $0.60 per square foot over one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) square feet up to two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
$1,150.00 plus $0.40 per square foot over two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
Square footage is based on total square foot under roof to include but not limited to garages, porches, and breezeways. 
B.  Multifamily dwellings other than duplex: $150.00 each unit. 
C.  Commercial, industrial, retaining walls, and other structure, additions or alterations, tenant finish outs: 
VALUATIONS 	FEES 
$1.00—$500.00 	$50.00 
$500.00—$2,000.00 	$50.00 for the first $500.00 plus $1.40 for each additional $100.00 or fraction thereof. 
$2,001.00—$25,000.00 	$71.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus $9.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
$25,001.00—$50,000.00 	$278.00 for the first $25,000.00 plus $8.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
$50,001.00—$100,000.00 	$478.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
$100,001.00—$500,000.00 	$828.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $6.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
$500,001.00 and greater 	$3,228.00 for the first $500,000.00 plus $5.00 for each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof. 
 
D.  Commercial plan review fee: All commercial permits to include but not limited to commercial, industrial, multifamily, additions, alterations, and tenant finish outs shall be assessed a plan review fee of forty-five (45) percent of the building permit fee. The plan review fee is due at the time of applying for the building permit and is nonrefundable. 
E.  In-ground swimming pool: $200.00. 
F.  Above-ground swimming pool or spa: $100.00 
G.  Accessory building less than or equal to one hundred (100) square feet: $50.00 
H.  Accessory building greater than or equal to one hundred one (101) square feet and less than two hundred forty (240) square feet: $75.00 
I.  Accessory building two hundred forty (240) square feet or greater: Based on value of construction from the table in item C. 
Miscellaneous building permits: The rates to be charged for building permits on structures herein designated shall be as follows: 
J.  Construction trailer: $100.00 
K.  Demolition: $50.00 
L.  Concrete approaches and sidewalks on city property only: $75.00 
M.  Certificate of occupancy: $75.00 
N.  Reinspection fee: $50.00 
O.  General contractor registration (due annually): $100.00 
P.  Electrical registration (due annually): $75.00 
Q.  Electrical repair or alteration: $50.00 
R.  Mechanical registration (due annually): $75.00 
S.  Mechanical repair or alteration: $50.00 
T.  Plumbing registration (due annually): $75.00 
U.  Plumbing repair or alteration: $50.00 
V.  On-site sewer systems: $100.00 
W.  Lawn sprinkler: $100.00 
Any person, firm partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas such violation shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00, and each and every instance of the violation of this section constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2009-381, §§ 1, 2, 4, 4-28-09) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and other miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10.  
Sec. 4-2. - Same—Application and payment of fee. 
Application for any permit required pursuant to this chapter, as well as the payment of any fee required by this chapter, shall be made to the inspection department of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.8; Ord. No. 79-537, § 8, 10-23-79)  
Sec. 4-3. - Same—Additional fees for failure to comply. 
Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required (under the building, mechanical, plumbing and electrical codes of the city) without first having obtained a permit therefor shall, if subsequently permitted to obtain a permit, pay double the permit fee fixed by ordinance. This section shall not apply to emergency construction. The city council shall enforce this section at its discretion. 
(Code 1976, § 4-15.9; Ord. No. 79-537, § 9, 10-23-79)  
Sec. 4-4. - Same—City school district. 
Notwithstanding any fee schedule to the contrary, the building permit fees to be charged to public school buildings within the Cedar Hill Independent School District shall be fifty (50) percent of the fee that would have been assessed pursuant to such fee structure heretofore adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 88-977, § 2, 6-14-88) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 88-977, § 2, adopted June 14, 1988, being not expressly amendatory of this Code, has been codified as § 4-4 at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 4-5—4-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING APPEALS AND ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2; attendance of board, commission members at meetings, etc., § 2-1. 
 
Sec. 4-21. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created a board to be known as the building appeals and advisory board. Such board shall consist of nine (9) members, all of whom shall reside within the corporate limits of the city. The nine (9) members of the board shall be appointed by the city council, and shall consist of the following persons: 
(1)  One (1) licensed and registered master plumber; 
(2)  One (1) licensed and registered master electrician; 
(3)  Two (2) building contractors; 
(4)  One (1) mechanical contractor; 
(5)  Four (4) engineers, architects or persons without building profession expertise, or any combination thereof. 
The building official of the city shall also be an ex officio member of the board. 
(Ord. No. 84-744, § 4, 12-18-84; Ord. No. 91-081, § 1, 7-9-91)  
Sec. 4-22. - Tenure of office. 
(a)  The appointive members of the building appeals and advisory board shall hold office for a period of two (2) years from the dates of their appointments and qualifications or until their successors have been appointed and qualified. 
(b)  One (1) master plumber, master electrician, building contractor, mechanical contractor, and one (1) engineer, architect or person without building profession expertise shall be appointed to terms of office expiring on or about May first of odd-numbered years. The remaining master electrician, master plumber, building contractor, mechanical contractor, and engineer, architect or person without building profession expertise shall be appointed to terms of office expiring on or about May first of even-numbered years. 
(c)  Any appointed member of the board may be removed by the city council for cause. Vacancies within the board shall be filled by appointment of the city council for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 84-744, § 5, 12-18-84)  
Sec. 4-23. - Compensation. 
The appointive members of the building appeals and advisory board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 84-744, § 6, 12-18-84)  
Sec. 4-24. - Organization and procedure. 
(a)  The board created by this article shall select a chairman and shall prescribe a procedure and order of business for the performance of its duties. The building official shall act as, or designate a suitable person to act as secretary to the board. 
(b)  Five (5) members of the board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and any action taken at any meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of those present and eligible to vote, and in no case less than four (4) affirmative votes. 
(c)  Regular meetings of the board shall be held for the purpose of hearing appeals and rendering interpretations of the building, mechanical, plumbing and electrical codes, and hearing applications for the proposed use of new materials and methods of construction or installation. 
(d)  The board shall keep a minute book in which shall be recorded all transactions and business of the board. 
(Ord. No. 84-744, § 7, 12-18-84)  
Sec. 4-25. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The board created by this article shall have jurisdiction over all appeals from the decision of the building official which relates to any building installation, and shall have the power to pass upon the true intent and meaning of the provisions of the building, mechanical, plumbing and electrical codes, and to approve such alternate materials and methods of construction or installation as are proved acceptable to the board under the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Whenever the board finds in the building, mechanical, plumbing or electrical code any provision that is inadequate or obsolete, it shall be the duty of such board to recommend the necessary amendments to the city council through the city manager. 
(c)  The board shall hear and determine any appeal by a general contractor from a decision by the building official to suspend, revoke or deny a permit under article XXI, registration of general contractors. 
(Ord. No. 84-744, § 8, 12-18-84; Ord. No. 2007-317, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 4-26. - Appeal from decision of building official. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by any interpretation of this article or by any decision or ruling by the building official under this article shall have the right to make an appeal to the board created by this article. Such appeal shall be made in writing and shall be duly verified by the person familiar with the facts therein charged and three (3) written copies of the same shall be filed with the city secretary within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision appealed from. A certified check for the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) payable to the city shall accompany such appeal to cover the cost of processing the appeal. The city secretary shall retain one (1) copy of such appeal for the official records of the city and shall refer two (2) copies of the appeal to the chief of the division of building inspection, who shall investigate the facts and report the appeal and the facts to the board. 
(b)  The board shall, within a period of thirty (30) days, hear the appeal and the facts. The building official shall not sit as a member of the board at any time when the board is hearing an appeal from the decision of the building official, and he shall not vote. 
(c)  In hearing such appeal, the board shall not have the power to waive or set aside the requirements of this article and in the case of alternate types of construction or material, shall determine whether or not such alternative types of construction or material are in fact equal to the standards of this chapter, considering adequacy, stability, strength, sanitation and safety to the public health and welfare. 
(d)  The board shall render a final decision which shall be filed with the city secretary. 
(e)  The building official, or the board at its own volition, shall have the authority to consider alternate materials and construction methods and approve the use of same as equal to the standards set out in the adopted codes of the city. All such approvals and conditions under which they are approved shall be specific, shall be reasonable, shall not create an injustice and shall be made a matter of public record. 
(Ord. No. 84-744, § 9, 12-18-84)  
Sec. 4-27. - Appeals to the court. 
(a)  Any person who may feel himself aggrieved by any action or decision of the board created by this article, after exhausting the remedies provided in section 4-26 of this article, may file a suit within thirty (30) days after receiving notice of the board's final order, in a district court of Dallas County, to annual or vacate the order of the board. Such suit shall be filed against the board as defendant and service of process may be made upon the board by serving the city secretary. The suit shall be tried as other civil cases, the burden of proof devolving upon the plaintiff assailing the order of the board. 
(b)  In such suits the board shall be defended by the city attorney until final determination of the proceedings contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 84-744, § 10, 12-18-84)  
Secs. 4-28—4-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING INSPECTOR[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— City officers and employees generally, § 2-31 et seq.; duties of building inspector in relation to moving of buildings, § 4-166. 
 
Sec. 4-41. - Office created. 
The office of "building inspector" of the city is hereby created, and the executive official in charge shall be known as the building inspector. The building inspector shall be appointed by the city council, and his appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service; provided that, he may be removed from office for cause after full opportunity has been given him to be heard by the council. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2; Ord. No. 81-596, § 2, 6-2-81)  
Sec. 4-42. - Duties. 
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce all provisions of this Code and laws relating to the construction, alteration, removal and demolition of buildings and structures. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3; Ord. No. 81-596, § 3, 6-2-81)  
Sec. 4-43. - Right of entry. 
The building inspector, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have the authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Code 1976, § 4-4; Ord. No. 81-596, § 4, 6-2-81)  
Sec. 4-44. - Trench safety. 
The building inspector shall be required to attend the trench safety course sponsored by the Associated General Contractors. 
(Ord. No. 88-959, § 5, 2-23-88) 
Cross reference— Trench safety program, § 4-311 et seq.  
Secs. 4-45—4-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical code, § 4-81 et seq.; mechanical code, § 4-101 et seq.; plumbing code, § 4-116 et seq.; fire prevention code, § 6-21 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-61. - Adoption of the 2015 International Building Code. 
The 2015 International Building Code is hereby adopted and incorporated in its entirety as though fully set out at length herein, save and except such portions as are herein after deleted, modified or amended and the provisions of such code shall be controlling in the installation, alteration or repair of all buildings and the inspection thereof; within the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2009-378, §§ 1, 2, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 2012-487, §§ 1, 2, 9-25-12; Ord. No. 2017-632, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 4-62. - 2015 International Building Code additional requirements and amendments. 
(1)  Section 901.6.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
901.6.1.1 standpipe testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as per nfpa 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years: 
1.  The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be back flushed when material is present and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of standpipe systems. 
2.  For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system. 
3.  Any pressure relief, reduction, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised. 
4.  If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official. 
5.  Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as "Fifth Year" for type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read "5 Year Standpipe Test" at a minimum. 
6.  The procedures required by the Texas Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed. 
7.  Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25. 
8.  Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing conditions. 
9.  Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval id given to remove hose by the fire code official. 
(2)  Section 901.6.4 is added to read as follows: 
901.6.4 Systems in high-rise buildings. The owner of a high-rise building shall be responsible for assuring that the fire and life-safety systems required by the Building Code are maintained in an operable condition at all times. Unless otherwise required by the chief, quarterly tests of such systems shall be conducted by approved persons. A written record shall be maintained and shall be made available to the inspection authority. 
(3)  Section 901.6.5 is added to read as follows: 
901.6.5 Smoke-control systems. Mechanical smoke-control systems, such as those in high-rise buildings, buildings containing atria, covered mall buildings and mechanical ventilation systems utilized in smoke proof enclosures and for smoke-removal systems utilized in high-piled combustible storage occupancies, shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times. Unless otherwise required by the chief, quarterly tests of such systems shall be conducted by approved persons. A written record shall be maintained and shall be made available to the inspection authority. 
(4)  Section 903.2.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-1 Occupancies where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 9,000 square feet (836 m 2 ). 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. 
4.  The fire area contains a multi-theater complex. 
(5)  Section 903.2.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-3 Occupancies where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 9000 square feet (836 m 2 ). 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. 
Exception: Areas used exclusively as participant sports areas where the main floor area is located at the same level as the level of exit discharge of the main entrance and exit. 
(6)  Section 903.2.1.4 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-4 Occupancies where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 9,000 square feet (836 m 2 ). 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. 
(7)  Section 903.2.4 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.4 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group F-1 where the following conditions exists: 
1.  F-1 moderate hazard occupancies 9,000 square feet and greater containing the following: 
Air craft (Manufacturing, not to include repair) 
Beverages; over 16 percent alcohol content 
Boats 
Canvas or similar fabric 
Clothing 
Electric generation plants 
Engines (including rebuilding) 
Food processing and commercial kitchens not associated with restaurants, cafeterias and similar dining facilities are more than 2,500 square feet (232 m 2 ) in area 
Furniture (Sprinkle at 2,500 square feet) 
Metals 
Millwork 
Paper Mills or products 
Plastic products 
Refuse Incineration 
Photo engravings 
Resilient flooring 
Silks 
Tobacco, cigars, cigarettes and snuff 
Upholstery and mattresses 
Wax candles 
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all other Group F-1 occupancies not listed here at 12,000 square feet or greater. 
2.  A Group F-1 fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane. 
3.  The combined area of all Group F fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 18,000 square feet (1672 m 2 ). 
4.  A Group F-1 occupancy used for the manufacture of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m 2 ). 
(8)  Section 903.2.7 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing a Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exist: 
1.  A Group M fire area exceeds 9,000 square feet (836 m 2 ). 
2.  A Group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane. 
3.  The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square feet (2230 m 2 ). 
4.  A Group M occupancy used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 m 2 ). 
5.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing Group M occupancy when the storage fire area exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m 2 ). 
(9)  Section 903.2.9 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.9 S-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing a Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exist: 
1.  S-1 moderate hazard occupancies 9,000 square feet and greater containing the following: 
Aerosols, Levels 2 and 3 
Aircraft hangar (storage and repair) 
Bags: cloth, burlap and paper 
Bamboos and rattan 
Baskets 
Belting: canvas and leather 
Books and paper in rolls or packs 
Boots and shoes 
Buttons, including cloth covered, pearl or bone 
Cardboard and cardboard boxes 
Clothing, woolen wearing apparel 
Cordage 
Dry boat storage (indoor) 
Furniture 
Furs 
Glues, mucilage, pastes and size 
Grains 
Horns and combs, other than celluloid 
Leather 
Linoleum 
Lumber 
Tobacco, cigars, cigarettes and snuff 
Wax candles 
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all other Group S-1 moderate hazard occupancies not listed here at 12,000 square feet or greater. 
2.  A Group S-1 fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane. 
3.  The combined area of all S-1 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 18,000 square feet (1672 m 2 ). 
4.  A Group S-1 fire area used for the storage of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 m 2 ). 
5.  A Group S-1 occupancy used for the storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m 2 ). 
(10)  Section 903.2.9.1 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages in accordance with amended Section 406.8 in the Building Code as shown: 
1.  Buildings having two or more stories above grade plane, including basements, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 10,000 square feet (929 m 2 ). 
2.  Buildings not more than one story above grade plane with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 10,000 square feet (929 m 2 ). 
3.  Buildings with repair garages servicing vehicles parked in basements. 
4.  A Group S-1 fire area used for the repair of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 m 2 ). 
(11)  Section 903.2.10 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.10 All Group S-2 Enclosed parking garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in accordance with Section 406.6 of the International Building Code where either of the following conditions exists: 
1.  Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage exceeds 9,000 square feet (836 m 2 ). 
2.  Where the enclosed parking garage is located beneath other groups. 
Exception: Enclosed parking garages located beneath Group R-3 occupancies. 
(12)  Section 903.3.1.2.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attics, Open Breezeways, and Attached Garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attic spaces of such buildings two or more stories in height, open breezeways, and attached garages in accordance with NFPA 13 and or NFPA 13R requirements. 
(13)  Section [F] 905.3.9 is added to read as follows: 
[F] 905.3.9 Building Area. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (60960) of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, Class 1 automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry or manual dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14. 
2.  R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors. 
(14)  Section [F] 907.1.4 is added to read as follows: 
[F] 907.1.4 Design Standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems servicing more than 20 smoke detectors shall be minimum analog initiating devices. 
(15)  Section [F] 907.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
[F] 907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with new Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy. 
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall: 
1.  Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the walking surface level, and 
2.  Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions. 
(16)  Section [F] 907.2.3 is amended to read as follows: 
[F] 907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems. 
Exceptions: 
1.  A manual fire alarm system is not required in Group E educational with an occupant load of 50 or less when provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
1.1.  Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than 5 children 2 1/2 or less years of age, see Section 907.2.6). 
2.  Emergency voice/alarm communication systems meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall not be required in Group E occupancies with occupant loads of 100 or less, provided that activation of the manual fire alarm system initiates as approved occupant notification signal in accordance with Section 907.5. 
3.  Manual fire alarm boxes are not required in Group E occupancies where all the following apply: 
3.1.  Interior corridors are protected by smoke detectors. 
3.2.  Auditoriums, cafeterias, gymnasiums and similar areas are protected by heat detectors or other approved detection devices. 
3.3.  Shops and laboratories involving dusts or vapors are protected by heat detectors or other approved detection devices. 
4.  Manual fire alarm boxes shall not be required in Group E occupancies where all of the following apply: 
4.1.  The building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
4.2.  The emergency voice/alarm communication system will activate on sprinkler water flow. 
4.3.  Manual activation is provided from a normally occupied location. 
(17)  Section [F]907.2.11.2 is amended to read as follows: 
[F] 907.2.11.2 Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1 regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations: 
1.  On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. 
2.  In each room used for sleeping purposes. 
3.  In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. 
All smoke alarms shall be UL listed and installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and the household fire warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72. 
(18)  Section [F]907.2.13.1.1 amended to read as follows: 
[F] 907.2.13.1.1 Area smoke detection. Area smoke detectors shall be provided in accordance with this section. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an automatic fire alarm system. The activation of any detector required by this section shall activate the emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2. In addition to smoke detectors required by Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.10, smoke detectors shall be located as follows: 
1.  In each mechanical equipment, electrical, transformer, telephone equipment or similar room, and Central Control Station. 
2.  In each elevator machine room, machinery space, control room and control space and in elevator lobbies. 
3.  For Group R, Division 1 Occupancies, in all interior corridors serving as a means of egress for an occupant load of 10 or more. 
(19)  Section [F] 907.6.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
[F] 907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuits conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from an addressable input (monitor) module may be wired Class B, provided the distance from addressable module to the initiating device is ten feet or less. 
(20)  Section 907.6.6 is amended to read as follows: 
[F] 907.6.6 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by this chapter or by the International Fire Code shall be monitored by an approved supervising station in accordance with NFPA 72. See Section 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station. 
Exception: Monitoring by a supervising station is not required for: 
1.  Single and multiple-station smoke alarms required by Section 907.2.11. 
2.  Smoke detectors in Group I-3 occupancies. 
3.  Automatic sprinkler systems in one and two family dwellings. 
(21)  Section [F]907.6.6.3 is added to read as follows: 
[F] 907.6.6.3 Communication requirements. All alarm systems, new or replacement shall transmit alarm, supervisory and trouble signals descriptively to the approved central station, remote supervisory station or proprietary supervising station as defined in NFPA 72, with the correct device designation and location of addressable device identification. Alarms shall not be permitted to be transmitted as a general alarm or zone condition. 
(22)  Section [F] 909.2.1 is added to read as follows: 
[F] 909.2.1 Smoke-control system for high-rises. A smoke control system meeting the requirements of Section 909 in the International Fire Code - 2015 edition and International Building Code 2015 edition shall be provided for high-rise buildings. 
(23)  Section [F]910.3.3.4 is added to read as follows: 
[F] 910.3.3.4 Gravity-operated drop out vents. Automatic smoke and heat vents containing heat sensitive glazing designed to shrink and drop out of the vent opening when exposed to fire shall fully open within 5 minutes after the vent cavity is exposed to a simulated fire represented by a time-temperature gradient that reaches an air temperature of 500 degrees F (260 degrees C) within 5 minutes. 
(24)  Section [F]914.3.1.2 is amended to read as follows: 
[F] 914.3.1.2 Water Supply to required Fire Pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet (128 m) in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate. 
Exception: Two connections to the same main shall be permitted provided the main is valved such that an interruption can be isolated so that the water supply will continue without interruption through no fewer than one of the connections. 
(25)  Section [F] 1010.1.9.8 is amended to read as follows: 
[F] 1010.1.9.8 Sensor release of electrically locked egress doors. The electric locks on sensor-released doors located in a means of egress in buildings with an occupancy in Groups A, B, E, I-1, I-2, I-4, M, R-1 or R-2 and entrance doors to tenant spaces in occupancies in Groups A, B, E, I-1, I-2, I-4, M, R-1 or R-2 are permitted where installed and operated in accordance with all of the following criteria: 
1.  The sensor shall be installed on the egress side, arranged to detect an occupant approaching the doors. The doors shall be arranged to unlock by a signal from or loss of power to the sensor. 
2.  Loss of power to the lock or locking system shall automatically unlock the doors. 
3.  The doors shall be arranged to unlock from a manual unlocking device located 40 inches to 48 inches (1016 mm to 1219 mm) vertically above the floor and within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the secured doors. Ready access shall be provided to the manual unlocking device and the device shall be clearly identified by a sign that reads "PUSH TO EXIT." When operated, the manual unlocking device shall result in direct interruption of power to the lock-independent of other electronics-and the doors shall remain unlocked for not less than 30 seconds. 
4.  Activation of the building fire alarm system, where provided, shall automatically unlock the doors, and the doors shall remain unlocked until the fire alarm system has been reset. 
5.  Activation of the building automatic sprinkler system or fire detection system shall automatically unlock the doors. The doors shall remain unlocked until the fire alarm system has been reset. 
6.  The door locking system units shall be listed in accordance with UL 294. 
7.  The building must be protected throughout by an approved and monitored automatic fire sprinkler system or an approved automatic fire/smoke detection system. Activation of the approved system shall automatically unlock the doors. The doors shall remain unlocked until the system is reset. 
(Ord. No. 2009-378, §§ 1, 2, 3-24-09; Ord. No. 2012-487, §§ 1, 2, 9-25-12; Ord. No. 2017-632, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 4-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-270, § 1, adopted December 13, 2005, repealed the former section 4-63. The former § 4-63 pertained to additional requirements and amendments of 2000 International Building Code and derived from Ord. No. 92-108, § 1, 2-25-92; Ord. No. 93-153, § 1, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 2000-09, § 1, 1-25-00; Ord. No. 2003-169, §§ 1,`3, 9-9-03. Refer to section 4-62 for similar provisions.  
Sec. 4-64. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-1037, § 1, adopted Sept. 12, 1989, repealed former § 4-64, which pertained to shingles and derived from §§ 4-9.1—4-9.4, 4-9.6 and 4-9.7 of the city's 1976 Code as amended by Ord. No. 80-565, § 7, adopted June 24, 1980.  
Sec. 4-65. - Enforcement of penalty. 
Any person, firm partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas such violation shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00, and each and every instance of the violation of this section constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Code 1976, § 4-6; Ord. No. 81-596, § 6, 6-2-81; Ord. No. 85-751, § 3, 1-22-85; Ord. No. 2009-378, § 4, 3-24-09)  
Sec. 4-66. - Trench safety. 
On all construction projects, public or private, within the boundaries of the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the bid document and the contract shall contain detailed plans and specifications for adequate safety systems that meet Occupational Safety and Health Administration standards and a pay item for those safety systems. This requirement shall not apply to persons subject to safety standards adopted under article 6053-1, Revised Civil Statutes, and subject to the administrative penalty provisions of article 6053-2, Revised Civil Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 88-959, § 2, 2-23-88) 
Cross reference— Trench safety program, § 4-311 et seq.  
Sec. 4-67. - Retaining wall design and construction. 
(a)  When required. A retaining wall shall be required when the slope of the ground exceeds a three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical ratio. All retaining walls shall be located within the property lines of the same lot. Special consideration shall be given to the natural slope which exists in the western portion of the city. Existing natural slopes and the stability of the Austin Chalk formation may exempt some slopes from these requirements. All exemptions shall be approved by the building official. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Design standards. Any retaining wall constructed within the city shall conform to the following requirements and design standards: 
(1)  All retaining walls constructed with a vertical face over four (4) feet in height shall be required to submit a design plan and obtain a permit. The construction of a retaining wall with a vertical height between four (4) and six (6) feet per face may be constructed according to the standard details developed by the city unless an alternate design is submitted and approved. Any alternate design shall be submitted to the building official and shall bear the seal and signature of a professional engineer qualified in the technical field and registered in the state. 
(2)  The retaining wall permit shall be designed for the particular location in question on the lot, showing lot lines, easements and right-of-way. 
(3)  The design of the retaining wall shall be the responsibility of the owner of the lot on which the retaining wall is constructed. The use of the standard design does not relieve the owner of having his engineer design a structure which is adequate to support the soil load upon which it is to be constructed. 
(4)  The retaining wall permit shall identify the backfall procedure to be used to a point within one and one-half (1½) feet of the top of the wall. The remaining top fill material to be used shall be specified. The placement of backfill material shall be in uniform layers placed without voids. Where weep hole drains are required, the placement of a free draining material shall be used. 
(5)  No retaining wall design using railroad tie materials shall be considered for approval which exceeds a six-foot height in a single vertical face unless the type design shall bear the seal and signature of a registered professional engineer. 
(6)  The structural design for concrete reinforced structural walls over four (4) feet in height shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. 
(7)  A wall built in tiers shall be considered a single wall in height when the upper tier is set back less than one and one-half (1½) times the height of the wall section below. 
(8)  The top of cut slopes shall be made not nearer to the foundation than one-fifth ( 1/5 ) of the vertical height of cut with a minimum of two (2) feet and a maximum of ten (10) feet. The setback may need to be increased for any required drainage. 
(9)  The toe of slope shall be made not nearer to the foundation than one-half (½) the height of the slope with a minimum of two (2) feet and a maximum of fifteen (15) feet. 
(10)  Dead men shall be minimum of four (4) feet in length or equal to the height of the wall. 
(11)  During the development of a subdivision, any grading that creates a slope with a ratio steeper than three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical is subject to the regulations of this section. Retaining walls for such areas shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer in the State of Texas and be constructed concurrently with the other development improvements. The retaining wall plans shall be included with the subdivision civil construction plans and be inspected by the public works department prior to the final acceptance of the subdivision. 
(d)  Building permit to be withheld. No building permit shall be issued nor final inspection approved for any construction which is not in conformity with the requirements and intent of this section. Any person who violates any of the terms and provisions of this section shall be denied a building permit until the violation is corrected. 
(e)  Inspections. Inspection shall be required on all retaining walls with a vertical face of over four (4) feet in height. Inspections are to be made before any backfilling is begun. 
(1)  Retaining walls located within ten (10) feet horizontally from the foundation must be constructed before the foundation inspection. 
(2)  Retaining walls located more than ten (10) feet horizontally from the foundation must be constructed before the final inspection. 
(f)  Right to appeal to building advisory board. The interpretation of the requirements hereinabove set forth shall be made by the building official. Any person adversely affected by the decision of the building official may, within ten (10) days from the date of such decision, file an appeal in writing to the building appeals and advisory board. Such appeal shall be filed with the building official and shall determine the specific areas of appeal. 
(g)  Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other entity who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every instance of the violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 90-046, §§ 1—6, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 2006-295, §§ 1, 2, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 2009-381, § 1, 4-28-09)  
Sec. 4-68. - Energy conservation on dwelling units. 
(a)  Standards. The following standards shall be required in the construction of residential structures: 
(1)  Insulate the exterior walls to a minimum rating of R-11. 
(2)  Insulate the attic over air conditioned areas to a minimum rating of R-19. 
(3)  Caulk between the sole plate and the slab. 
(4)  Caulk all penetrations in the exterior framing. 
(5)  Weatherstrip and caulk around exterior doors and windows. 
(b)  Enforcement and penalty. Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the city, such violation shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), and each and every instance of the violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 91-060, §§ 1, 2, 2-14-91) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-060, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 14, 1991, amended this Code by the addition of provisions to be included as § 4-67. Such provisions have been codified as § 4-68 inasmuch as other provisions were previously included as § 4-67.  
Secs. 4-69—4-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Alarm systems, Ch. 2.5; building code, § 4-61 et seq.; international mechanical code, § 4-101 et seq.; plumbing code, § 4-116 et seq.; international fire code, § 6-21 et seq.; rate schedules for electricity, § 18-96. 
 
Sec. 4-81. - Adoption of the 2014 National Electrical Code. 
The 2014 National Electrical Code is hereby adopted and incorporated in its entirety as though fully set out at length herein, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and the provisions of such code shall be controlling in the installation, alteration or repair of electric installations and the inspection thereof; within the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
2014 National Electrical Code Additional requirements and amendments. 
(1)  Article 100, Part 1 is amended to read as follows: 
Engineering Supervision. Supervision of a Qualified State of Texas Licensed Professional Engineer engaged primarily in the design or maintenance of electrical installations. 
(2)  Article 110.2 is amended to read as follows: 
110.2 Approval. The conductors and equipment required or permitted by this Code shall be acceptable only if approved. Approval of equipment may be evident by listing and labeling of equipment by a Nationally Recognized Testing Lab (NRTL) with a certification mark of that laboratory or a qualified third party inspection agency approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ). 
Exception: Unlisted equipment that is relocated to another location within a jurisdiction or is field modified is subject to the approval by the AHJ. This approval may be by a field evaluation by a NRTL or qualified third party inspection agency approved by the AHJ. 
Informational Note 1: See 90.7, Examination of Equipment for Safety, and 110.3, Examination, Identification, Installation, and Use of Equipment. See definitions of Approved, Identified, Labeled, and Listed. 
Informal Note 2: Manufacturer's self-certification of equipment may not necessarily comply with US product safety standards as certified by a National Recognized Testing Lab. 
Informal Note 3: NFPA 790 and 791 provide an example of an approved method for qualifying a third party inspection agency. 
(3)  Article 210.52(G)(1) is amended to read as follows: 
210.52(G)(1) Garages. In each attached garage and in each detached garage with electric power. At least one receptacle outlet shall be installed for each car space. 
(4)  Article 230.71(A) is amended to read as follows. 
230.71(A) General. The service disconnection means for each service permitted by 230.2, or for each set of service-entrance conductors permitted by 230.40, Exception No 1, 3, 4, or 5, shall consist of not more than six switches or sets of circuit breakers, or a combination of not more than six switches and sets of circuit breakers, mounted in a single enclosure, in a group of separate enclosures, or in or on a switchboard or in switchgear. There shall be not more than six sets of disconnects per service grouped in any one location. 
For the purpose of this section, disconnection means installed as part of listed equipment and used solely for the following shall not be considered a service disconnecting means: 
(1)  Power monitoring equipment 
(2)  Surge-protective device(s) 
(3)  Control circuit of the ground-fault protection system 
(4)  Power-operable service disconnection means 
Exception: Multi-occupant building. Individual service disconnecting means is limited to six for each occupant. The number of individual disconnects at one location may exceed six. 
(5)  Article 300.11(A) is amended to read as follows: 
300.11(A) Secured in Place. Raceways, cable assemblies, boxes, cabinets, and fittings shall be securely fastened in place. Support wires that do not provide secure support shall not be permitted as the sole support. Support wires and associated fittings that provide secure support and that are installed in addition to the ceiling grid support wires shall be permitted as the sole support. Where independent supports wires are used, they shall be secured at both ends. Cables and raceways shall not be supported by ceiling grids. 
Exception: Ceiling grid support wires may be used for structural supports when the associated wiring is located in that area, not more than two raceways or cables supported per wire, with a maximum nominal metric designation 16 (trade size ½"). 
(6)  Article 310.15(B)(7) is amended to read as follows: 
310.15(B)(7) 120/240-Volt, 3-Wire, Single-Phase Dwelling Services and Feeders. 
This Article shall not be used in conjunction with 220.82. 
(7)  Article 310.106(B) is amended to read as follows: 
310.106(B) Conductor material. No aluminum conductors shall be installed in any structure which is designated by the International Building Code as Group R Occupancy. Aluminum alloy conductors shall be made of an AA-8000 Series electrical grade aluminum alloy conductor material. The conductor shall be a minimum size of #1 wire gauge or larger. Aluminum alloy conductors may be used for service entrance conductors only in R-1 and R-2 occupancies. 
(8)  Article 500.8 (A)(3) is amended to read as follows: 
500.8 Equipment. Articles 500 through 504 require equipment construction and installation that ensure safe performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more than ordinary care with regard to installation and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 2: Since there is no consistent relationship between explosion properties and ignition temperature, the two are independent requirements. 
Informational Note No. 3: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Explosion proof or dust-ignition proof equipment may not be suitable for use at temperatures lower than -25°C (-13° F) unless they are identified for low-temperature service. However, at low ambient temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may not exist in a location classified as Class 1 Division 1 at normal ambient temperature. 
(A)  Suitability. Suitability of identified equipment shall be determined by one of the following: 
(1)  Equipment listing or labeling. 
(2)  Evidence of equipment evaluation from a qualified testing laboratory or inspection agency concerned with product evaluation. 
(3)  Evidence acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction such as a manufacturer's self- evaluation or an engineering judgment signed and sealed by a qualified Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas. 
Informational Note: Additional documentation for equipment may include certificates demonstration compliance with applicable equipment standards, indication special conditions of use, and other pertinent information. Guidelines for certificates may be found in ANSI/ISA 12.00.02, Certificate Standard for AEx Equipment for Hazardous (Classified) Locations. 
(9)  Article 505.7 (A) is amended to read as follows: 
505.7 Special Precaution. Article 505 requires equipment construction and installation that ensures safe performance under conditions of proper use and maintenance. 
Informational Note No. 1: It is important that inspection authorities and users exercise more than ordinary care with regard to the installation and maintenance of electrical equipment in hazardous (classified) locations. 
Informational Note No. 2: Low ambient conditions require special consideration. Electrical equipment depending on the protection techniques described by 505.8(A) may not be suitable for use at temperatures lower than - 20°C (-4°F) unless they are identified for use at lower temperatures. However, at low ambient temperatures, flammable concentrations of vapors may not exist in a location classified Class 1, Zones 0, 1, or 2 at normal ambient temperature. 
(A)  Implementation of Zone Classification System. Classification of areas, engineering and design, selection of equipment and wiring methods, installation, and inspection shall be performed by qualified Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas. 
(10)  Article 517.30(G) is amended to read as follows: 
(G)  Coordination. Overcurrent protective devices serving the equipment branch of the essential electrical system shall be coordinated for the period of time that a fault's duration extends beyond 0.1 second. 
Exception No. 1: Between transformer primary and secondary overcurrent protective devices, where only one overcurrent protective device or set of overcurrent protective devices exists on the transformer secondary. 
Exception No. 2: Between overcurrent protective devices of the same size (ampere rating) in series. 
Informal Note: The terms coordination and coordinated as used in this section do not cover the full range of overcurrent conditions. 
(11)  Article 517.30(H) is added to read as follows: 
(H)  Selective Coordination. Overcurrent protective devices serving the life safety, and critical branches of the essential electrical system shall be selectively coordinated with all supply-side overcurrent protective devices. 
Exception No. 1: Between transformer primary and secondary overcurrent protective devices, where only on overcurrent protective device or set of overcurrent protective devices exists on the transformer secondary. 
Exception No. 2: Between overcurrent protective devices of the same size (ampere rating) in series. 
Informal Note: The terms coordination and coordinated as used in this section do not cover the full range of overcurrent conditions. 
(Ord. No. 91-062, § 2, 2-14-91; Ord. No. 96-271, § 1, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 2001-72, § 1, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 2004-220, § 1, 10-12-04; Ord. No. 2007-312, §§ 1, 2, 1-9-07; Ord. No. 2009-390, §§ 1, 2, 8-18-09; Ord. No. 2012-486, §§ 1, 2, 9-25-12; Ord. No. 2012-497, §§ 1, 2, 12-11-12; Ord. No. 2016-608, § 2, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 4-82. - Registration of electricians required. 
No person shall engage in the business of an electrician without first having registered with the city and having paid a fee therefor in such amount and based on such classification as established by the city council from time to time. 
(Code 1976, § 4-60.53; Ord. No. 76-424, § 3, 7-13-76; Ord. No. 85-751, § 5, 1-22-85)  
Sec. 4-83. - Enforcement of penalty. 
Any person, firm partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas such violation shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00, and each and every instance of the violation of this section constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Code 1976, § 4-60.60; Ord. No. 76-424, § 11, 7-13-76; Ord. No. 2009-390, § 4, 8-18-09; Ord. No. 2016-608, § 4, 12-13-16)  
Secs. 4-84—4-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - INTERNATIONAL MECHANICAL CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-384, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 9, 2009, repealed the former Art. VI, §§ 4-101, 4-102, and enacted a new Art. VI as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to 2003 International Mechanical Code and derived from Ord. No. 2006-287, §§ 1, 2, 4-11-06. 
 
Sec. 4-101. - Adoption of the 2015 International Mechanical Code. 
The 2015 International Mechanical Code is hereby adopted and incorporated in its entirety as though fully set out at length herein, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and the provisions of such code shall be controlling in the installation, alteration or repair of buildings and the inspection thereof within the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2009-384, § 2, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2012-489, §§ 1, 2, 9-25-2012; Ord. No. 2016-601, § 2, 10-11-16)  
Sec. 4-102. - 2015 International Mechanical Code additional requirements and amendments. 
2015 International Mechanical Code Additional requirements and amendments. 
(1)  Section 102.8 is amended to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced herein shall be those that are listed in Chapter 15 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the National Electrical Code (NEC) shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
(2)  Section 106.5.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
106.5.1.1 Investigation. Whenever work for which a permit is required by the code has been commenced without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. 
(3)  Section 106.5.1.2 is added to read as follows: 
106.5.1.2 Fee. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether or not a permit is subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall be equal to the permit fee required by this code or the city fee schedule as applicable. The payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt the applicant from the compliance with all other provisions of either this code or the technical codes from penalty prescribed by law. 
(4)  Section 106.5.2 is amended to read as follows: 
106.5.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all mechanical work shall be adopted by resolution of the governing body of the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Section 106.5.3 is amended to read as follows: 
106.5.3 Fee refunds. The code official shall establish a policy for authorizing the refunding of fees. 
(6)  Section 109.1 is amended to read as follows: 
109.1 Application for appeal. A person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The application shall be filed on a form obtained from the code official within 20 days after the notice was served. 
A fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall be charged for the application for appeal. 
(7)  Section 304.3 is amended to read as follows: 
304.3 Elevation of equipment and appliance. Equipment and appliances shall be elevated not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor in public garages, private garages, repair garages, automotive motor fuel-dispensing facilities and parking garages. For the purpose of this section, rooms or spaces that are not part of the living space of a dwelling unit and that communicate directly with a private garage through openings shall be considered to be part of the private garage. 
(8)  Section 304.7 is amended to read as follows: 
304.7 Private garages. Appliances located in private garages shall be installed with a minimum clearance of 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor. 
(9)  Section 306.3 is amended to read as follows: 
306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided with an opening and unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. The passage way shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide and not more than 20 feet (6096 mm) in length measured along the center line of the passageway from the opening to the appliance. The passageway shall have continuous solid flooring not less than 24 inches (610 mm) wide. A level service space not less than 30 inches (762 mm) deep and 30 inches (762 mm) wide shall be present at the front or service side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, access to the attic space shall be provided by one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced or removed through the required opening. 
2.  Where the passageway is unobstructed and not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) high and 22 inches wide for its entire length, the passageway shall be not greater than 50 feet (15250 mm) in length. 
(10)  Section 306.3.1 is amended to read as follows: 
306.3.1 Electrical requirements. A luminaire controlled by a switch located at the required passageway opening and receptacle outlet shall be provided at or near the appliance location in accordance with the National Electrical Code. Low voltage wiring of 50 Volts or less shall be installed in a manner to prevent physical damage. 
(11)  Section 306.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
306.4.1 Electrical requirements. A luminaire controlled by a switch located at the required passageway opening and receptacle outlet shall be provided at or near the appliance location in accordance with the National Electrical Code. Low voltage wiring of 50 Volts or less shall be installed in a manner to prevent physical damage. 
(12)  Section 306.5 is amended to read as follows: 
306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment and appliances requiring access are installed on roofs or elevated structures at an aggregate height exceeding 16 feet (4877 mm), such access shall be provided by a permanent approved means of access. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (3038 mm) to the finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliance's level service space. Such access shall not require climbing over obstructions greater than 30 inches (762 mm) high or walking on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope). Where access involves climbing over parapet walls, the height shall be measured to the top of the parapet wall. 
A receptacle outlet shall be provided at or near the equipment and appliance location in accordance with the Electrical Code. 
Permanent ladders installed to provide the required access shall comply with the following minimum design criteria: 
1.  The side railing shall extend above the parapet or roof edge not less than 30 inches (762 mm). 
2.  Ladders shall have rung spacing not to exceed 14 inches (356 mm) on center. 
3.  Ladders shall have a toe spacing not less than 6 inches (152 mm) deep. 
4.  There shall be a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) between rails. 
5.  Rungs shall have a minimum of 0.75- inch (19mm) diameter and be capable of withstanding a 300-pound (136.1 kg) load. 
6.  Ladders over 30 feet (9144 mm) in height shall be provided with offset sections and landings capable of withstanding 100 pounds (488.2 kg/m 2 ) per square foot. Landing dimensions shall be not less than 18 inches (457 mm) and not less than the width of the ladder served. A guard rail shall be provided on all open sides of the landing. 
7.  Climbing clearance. The distance from the centerline of the rungs to the nearest permanent object on the climbing side of the ladder shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) measured perpendicular to the rungs. This distance shall be maintained from the point of ladder access to the bottom of the roof hatch. A minimum clear width of 15 inches ( 381 mm) shall be provided on both sides of the ladder measured from the midpoint of the parallel with the rungs except where cages or wells are installed. 
8.  Landing required. The ladder shall be provided with a clear and unobstructed bottom landing area having a minimum dimension of 30 inches (762 mm) by 30 inches (762 mm) centered in front of the ladder. 
9.  Ladders shall be protected against corrosion by approved means. 
10.  Access to ladders shall be provided at all times. 
Catwalks installed to provide the required access shall be not less than 24 inches (610 mm) wide and shall have railings as required for service platforms. 
Exception: This section shall not apply to Group R-3 occupancies. 
(13)  Section 306.5.1 is amended to read as follows: 
306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are installed on roofs having slopes greater than 3 units vertical in 12 units horizontal and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required for service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21-inch-diameter (533 mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code. 
(14)  Section 306.5.2 is amended to read as follows: 
306.5.2 Electrical requirements. A receptacle outlet shall be provided at or near the equipment location in accordance with the National Electrical Code. Low voltage wiring of 50 volts or less shall be installed in a manner to prevent physical damage. 
(15)  Section 307.2.3 is amended to read as follows: 
307.2.3 Auxiliary and secondary drain systems. In addition to the requirements of Section 307.2.1, where damage to any building components could occur as a result of overflow from the equipment primary condensate removal system, one of the following auxiliary protection methods shall be provide for each cooling coil or fuel-fired appliance that produces condensate: 
1.  An auxiliary drain pan with a separate drain shall be provided under the coils on which condensation will occur. The auxiliary pan drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of the primary drain. The pan shall have a minimum depth of 1.5 inches (38 mm), shall not be less than 3 inches (76m) larger than the unit or the coil dimensions in width and length and shall be constructed of corrosion-resistant material. Galvanized sheet steel pans shall have a minimum thickness of not less than 0.0236 inch (0.6010 mm) (No. 24 gage). Non-metallic pans shall have a minimum thickness of not less than 0.0625 inch (1.6 mm). 
2.  A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to the drain pan provided with the equipment. Such overflow drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher level than the primary drain connection. However, the conspicuous point shall not create a hazard such as dripping over a walking surface or other areas so as to create a nuisance. 
3.  An auxiliary drain pan without a separate drain line shall be provided under the coils on which condensate will occur. Such pan shall be equipped with a water-level detection device conforming to UL508 that will shut off the equipment served prior to overflow of the pan. The auxiliary drain pan shall be constructed in accordance with Item 1 of this section. 
4.  A water level detection device conforming to UL 508 shall be provided that will shut off the equipment served in the event that the primary drain is blocked. The device shall be installed in the primary drain line, the overflow drain line, or in the equipment-supplied drain pan, located at a point higher than the primary drain line connection and below the overflow rim of such pan. 
Exception: Fuel-fired appliances that automatically shut down operation in the event of a stoppage in the condensate drainage system. 
(16)  Section 403.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
403.2.1 Recirculation of air. The outdoor air required by Section 403.3 shall not be re-circulated. Air in excess of that required by Section 403.3 shall not be prohibited from being re-circulated as a component of supply air to building spaces, except that: 
1.  Ventilation air shall not be re-circulated from the dwelling to another or to dissimilar occupancies. 
2.  Supply air to a swimming pool and associated deck areas shall not be re-circulated unless such air is dehumidified to maintain the relative humidity of the area at 60 percent or less. Air from this area shall not be re-circulated to other spaces where 10 percent or more of the resulting supply airstream consists of air re-circulated from these spaces. 
3.  Where mechanical exhaust is required by Note b in Table 403.3.1.1, recirculation of air from such spaces shall be prohibited. Recirculation of air that is completely within such spaces shall not be prohibited. Where recirculation of air is prohibited, all air supplied to such spaces shall be exhausted, including any air in excess of that required by Table 403.3.1.1. 
4.  Where mechanical exhaust is required by Note g in Table 403.3.1.1, mechanical exhaust is required and recirculation from such spaces is prohibited where 10 percent or more of resulting supply airstream consists of air re-circulated from these spaces. Recirculation of air that is contained completely within such spaces shall not be prohibited. 
5.  Toilet rooms within private dwellings that contain only a water closet, lavatory or combination thereof may be ventilated with an approved mechanical re-circulating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air. 
(17)  Section 501.3 is amended to read as follows: 
501.3 Exhaust discharge. The air removed by every mechanical exhaust system shall be discharged outdoors at a point where it will not cause a nuisance and not less than the distances specified in Section 501.3.1. The air shall be discharged to a location from which it cannot again be readily drawn in by a ventilating system. Air shall not be exhausted into an attic or crawl space, or be directed onto walkways. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Whole- house ventilation-type attic fans shall be permitted to discharge into the attic space of dwelling units having private attics. 
2.  Commercial cooking re-circulating systems. 
3.  Where installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instruction and where mechanical or natural ventilation is otherwise provided in accordance with Chapter 4, listed and labeled domestic ductless range hoods shall not be required to discharge to the outdoors. 
4.  Toilet rooms exhaust ducts may terminate in a warehouse or shop area when infiltration of outside air is present. 
(18)  Section 607.5.1 is amended to read as follows: 
607.5.1 Fire Walls. Ducts and air transfer openings permitted in fire walls in accordance with Section 706.11 of the International Building Code shall be protected with listed fire dampers installed in accordance with their listing. For hazardous exhaust systems see Section 510.1 — 510.9 IMC. 
(19)  Section 1102.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
1102.1.1 Testing of Refrigerating Systems. All refrigerating systems shall comply with one of the following testing methods; 
1.  Pressure Test. Pressurize the system with dry nitrogen to 500psi and hold that pressure four 24 hours. 
2.  Vacuum Test. System must be evacuated to a level of 300 microns and could not rise to more than 600 microns after isolating the vacuum pump. 
(Ord. No. 2009-384, § 2, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2012-489, §§ 1, 2, 9-25-12; Ord. No. 2016-601, § 2, 10-11-16)  
Sec. 4-103. - Enforcement of penalty. 
Any person, firm partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas such violation shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00, and each and every instance of the violation of this section constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2009-384, § 4, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2016-601, § 4, 10-11-16)  
Secs. 4-104—4-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - INTERNATIONAL PLUMBING CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Plumbing License, Law, V.A.C.S. art. 6243-101; authority of cities to regulate plumbing, V.A.C.S. art. 6243-101, § 15. 
 
Sec. 4-116. - Adoption of the 2015 International Plumbing Code. 
The 2015 International Plumbing Code is hereby adopted and incorporated in its entirety as though fully set out at length herein, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and the provisions of such code shall be controlling in the installation, alteration or repair of buildings and the inspection thereof within the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Code 1976, § 4-72.1; Ord. No. 79-539, § 1, 12-11-79; Ord. No. 85-751, § 8, 1-22-85; Ord. No. 86-851, § 1, 5-27-86; Ord. No. 89-1014, § 1, 2-28-89; Ord. No. 92-110, § 1, 2-25-92; Ord. No. 2003-168, §§ 1, 2, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 2006-288, §§ 1, 2, 4-11-06; Ord. No. 2009-385, §§ 1, 2, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2012-491, §§ 1, 2, 9-25-12; Ord. No. 2016-602, § 2, 10-11-16)  
Sec. 4-117. - 2015 International Plumbing Code additional requirements and amendments. 
(1)  Table of Contents, Chapter 7, Section 714 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 714 Engineered Drainage Design.....69 
(2)  Section 102.8 is amended to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 13 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered as part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where the differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall be the minimum requirements. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the National Electrical Code (NEC) shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
(3)  Section 106.6.2 is amended to read as follows: 
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be as adopted by resolution of the governing body of the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Section 106.6.3 is amended to read as follows: 
106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall establish a policy for authorizing the refunding of fees. 
(5)  Section 109 is changed to read as follows: 
Section 109 
Means of appeal. 
109.1 Application for appeal. Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to the board of appeals established by ordinance. The board shall be governed by the enabling ordinance. 
(6)  Section 109.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
109.1.1 Fee. An application fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) is required for hearing of appeal. 
(7)  Section 305.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade. 
(8)  Section 305.7 is amended to read as follows: 
305.7 Protection of components of plumbing system. Components of a plumbing system installed within 3 feet along alleyways, driveways, parking garages or other locations in a manner in which they could be exposed to damage shall be recessed into the wall or otherwise protected in an approved manner. 
(9)  Section 314.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
[M] 314.2.1 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils and evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to an approved place of disposal. Such piping shall maintain a minimum horizontal slope in the direction of discharge of not less than one-eighth unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (1-percent slope). Condensate shall not discharge into a street, alley, sidewalk, rooftop, or other areas so as to cause a nuisance. 
(10)  Section 401.1 is amended to read as follows: 
401.1 Scope. This chapter shall govern the materials, design and installation of plumbing fixtures, faucets and fixture fittings in accordance with the type of occupancy, and shall provide for the minimum number of fixtures for various types of occupancies. The provisions of this Chapter are meant to work in coordination with the provisions of the Building Code. Should any conflicts arise between the two chapters, the Code Official shall determine which provision applies. 
(11)  Table 403.1 footnote f is added as follows: 
Table 403.1 footnote f. Drinking fountains are not required in M Occupancies with an occupant load of 100 or less, B Occupancies with an occupant load of 25 or less, and for dining and/or drinking establishments. 
(12)  Section 403.1.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
403.1.1.1 Additional fixtures for food preparation facilities. In addition to the fixtures required in this Chapter, all food service facilities shall be provided with additional fixtures set out in this section. 
403.1.1.2 Hand washing lavatory. At least one hand washing lavatory shall be provided for use by employees that is accessible from food preparation, food dispensing and ware washing areas. Additional hand washing lavatories may be required based on convenience of use by employees. 
403.1.1.3 Service sink. In new or remodeled food service establishments, at least one service sink or mop sink shall be provided so that it is conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tools and for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste. The location of the service sink(s) and/or mop sink(s) shall be approved by the health department. 
(13)  Section 409.2 is amended to read as follows: 
409.2 Water connection. The water supply to a commercial dishwashing machine shall be protected against backflow by an air gap that is integral with the machine or a backflow preventer in accordance with Section 608. Air gaps shall comply with ASME A112.1.2 or A112.1.3. 
(14)  Section 412.4 is amended to read as follows: 
412.4 Required location for floor drains. Floor drains shall be installed in the following areas. 
1.  In public coin-operated laundries and in the central washing facilities of multiple family dwellings, the rooms containing automatic clothes washers shall be provided with floor drains located to readily drain the entire floor area. Such drains shall have a minimum outlet of not less than 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter. 
2.  Commercial kitchens. In lieu of floor drains in commercial kitchens, the code official may accept floor sinks. 
3.  In restrooms located within a restaurant or eating establishment. 
(15)  Section 419.3 is amended to read as follows: 
419.3 Surrounding material. Wall and floor space to a point 2 feet (610 mm) in front of a urinal lip and 4 feet (1219 mm) above the floor and at least 2 feet (610 mm) to each side of the urinal shall be waterproofed with a smooth, readily cleanable, hard, nonabsorbent material. 
(16)  Section 501.9 is added to read as follows: 
501.9 Prohibited locations. Storage type water heater shall not be located in an attic space. Fuel fired water heaters shall not be accessed through a sleeping area. 
(17)  Section 502.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
502.1.1 Elevation and protection. Water heaters shall be elevated not less than 18 (457 mm) inches above the floor in public garages, private garages, repair garages, motor fuel dispensing facilities and parking garages. For the purpose of this section, rooms or spaces that are not part of the living space of a dwelling unit and that communicate directly with a private garage through openings shall be considered to be part of the private garage. 
(18)  Section 502.3 is amended to read as follows: 
502.3 Tank-less water heaters installed in attics. Attics containing a tank-less water heater shall be provided with an opening and unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the tank-less water heater. The passageway shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide and not more than 20 feet (6096 mm) in length when measured along the centerline of the passageway from the opening to the tank-less water heater. The passageway shall have continuous solid flooring not less than 24 inches (610 mm) wide. A level service space at least 30 inches (762 mm) deep and 30 inches (762 mm) wide shall be present at the front or service side of the water heater. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the water heater. As a minimum access to the attic space shall be provide by one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair rated for 300 lb. minimum. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
(19)  Section 502.3.1 is added to read as follows: 
502.3.1 Electrical requirements. A luminaire controlled by a switch located at the required passageway opening and a receptacle outlet shall be provided at or near the water heater location in accordance with the National Electrical Code. Low voltage wiring of 50 volts or less shall be installed in a manner to prevent physical damage. 
(20)  Section 502.6 is added to read as follows: 
502.6. Water heaters above ground or floor. When the roof or mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
Exception: A max 10 gallon water heater (or larger with approval) is capable of being accessed through a lay-in ceiling and a water heater is installed is not more than ten (10) feet (3048 mm) above the ground or floor level and may be reached with a portable ladder. 
(21)  Section 504.6 is amended to read as follows: 
504.6 Requirements for discharge piping. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall: 
1.  Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
2.  Discharge through an air gap. 
3.  Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
4.  Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T&P discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufacturer's installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
5.  Discharge to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors. 
6.  Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage. 
7.  Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants. 
8.  Not be trapped. 
9.  Be installed so as to flow by gravity. 
10.  Not terminate more than 6 inches (152 mm) above and not less than two times the discharge pipe diameter above the floor or flood level rim of the waste receptor. 
11.  Not have a threaded connection at the end of such piping. 
12.  Not have valves or tee fittings. 
13.  Be constructed of those materials listed in Section 605.4 or materials tested, rated and approved for such use in accordance with ASME A112.4.1. 
(22)  Section 504.7.1 is amended to read as follows: 
504.7.1 Pan size and drain. The pan shall be not less than 1 ½ inches (38 mm) in depth and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping or condensation from the tank or water heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than ¾ inch (19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials listed in Table 605.4. Multiple pan drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approved by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufacturer's installation instructions and installed with those instructions. 
(23)  Section 604.4.1 is added to read as follows: 
604.4.1 State maximum flow rate. Where the State mandated maximum flow rate is more restrictive than those of this section, the State flow rate shall take precedence. 
(24)  Section 606.1 is amended to read as follows: 
606.1 Location of full-open valves. Full-open valves shall be installed in the following locations: 
1.  On the building water service pipe from the public water supply near the curb. 
2.  On the water distribution supply pipe at the entrance into the structure or on the discharge side of every water meter. 
3.  On the entrance to every water supply pipe to a dwelling unit, except where supplying a single fixture equipped with individual stops. 
4.  On the water supply pipe to a gravity or pressurized water tank. 
5.  On the water supply pipe to every water heater. 
(25)  Section 608.1 is amended to read as follows: 
608.1 General. A potable water supply system shall be designed, installed and maintained in such a manner so as to prevent contamination from non-potable liquids, solids or gases being introduced into the potable water supply through cross-connections or any other piping connections to the system. Backflow preventer applications shall conform to applicable local regulations, Table 608.1, and as specifically stated in Sections 608.2 through 608.16.10. 
(26)  Section 608.16.5 is amended to read as follows: 
608.16.5 Connections to lawn Irrigation Systems. The potable water supply system to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure type vacuum breaker, a double-check assembly or a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer. 
(27)  Section 608.17 is amended to read as follows: 
608.17 Protection of individual water supplies. An individual water supply shall be located and constructed so as to be safeguarded against contamination in accordance with applicable local regulations. Installation shall be in accordance with Sections 608.17.1 through 608.17.8. 
(28)  Section 610.1 is amended to read as follows: 
610.1 General. New or repaired potable water systems shall be purged of deleterious matter and disinfected prior to utilization. The method to be followed shall be that prescribed by the health authority or water purveyor having jurisdiction or, in the absence of a prescribed method, the procedure described in either AWWA C651 or AWWA C652, or as described in this section. This requirement shall apply to "on-site" or "in plant" fabrication of a system or to a modular portion of a system. 
1.  The pipe system shall be flushed with clean, potable water until dirty water does not appear at the points of outlet. 
2.  The system or part thereof shall be filled with a water/chlorine solution containing at least 50 parts per million (50 mg/L) of chlorine, and the system or part thereof shall be valved off and allowed to stand for 24 hours; or the system or part thereof shall be filled with a water/chlorine solution containing at least 200 parts per million (200 mg/L) of chlorine and allowed to stand for 3 hours. 
3.  Following the required standing time, the system shall be flushed with clean potable water until the chlorine is purged from the system. 
4.  The procedure shall be repeated where shown by a bacteriological examination that contamination remains present in the system. 
Exception: With prior approval the Code Official may waive this requirement when deemed unnecessary. 
(29)  Section 703.6 is deleted. 
(30)  Section 705.11.2 is amended to read as follows: 
705.11.2 Solvent cementing. Joint surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. A purple primer that conforms to ASTM F 656 shall be applied. Solvent cement not purple in color and conforming to ASTM D 2564, CSA B137.3, CSA B181.2 or CSA B182.1 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. The joint shall be made while the cement is wet and shall be in accordance with ASTM D 2855. Solvent cement joints shall be permitted above or below ground. 
(31)  Section 712.5 is added to read as follows: 
712.5 Dual Pump System. All sumps shall be automatically discharged and, when in any "public use" occupancy where the sump serves more than 10 fixture units, shall be provided with dual pumps or ejectors arranged to function independently in case of overload or mechanical failure. For storm drainage sumps and pumping systems, see Section 1113. 
(32)  Section 714 and 714.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 714 Engineered Drainage Design. 
714.1 Design of drainage system. The sizing, design and layout of the drainage system shall be designed by registered professional engineer using approved design methods. 
(33)  Section 804.2 is added to read as follows: 
804.2 Special waste pipe, fittings, and components. Pipes, fittings, and components receiving or intended to receive the discharge of any fixture into which acid or corrosive chemicals are placed shall be constructed of CPVC, high silicone iron, PP, PVDF, chemical resistant glass, or glazed ceramic materials. 
(34)  Section 903.1 is amended to read as follows: 
903.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least six (6) inches (152 mm) above the roof and/or vent flashing, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions shall be run at least 7 feet (2134 mm) above the roof. 
(35)  Section 916.4 is added to read as follows: 
916.4 Island fixture drain piping. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment shall be roughed in above the floor and may be vented by extending the vent as high as possible, but not less than the drain board height and then returning it downward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immediately downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The return vent shall be connected to the horizontal drain through a wye-branch fitting and shall, in addition, be provided with a foot vent taken off the vertical fixture vent by means of a wye-branch immediately below the floor and extending to the nearest partition and then through the roof to the open air or may be connected to other vents at a point not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the fixtures served. Drainage fittings shall be used on all parts of the vent below the floor level a minimum slope of one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) back to the drain shall be maintained. The return bend used under the drain board shall be a one (1) piece fitting or an assembly of a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius), a ninety (90) degree (1.6 radius) and a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius) elbow in the order named. Pipe sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this Code. The island sink drain, upstream of the return vent, shall serve no other fixtures. An accessible cleanout shall be installed in the vertical portion of the foot vent. 
(36)  Section 917 is deleted. 
(37)  Section 1002.4 is amended to read as follows: 
1002.4 Trap seals. Each fixture trap shall have a liquid seal of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) and not more than 4 inches (102 mm), or deeper for special designs relating to accessible fixtures. Where a trap seal is subject to loss by evaporation, a trap guard shall be installed. Trap seals shall connect to the trap at a point above the level of the trap weir. All hub drains, floor sinks, and floor drains shall have a trap guard installed. 
(38)  Section 1002.4.1, 1002.4.1.1 thru 1002.4.1.4 is deleted. 
(39)  Section 1002.10 is deleted. 
(40)  Section 1003.2 is amended to read as follows: 
1003.2 Approval. All grease interceptors shall be permanently marked with the manufacturer's name and the maximum grease retention capacity in gallons and flow rate in gallons per minute. The size, type and location of each interceptor and of separator shall be designed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and the requirements of this section based on the anticipated conditions of the use. Wastes that do not require treatment or separation shall not be discharged into any interceptor or separator. All grease interceptors shall be located exterior of the establishment, unless approved by the Building Official. 
(41)  Section 1003.2.1 is added to read as follows: 
1003.2.1 Sizing considerations. Fixture drainage period and the quantity of waste water involved establishes the rate of flow through the grease interceptor. Flow rate is the primary gauge when establishing interceptor size and capacity. All interceptors shall be sized in accordance with Table 1003.3.4.1. 
(42)  Section 1003.2.2 is added to read as follows: 
1003.2.2 Interceptor maintenance. The maintenance of all interceptors shall meet all manufacturer's requirements and the requirements of the jurisdiction having authority. 
(43)  Section 1003.3 is amended to read as follows: 
1003.3 Grease interceptors. Grease interceptors shall comply with the following requirements. 
(44)  Section 1003.3.1 is amended to read as follows: 
1003.3.1 Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices required. A grease interceptor or automatic grease removal device shall be required to receive the drainage from fixtures and equipment with grease-laden waste located in food preparation areas, such as but not limited to restaurants, hotel kitchens, hospitals, school kitchens, bars, factory cafeterias and clubs. Fixtures and equipment shall include pot sinks, pre-rinse sinks, soup kettles, or similar devices, wok stations, floor drains used to drain wash down areas in the kitchen, floor sinks, automatic hood wash units and dishwashers. 
(45)  Section 1003.3.2 is amended to read as follows: 
1003.3.2 Food waste grinders. Where food waste grinders connect to grease interceptors, a solid interceptor shall separate the discharge before connection to the grease interceptor. Solids interceptors shall be located not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet in developed length of piping from the entrance of the solid interceptor. Solid interceptors and grease interceptors shall be sized and rated for the discharge of the food waste grinder. Emulsifiers, chemicals, enzymes and bacteria shall not discharge into the food waste grinder. 
(46)  Section 1003.3.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
1003.3.4.1 Grease interceptor capacity. Grease interceptors shall be sized in accordance with Table 1003.3.4.1. A minimum 100 lb. capacity trap is required for non-grease producing establishments that manufacture dough-like material, such as pizza parlors and no-fry bakeries. 
(47)  Section 1003.3.4.2 is amended to read as follows: 
1003.3.4.2 Rate of flow controls. Grease interceptors shall be equipped with devices to control the rate of water flow so that the water flow does not exceed the grease interceptor's rated flow capacity. The flow control fitting shall be installed prior to the grease interceptor in the waste line beyond the last connection from the fixture and as close as possible to the underside of lowest fixture. When waste of two or more sinks or fixtures are combined to be served by one interceptor, a single flow control fitting should be used. If the drain line drops ten (10) feet or more to the interceptor an additional flow control may be needed due to built up head pressures. The flow control device shall be vented and terminate not less than 6 inches (152 mm)above the flood rim level, terminate in a return bend at the same height and on the outside of the building, or be re-vented into the vent system of the building per local plumbing codes. 
(48)  Section 1003.3.4.3 is added to read as follows: 
1003.3.4.3 Venting grease interceptor. Grease interceptors shall have a vented waste on the inlet and outlet sides of the interceptor sized in accordance with the code requirements for venting traps. 
(49)  Section 1003.3.4.4 is added to read as follows: 
1003.3.4.4 Cleanouts. All grease interceptors shall be installed with a double cleanouts on each side of the interceptor. The cleanout shall be sized equal to the drain pipe entering the interceptor. 
(50)  Section 1003.3.4.5 is added to read as follows: 
1003.3.4.5 Test port. All grease interceptors shall be installed with a test port on the outlet side of the interceptor within thirty-six (36) inches past the double cleanout on the outlet side. 
(51)  Table 1003.4.1 is amended as follows: 
Table 1003.3.4.1 
Grease Interceptor Sizing 
DFU's a 	Pipe Size 	Slope 	Flow (gpm) 	Cal. Size 	Nominal 
8 	2" 	2% 	10 gpm 	300 gal 	500 gal 
35 	3" 	2% 	29 gpm 	870 gal 	1000 gal 
172 	4" 	1% 	44 gpm 	1320 gal 	1500 gal 
216 	4" 	2% 	62 gpm 	1860 gal 	2000 gal 
342 	5" 	1% 	80 gpm 	2400 gal 	3000 gal 
428 	5" 	2% 	120 gpm 	3600 gal 	4000 gal 
576 	6" 	1% 	140 gpm 	4200 gal 	5000 gal 
720 	6" 	2% 	190 gpm 	5700 gal 	7500 gal 
 
a.  Drainage fixture units shall be based on Table 709.1 
(52)  Diagram 1003.1 is added as follows: 
Diagram 1003.1 Required style of grease interceptor. All concrete grease interceptors shall be constructed to meet the design of Diagram 1003.1(1) and Diagram 1003.1(2). 
 
Diagram 1003.1(1)
 
Diagram 1003.1(2)
(53)  Section 1101.8 is amended to read as follows: 
1101.8 Cleanouts required. Cleanouts or manholes shall be installed in the storm drainage system and shall comply with the provisions of this code for sanitary drainage pipe cleanouts. 
(54)  Section 1106.1 is amended to read as follows: 
1106.1 General. The size of the vertical conductors and leaders, building storm drains, building storm sewers, and any horizontal branches of such drains or sewers shall be based on six (6) inches per hour rain fall rate. 
(55)  Section 1108.3 is amended to read as follows: 
1108.3 Sizing of secondary drains. Secondary (emergency) roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance with Section 1106. Scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of ponding water from exceeding that for which the roof was designed as determined by Section 1101.7. Scuppers shall not have an opening dimension of less than 4 inches (102 mm). The flow through the primary system shall not be considered when sizing the secondary roof drain system. 
(56)  Section 1109 is deleted. 
(57)  Section [F] 1202.1 is amended to read as follows: 
[F] 1202.1 Nonflammable medical gases. Nonflammable medical gas systems, inhalation anesthetic systems and vacuum piping systems shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 99 most current edition. 
Exceptions: This section shall not apply to portable systems or cylinder storage. 
(Code 1976, § 4-72.2; Ord. No. 79-539, § 2, 12-11-79; Ord. No. 85-830, § 1, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 89-1014, § 1, 2-28-89; Ord. No. 92-110, § 1, 2-25-92; Ord. No. 2003-168, §§ 1, 3, 9-9-03; Ord. No. 2006-288, §§ 1, 2, 4-11-06; Ord. No. 2009-385, §§ 1, 2, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2012-491, §§ 1, 2, 9-25-12; Ord. No. 2016-602, § 2, 10-11-16)  
Sec. 4-118. - Enforcement of penalty. 
Any person, firm partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas such violation shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00, and each and every instance of the violation of this section constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Code 1976, § 4-72.8; Ord. No. 80-579, § 6, 11-11-80; Ord. No. 89-1014, § 2, 2-28-89; Ord. No. 2009-385, § 4, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2016-602, § 2, 10-11-16)  
Sec. 4-119. - Registration of plumbers. 
(a)  The master plumber shall be required to maintain a registration with the city before performing any type of plumbing work. Each contractor shall furnish the inspection department with a written notice of the contractor's permanent business and residential address, telephone number, and proof of current state license. 
(b)  Every master plumber, plumbing contractor, or other person authorized and licensed to perform plumbing services in the State of Texas must obtain a permit from the City of Cedar Hill before engaging in or performing any plumbing services in the City of Cedar Hill, other than the repairing of leaks, the replacement of lavatory or kitchen faucets, the replacement of ballcocks or water control valves, the replacement of garbage disposals, or the replacement of water closets. 
(c)  A master plumber, plumbing contractor, or other person required to obtain a permit under this section may apply for a permit by telephone, fax or e-mail to the City of Cedar Hill's Building Inspector. 
(d)  Every master plumber, plumbing contractor, or other person required to obtain a permit under this section must have a certificate of insurance on file with the Texas Board of Plumbing Examiners in accordance with V.T.C.A. Occupations Code, § 1301.552. 
(Ord. No. 2014-534, §§ 1, 2, 2-11-14)  
Sec. 4-120. - Registration of licensed irrigators. 
(a)  Registration required. The licensed irrigator shall be required to maintain a registration with the city before performing any type of irrigation work. Each contractor shall furnish the inspection department with a written notice of contractor's permanent business and residential address, telephone numbers, and proof of current state license. 
(b)  Registration fee. A business registration fee shall be paid in addition to the other provision provided herein. The fee for establishing registration data shall be as established by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 91-061, § 1, 2-14-91)  
ARTICLE VIII. - MINIMUM HOUSING CODE[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-263, §§ 1—42, adopted October 11, 2005, repealed the former Art. VIII, §§ 4-136—4-138, and enacted a new Art. VIII as set out herein. The former Art. VIII pertained to dangerous buildings code; housing code and derived from Ord. No. 90-044, §§ 2, 3, 5, 11-13-90. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-121. - Adoption of the Minimum Housing Code. 
The Minimum Housing Code is hereby adopted and incorporated in its entirety as though fully set out at length herein, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and the provisions of such code shall be controlling in matters of housing and the inspections thereof within the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 2, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-122. - Title, purpose, scope. 
(a)  Title. This article shall be known as the "Minimum Housing Code" of the City of Cedar Hill and shall be referred to herein as "this Code." 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this Code is to provide minimum standards and regulations to help safeguard and preserve life or limb, property and public welfare by regulating the use, occupancy, and maintenance of all residential structures, buildings and properties within the city. 
(c)  Scope. This Code shall apply to all buildings or portions of buildings used, or designed or intended to be used, for human habitation. Buildings in existence and occupied at the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived may continue to be occupied if such occupancy was legal on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived, provided such continued use is not dangerous to life, and except such structures as are found to be substandard as defined in this article. 
Every roominghouse or lodginghouse shall comply with all the requirements of this article for dwellings. 
(d)  Other ordinances. If any other ordinances of the city conflict with this Code and the standards and regulations established herein, the higher or stricter standard or regulation shall prevail. 
(e)  Purpose and intent. It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of this Code to regulate and control public nuisances and other conditions and circumstances, as herein set forth, that adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the general public. It is not intended that this Code be interpreted or enforced to require the city to intervene in matters which are primarily personal or private in nature and which may appropriately be resolved between or among private interests without material danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 3, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-123. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. For the purpose of this article, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be construed as specified in the building code of the city. 
Building code means the Building Codes as adopted by the City of Cedar Hill. 
Efficiency living unit means any room having cooking facilities used for combined living, dining and sleeping purposes and meeting the requirements of section 4-128. 
Hot water means water at a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit. 
Nuisance means as follows: 
(1)  A public nuisance known and established at common law or in equity jurisprudence. 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence, including without limitation, any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations, inoperable motor vehicles, or any structurally unsound fences or structures, or any lumber, trash, fence, debris or vegetation which are or may be hazardous to children. 
(3)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, and is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city. 
(4)  Overcrowding a room with occupants, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city. 
(5)  Insufficient ventilation or illumination, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city. 
(6)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city. 
(7)  Uncleanliness, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city. 
(8)  Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, and is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare in violation of the codes and ordinance of the city. 
Occupied space means the total area of all buildings or structures on any lot or parcel of ground project on a horizontal plane, excluding permitted projections as allowed by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 4, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-124. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  Authority. The building official or his authorized representative is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the building official or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building, or upon any premises, any condition which makes such building or premises substandard, the building official or his authorized representative may enter such building premises at all reasonable times to inspect such building or premises or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this article; provided, however, that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and demand entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the building official or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. No owner or occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper demand is made as provided in this subsection, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official or his authorized representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Compliance and responsibilities. Each owner, manager, and occupant of each structure and premises within the city shall comply with the applicable provisions of this article. The standards established in this article shall be the minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all structures and premises regardless of when they were constructed. Any structure or premise that is in violation of these standards is hereby declared to be in violation of this article and may be ordered to be one (1) or more of the following: vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished. Every owner and manager remains liable for violations of duties imposed upon them by this article even though an obligation is also imposed on the occupants of the building, and even though the owner or manager has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of furnishing required equipment or of complying with this article. Every owner, manager, or their agent, in addition to being responsible for maintaining a building in a sound structural condition, shall be responsible for keeping that part of the building or premises which they occupy or control in a clean, sanitary and safe condition, including the shared or public areas in a building containing two (2) or more dwelling units. Every owner and manager shall, where required by this article, a health ordinance and/or other codes and ordinances, furnish and maintain such approved sanitary facilities as required, and shall furnish and maintain approved devices, sanitary facilities as required, and shall furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities for the prevention of insect and rodent infestation. Where infestation has taken place, the owner and manager shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests when such extermination is not specifically made the responsibility of the occupant by law or ruling. Every occupant of a dwelling unit, in addition to being responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling or dwelling unit or premises which he occupies and controls, shall dispose of all their rubbish, garbage and other organic waste in a manner required by the health ordinance and other ordinances of the city. Every occupant shall, where required by this article, a health ordinance and other ordinances of the city, furnish and maintain approved devices, equipment or facilities necessary to keep their premises safe and sanitary. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 5, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 2016-588, § 1, 8-9-16)  
Sec. 4-125. - Substandard buildings declared public nuisances. 
All buildings or portions of buildings which are determined to be substandard are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 6, 10-11-05)  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 4-126. - Required. 
No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or structure, or cause or permit such work to be done, without first obtaining a separate building permit for each such building or structure from the building official in the manner and according to the applicable conditions prescribed in the building code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 7, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-127. - Fee. 
Whenever a building permit is required, the appropriate fees shall be paid to the building official as specified in the building code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 8, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-128. - Inspection. 
All buildings or structures within the scope of this article and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the city in accordance with and in the manner provided by this Code and the building code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 9, 10-11-05)  
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 4-129. - Space and occupancy standards—Locations on property. 
Access to public property. All buildings shall be located with respect to property lines and to other buildings on the same property as required by the building code. Each dwelling unit and each guestroom in a dwelling or a lodginghouse shall have access to a passageway, not less than three feet in width, leading to a public street or alley. Each apartment house or hotel shall have access to a public street by means of a passageway not less than four (4) feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 10, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-130. - Same—Room dimensions. 
(a)  Ceiling heights. Habitable rooms, hallways, corridors, bathrooms, toilet rooms and laundry rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet. If any room in a building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half (½) the area thereof. No portion of the room measuring less than five (5) feet from the finished floor to the finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area thereof. If any room has a furred ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height is required in two-thirds ( 2/3 ) the area thereof, but in no case shall the height of the furred ceiling be less than seven (7) feet. 
(b)  Floor area. Every dwelling unit shall be not less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet and shall include a kitchen, bathroom and at least one (1) habitable room, other than rooms used for sleeping purposes. Other habitable rooms, except kitchens and bathrooms, shall have an area of not less than seventy (70) square feet. 
Exception: Nothing in this section shall prohibit the use of an efficiency living unit within an apartment house meeting the following requirements: 
(1)  The unit shall have a living room of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet of superficial floor area. An additional one hundred (100) square feet of superficial floor area shall be provided for each occupant in such unit in excess of two (2). 
(2)  The unit shall be provided with a separate closet. 
(3)  The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities each having a clear working space of not less than thirty (30) inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this Code shall be provided. 
(4)  The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory, and bathtub or shower. 
(c)  Sleeping room area. Every room designed and/or used as a room for sleeping purposes shall have a minimum area of not less than seventy (70) square feet. Where more than one (1) person over the age of twelve (12) years occupies a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be increased at the rate of fifty (50) square feet for each occupant in excess of one (1). Not more than two (2) persons over the age of twelve (12) years may occupy a room used for sleeping purposes. 
Exception: 
(1)  Two (2) children, age twelve (12) or under, may occupy a room used for sleeping purposes with a minimum area of seventy (70) square feet. Where more than two (2) children, age twelve (12) or under, occupy a room used for sleeping purposes, the required floor area shall be increased at a rate of thirty-five (35) square feet for each child in excess of two (2). Not more than four (4) children, age twelve (12) or under, may occupy a room used for sleeping purposes. 
(2)  Up to two (2) children under the age of one (1) year may share occupancy of a sleeping room with one or two (2) persons without additional sleeping room area being provided. 
(d)  Width. No habitable room shall be less than seven (7) feet in any dimension and no water closet space less than thirty (30) inches in width and shall provide a clear space in front of the toilet stool not less than twenty-four (24) inches. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 3, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-131. - Same—Light and ventilation. 
(a)  Natural light and ventilation. All guestrooms, dormitories and habitable rooms within a dwelling unit shall be provided with natural light by means of windows or skylights with an area of not less than one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of ten (10) square feet. All bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of windows or skylights with an area of not less than one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of the floor area of such rooms with a minimum of three (3) square feet. Not less than one-half (½) of the required window or skylight area shall be openable to provide natural ventilation. 
Exception: The glazed areas shall not be required where artificial light and a mechanical ventilation system are provided. The minimum ventilation rates shall be fifty (50) cfm for intermittent ventilation or twenty (20) cfm for continuous ventilation. Ventilation air from the space shall be exhausted directly to the outside. 
(b)  Origin of light and ventilation. Required windows shall open directly onto a street or public alley or a yard or court located on the same lot as the building. 
Exception: Required windows may open into a roofed porch where the porch: 
(1)  Abuts a street, yard, or court; 
(2)  Has a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet; and 
(3)  Has the long side at least sixty-five (65) percent open and obstructed. 
A required window in a service room may open into a vent shaft which is open and unobstructed to the sky and not less than four (4) feet in its least dimension. No vent shaft shall extend through more than two (2) stories. For the purpose of determining light and ventilation requirements, any room may be considered as a portion of an adjoining room when one-half (½) of the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of not less than one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of the floor area of the interior room or twenty-five (25) square feet, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Hallways. All public hallways, stairs and other exitways shall be adequately lighted at all times in accordance with the requirement of the building code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 12, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-132. - Same—Sanitation. 
(a)  Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a water closet, a lavatory and a bathtub or shower. 
(b)  Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, there shall be provided on each floor for each sex at least one (1) water closet and lavatory and one (1) bath accessible from a public hallway. Additional water closets, lavatories, and baths shall be provided on each floor for each sex at the rate of one (1) for every additional ten (10) guests, or fractional number thereof in excess of ten (10). Such facilities shall be clearly marked for "men" or "women." 
(c)  Kitchen. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen. Every kitchen shall be provided with a kitchen sink. No wooden sink or sink of similarly absorbent material shall be permitted. 
(d)  Fixtures. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or to an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and cold running water, except water closets shall be provided with cold water only. All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved glazed earthenware type or similarly nonabsorbent material. 
(e)  Water closet compartments. Walls and floors of water closet compartments, except in dwellings, shall be finished in accordance with the requirements of the building code. Water closet compartments in dwellings shall be finished with approved nonabsorbent materials. 
(f)  Room separations. Every water closet, bathtub or shower required by this article shall be installed in a room which will afford privacy to the occupant. A room in which a water closet is located shall be separated from food preparations or storage rooms by a tightfitting door. 
(g)  Installation and maintenance. All sanitary facilities shall be installed and maintained in safe and sanitary condition and in accordance with all applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 13, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-133. - Structural requirements. 
(a)  Generally. Buildings or structures may be of any type of construction permitted by the building code. Roofs, floors, walls, foundations and all other structural components of buildings shall be capable of resisting any and all forces and loads to which they may be subjected. All structural elements shall be proportioned and joined in accordance with the stress limitations and design criteria as specified in the appropriate sections of the building code. Buildings of every permitted type of construction shall comply with the applicable requirements of the building code. 
(b)  Shelter. Every building shall be weather protected so as to provide shelter for the occupants against the elements and to exclude dampness. 
(c)  Protection of materials. All wood shall be protected against termite damage and decay as provided in the building code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 14, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-134. - Mechanical requirements; heating and ventilation. 
(a)  Heating. Every dwelling unit and guestroom shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit at a point three (3) feet above the floor in all habitable rooms. Such facilities shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with the requirements of the building code, mechanical code and all other applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  Electrical equipment. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type. Where there is electrical power available within three hundred (300) feet of the premises of any building, such building shall be connected to such electrical power. Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) supplied electric light fixtures. Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public hallway shall contain at least one supplied electric light fixture. 
(c)  Ventilation. Ventilation for rooms and areas and for fuel-burning appliances shall be provided as required in the mechanical code and in this article and other codes and ordinances of the city. Where mechanical ventilation is provided in lieu of the natural ventilation required by this article, such mechanical ventilating system shall be maintained in operation during the occupancy of any building or portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 15, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-135. - Exits. 
(a)  Every dwelling unit or guestroom shall have access directly to the outside or to a public corridor. All buildings or portions thereof shall be provided with exits, exitways and appurtenances, as required by the building code. 
(b)  Every sleeping room below the fourth floor shall have at least one (1) window or exterior door approved for emergency exit or rescue. Where windows are provided, they shall have a sill height not more than forty-four (44) inches above the floor. 
(c)  Windows with a net clear openable area of not less than five and seven-tenths (5.7) square feet with no dimension less than twenty (20) inches shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this section, provided the sill heights are not over forty-four (44) inches above the floor. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 16, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-136. - Fire protection. 
All buildings or portions of buildings shall be provided with the degree of fire-resistive construction as required by the building code, for the appropriate occupancy, type of construction and location on property; and shall be provided with the appropriate fire extinguishing systems or equipment required by the building code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 17, 10-11-05)  
DIVISION 4. - SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS  
Subdivision I. - General 
 
Sec. 4-137. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Substandard building means any building or portion of a building, including any dwelling unit, guestroom or suite of rooms, or the premises on which such structures are located, in which there exists any of the conditions listed in this division to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the public, or the occupants of such building, shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a substandard building. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 18, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-138. - Inadequate sanitation. 
Inadequate sanitation shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Lack of or improper water closet, lavatory, bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit. 
(2)  Lack of or improper water closets, lavatories and bathtubs or showers per number of guests in a hotel. 
(3)  Lack of or improper kitchen sink. 
(4)  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel. 
(5)  Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling unit. 
(6)  Lack of adequate heating facilities. 
(7)  Lack of or improper operation of required ventilating equipment. 
(8)  Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by this article. 
(9)  Room and space dimensions less than required by this article. 
(10)  Lack of required electrical lighting. 
(11)  Dampness of habitable rooms. 
(12)  Infestation of insects, vermin or rodents, as determined by the health officer or building official. 
(13)  General dilapidation or improper maintenance. 
(14)  Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system. 
(15)  Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal facilities as determined by the health officer or building official. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 19, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-139. - Penalty for violation of division. 
Any owner, manager or occupant of a building or structure violating any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine, upon conviction, as provided in section 4-160.2. Each and every day that the prohibited condition remains and restoration, if required, is not accomplished, it shall constitute a separate offense. These fines shall be in addition to and accumulative of the provisions for the abatement of the nuisance by tearing down and removal and restoration, if required by this article, as well as all other costs provided for by this division. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 20, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 2016-588, § 1, 8-9-16)  
Sec. 4-140. - Structural hazards. 
Structural hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations. 
(2)  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports. 
(3)  Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(4)  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
(5)  Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(6)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or deterioration. 
(7)  Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(8)  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle, due to defective material or deterioration. 
(9)  Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to carry imposed loads with safety. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 21, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-141. - Hazardous conditions. 
The following conditions are declared to be hazardous: 
(1)  Nuisance. Any nuisance as defined in this article. 
(2)  Hazardous wiring. All wiring, except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation, and which has been maintained in good condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
(3)  Hazardous plumbing. All plumbing, except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good condition and is being used in a safe manner. 
(4)  Hazardous mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment, including vents, except that which conformed with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been maintained in good and safe condition. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 22, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-142. - Faulty weather protection. 
Faulty weather protection shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster. 
(2)  Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors. 
(3)  Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved protective covering. 
(4)  Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof coverings. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 23, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-143. - Fire hazard. 
Fire hazards exist in any building or portion of a building, device, apparatus, equipment, combustible waste or vegetation which, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department, or his authorized representative, is in such a condition as to cause a fire or explosion, or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire or explosion arising from any cause. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 24, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-144. - Faulty materials of construction. 
Faulty materials of construction shall be all materials of construction, except those which are specifically allowed or approved by this article and the building code and which have been adequately maintained in good and safe condition. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 25, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-145. - Inadequate maintenance. 
Any building or portion of a building which is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with the building code is inadequately maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 26, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-146. - Inadequate exits. 
Inadequate exits exist in all buildings or portions of buildings not provided with adequate exit facilities as required by this article, except those buildings or portions of buildings whose exit facilities conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction, and which have been adequately maintained and increased in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration, or addition, or any change in occupancy. When an unsafe condition exists through lack of or improper location of exits, additional exits may be required to installed. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 27, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-147. - Inadequate fire protection or firefighting equipment. 
Inadequate fire protection or firefighting equipment exist in all buildings or portions thereof which are not provided with the fire-resistive construction or fire extinguishing systems or equipment required by this article, except those buildings or portions of buildings which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire-resistive integrity and fire extinguishing systems or equipment have been adequately maintained and improved in relation to any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 28, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-148. - Hazardous or unsanitary premises. 
Hazardous or unsanitary premises exist on those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation, junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborage, stagnant water, combustible materials and similar materials or conditions constitute fire, health or safety hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 29, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-149. - Improper occupancy. 
All buildings or portions of buildings occupied for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies are improperly occupied. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 30, 10-11-05)  
Subdivision II. - Administration 
 
Sec. 4-150. - Notices and orders of the building official—Commencement of proceedings. 
Whenever the building official has inspected or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such building is a substandard building, he shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, rehabilitation, vacation or demolition of the building. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 31, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-151. - Same—Issuance; contents. 
(a)  The building official shall issue a letter notice to any owner, manager or occupant of a premises which, in the determination of the building official, is in violation of any provision of this ordinance. The notice will be delivered to the owner, manager or occupant in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested. The letter notice shall state the address of the premises, the date of inspection and the condition of the premises requiring repair, replacement, removal, rehabilitation, removal or demolition. The notice letter will provide the owner, manager or occupant a reasonable period of time, and at least thirty (30) days, to comply with the building official's requested action to bring the premises into compliance with this article. 
(b)  If the owner, manager or occupant fails or refuses to comply with the requirements of the letter notice under subsection (a) above, the building official shall issue an official notice and order directed to the occupant, if any, and the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall set a public hearing before the building appeals and advisory board for determination as to whether the building complies with this article's standards and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The names of all persons and entities to which notice is sent. 
(2)  The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located. 
(3)  The date of inspection. 
(4)  A statement that the building official has found the building to be substandard with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building substandard under the provisions of this article. 
(5)  A statement of the action recommended to be taken as determined by the building official. 
(6)  A statement that the occupant, owner, manager, lienholder or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work undertaken or to be undertaken to comply with this article and the time it will reasonably take to perform the work. 
(7)  The date, time and place of the public hearing. 
(c)  The notice shall be sent to all record owners, lienholders and mortgagees via certified mail, return receipt requested, and via regular mail. 
(d)  The notice of hearing must be posted pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act. 
(e)  The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city on or before the 10 th day before the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 32, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 2016-588, § 1, 8-9-16)  
Sec. 4-152. - Service and publication. 
(a)  The notice of public hearing and order of any amended or supplemental notice and order shall be served upon the record owner, and posted on the property. One (1) copy shall be served on each of the following, if known to the building official or disclosed from official public records: 
(1)  The holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record. 
(2)  The owner or holder of any lease of record; and 
(3)  The holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on which it is located. 
The failure of the building official to serve any person required in this section to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings under this subdivision as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him by the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Method of service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, to each such person at his address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the city, or as known to the building official. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the building official, then a copy of the notice and order shall be mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the building involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this subdivision. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing. 
(c)  Proof of service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgement of receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the building official. 
(d)  Publication. The notice of the public hearing shall be posted pursuant to the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act. The notice shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation in the city on or before the 10 th day before the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 33, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 2016-588, § 1, 8-9-16)  
Sec. 4-153. - Hearings. 
(a)  The date of a public hearing under this article shall be not less than ten (10) days after notice has been made and published as set forth in section 4-152 above. 
(b)  If a building is found to be in violation of this article, the building appeals and advisory board may order the owner, lienholder or mortgagee of the building to within thirty (30) days to abate the condition found to constitute a nuisance, or to vacate, repair, remove or demolish the building, unless it is proven at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be accomplished in thirty (30) days. 
(c)  If the building appeals and advisory board allows more than thirty (30) days for the condition to be abated or the building to be vacated, repaired, removed or demolished, it shall establish specific time schedules for the work to be commenced and completed. The building appeals and advisory board shall not allow the owner, lienholder to mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to abate the condition or to vacate, repair, remove or demolish the building unless a detailed plan and time schedule for the work are submitted at the hearing and it is proven at the hearing that the work cannot be reasonably completed within ninety (90) days because of the scope and/or complexity of the work. 
(Ord. No. 2016-588, § 1, 8-9-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-588, § 1, adopted August 9, 2016, in effect repealed §§ 4-153—4-157 and enacted new §§ 4-153—4-157 as set out herein. Former §§ 4-153—4-157 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2005-263, adopted October 11, 2005.  
Sec. 4-154. - Recording. 
If compliance is not had with the order of the building appeals and advisory board within the time specified therein, and no appeal has been properly and timely filed, the building official shall file in the office of the county recorder a certificate describing the property and certifying that the building is a substandard building and that the owner has been so notified. Whenever the corrections ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building demolished so that it no longer exists as a substandard building on the property described in the certificate, the building official shall file a new certificate with the county recorder certifying that the building has been demolished, or all required corrections have been made so that the building is no longer substandard, whichever is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2016-588, § 1, 8-9-16)  
Sec. 4-155. - Notice to vacate. 
(a)  Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in section 4-152(a), be posted at or upon each exit of the building, and shall be in substantially the following form: 
DO NOT ENTER 
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this notice. 
Building Official 
City of Cedar Hill 
Sec. 4-155, Cedar Hill Code of Ordinances 
(b)  Compliance. Whenever such notice is posted, the building official shall include a notification in the notice and order issued by him under this subdivision, reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. Any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2016-588, § 1, 8-9-16)  
Sec. 4-156. - Repair, vacation and demolition; standards to be followed. 
The following standards shall be followed in the ordering of the repair, vacation or demolition of any substandard building or structure: 
(1)  If any building declared a substandard building under the ordinance shall either be repaired in accordance with the current building code or shall be demolished at the option of the building owner. 
(2)  If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or of the occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(Ord. No. 2016-588, § 1, 8-9-16)  
Sec. 4-157. - Enforcement of the order of the building appeals & advisory board—Compliance. 
(a)  Generally. After any order of the building appeals and advisory board made pursuant to this article shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Failure to obey order. If, after any order of the building appeals and advisory board made pursuant of this article has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the building official may cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection (a) of this section or institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance. 
(c)  Failure to commence work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within thirty (30) days after any final notice and order issued under this article becomes effective: 
(1)  The building official shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading: 
SUBSTANDARD BUILDING 
DO NOT OCCUPY 
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice. 
Building Official 
City of Cedar Hill 
(2)  No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this subsection. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the building official have been completed and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the building code. 
(3)  The building official may, in addition to any other remedy provided in this section, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building substandard as set forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order required demolition, to cause the building to be demolished, and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the costs paid and recovered in the manner provided in section 4-159. Any surplus realized from the sale of any such building, of from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and of cleaning the lot shall be paid over to the persons lawfully entitled thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2016-588, § 1, 8-9-16)  
Sec. 4-158. - Interference with repair or demolition work. 
No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this article, or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this article, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the city, person having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building pursuant to the provisions of this article, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 39, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 2016-588, § 1, 8-9-16)  
Sec. 4-159. - Recovery of cost of repair or demolition. 
(a)  All costs for the taking down and removal and/or restoring of such substandard building or structures, including costs for mailing of notice, and/or publication, filing of a statement with the county clerk, bid procedures costs, and/or interest shall be levied, assessed and collected against such property upon which such building is located. If there are any obstructions or other difficulties encountered in the taking down and removal and/or restoring, if required by this division, of such building or structure, such additional costs shall be levied, assessed and collected against such property and/or shall also become a personal obligation to the owners of such property upon which such building is located. 
(b)  The cost provided in this section shall be levied, assessed and collected by the city. If any owner of such property shall fail to pay the costs so assessed within thirty (30) days after being notified of such costs, the city shall file, with the county clerk, a statement of such costs. 
(c)  The city shall have a privileged lien on the premises and/or the personal obligation of the owners of such property, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements to receive the costs so made. For any such costs and interest, suit may be instituted and foreclosure had in the name of the city, and the statement, or a certified copy of the statement shall be prima facie proof of the costs expended in such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 40, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-160. - Waiver of cost. 
The owner of such property may appeal to city council for a waiver of all or part of the cost incurred by the city in the taking down and removal or restoration of a substandard building. The city council may waive any or all costs when sufficient evidence is submitted by an owner showing that payment of such costs would create a hardship. All appeals to the city council for waiver of costs or assessments shall be made in writing on forms provided by the building official, and the hearing shall be held only after publication of the hearing in the official newspaper of the city. The publication shall appear in the official newspaper a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 41, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 4-160.1. - Appeals. 
(a)  The owner, lienholder or mortgagee or the city administration may appeal any decision or order of the building appeals and advisory board to state district court within thirty (30) days from the date the order is mailed to the owner, lienholder or mortgagee. 
(b)  Enforcement of any notice and order of the building appeals and advisory board issued under this article shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 42, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 2016-588, § 1, 8-9-16)  
Sec. 4-160.2. - Enforcement and penalty clause. 
(a)  A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). However, a fine for the violation of a provision of this chapter that governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping or refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(b)  Each day any violation of any provision of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. Each structure or ground which is in violation of any part of this chapter is a separate offense. Each violation in any structure or ground is a separate offense. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall preclude the city's pursuit of any and all other remedies allowed under the civil and criminal statutes, and in equity, to address conditions which are treated in this article, under the theory of public nuisance and abatement of dangerous structures or buildings. Neither shall the city be required, nor prohibited, to issue criminal citations before, after, or during any proceeding prescribed in this article. Specifically, in addition to provisions of this article and remedies afforded under the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 214, Municipal Regulation of Structures, the city further asserts full authority to exercise its right to remedy under all provisions of the Texas Local Government Code, including, but not limited to, chapter 54, subchapter B, Municipal Health and Safety Ordinances, in prosecution of civil suits for enforcement, injunctive relief, and civil penalties to remedy conditions of public concern described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2005-263, § 44, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 2016-588, § 1, 8-9-16)  
ARTICLE IX. - MOVING AND DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Dangerous buildings code; housing code, § 4-136 et seq. 
 
Sec. 4-161. - Mover's license required; bond. 
No person shall move or cause to be moved over or along any street or highway within the city any house or other building unless such person is duly qualified to engage in such occupation and shall obtain a license therefor. Such license shall not be granted until such person applying for same shall first file with the city secretary a good and sufficient bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) payable to the city, such bond to be made by an approved bonding or surety company doing business in the state, conditioned, among other things, that such bonding party will pay any and all damages to any tree, pavement, sewer line, water main, sidewalk, awning, wire, traffic signal, fire alarm, telegraph, telephone, streetlight, power, or other pole provided such awning, wires, or poles are in place according to the ordinances governing the same, or to any other thing injured or damaged by such person, whether such injury or damage shall be inflicted by the party or his agents, employees, or workmen, and conditioned also that the party will save and indemnify and keep harmless the city against all liabilities, judgments, costs, and expenses which may in any way accrue against the city in consequence of the granting of such license and will in all things strictly comply with the conditions of his permit. Upon the execution of the bond and its approval by the city attorney, a license may be issued to the person applying therefor by the city tax assessor and collector. 
(Code 1976, § 4-32)  
Sec. 4-162. - Moving of houses and buildings restricted. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Historical significance is defined as having one (1) or more of the following characteristics: 
a.  Distinctive in character, interest or value and exemplifies cultural, economic, social, ethnic or historical heritage. 
b.  Is an important example of a particular architectural type or specimen or embodies elements of architectural design, detail, material or craftsmanship. 
c.  Has been identified as the work of an important architect or master builder. 
d.  Has been identified with a person or persons who significantly contributed to culture and development. 
e.  Bears a significant relationship to other distinctive buildings, structures, sites, objects or areas. 
f.  Possesses significant archeological value, which has produced or is likely to produce data affecting theories of historic or prehistoric interest. 
g.  Has been identified with a historic event. 
h.  Is designated on the local registry, as a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark, State Antiquities Landmark or an American Civil Engineering Landmark, or is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. 
(2)  Board shall refer to the historic downtown advisory board. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved a previously occupied house or building from one (1) location outside the city to a location within the city, or to move a previously occupied house or building from within the city to another location within the city for the purpose of residential occupancy, except for houses or buildings that meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The house or building is being moved into or within the old town zoning district; and 
(2)  The board has determined that the house or building is of historical significance. If the board determines that the house or building is not of historical significance, then the property owner may appeal the board's decision to city council. The written appeal shall be filed with the building official within ten (10) days after the board's decision. 
(c)  This section shall not be interpreted to preclude the moving of a previously occupied house or building from one (1) location outside the city to a location within the city, or to move a previously occupied house or building from within the city to another location within the city for the purpose of non-residential occupancy if it has met the same criteria for moving houses and buildings for residential occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 83-672, § 1, 8-9-83; Ord. No. 2019-661, § 1, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 4-163. - Moving bond. 
(a)  Any person who moves a house out of the city, or through or across the city, is required to post a bond with the office of the city secretary as a guarantee or conditioned that any streets or property damaged within the city will be returned to such condition as to meet city requirements within a period of ninety (90) days from the date of such moving of such house off of such property or through the city. The amount of such bond shall be a minimum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or an amount to be determined by the city manager as authorized by the city council after an inspection has been made of the building in question, before it is moved through or out of the city. 
(b)  If within the ninety-day period after the building has been moved it shall appear to the governing body of the city that any damage has been done to the streets, wires, trees or any other public or private property, the governing body shall assess the amount of such damage in favor of the city or the owner of such damaged property. The bond posted for the moving of such building shall then be forfeited in the discretion of the council. 
(Ord. No. 83-672, §§ 5, 6, 8-9-83)  
Sec. 4-164. - Demolition of buildings restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to raze, wreck or dismantle any house or building, the value of which exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00) within the city without securing a permit therefor as herein provided and removing all materials from the premises and from the public thoroughfares. 
(b)  The city secretary shall issue a permit upon the payment of the fee prescribed in the established building permit fee schedule for demolition of structures within the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-672, §§ 3, 4, 8-9-83)  
Sec. 4-165. - Permit—Required; application; etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to move or cause to be moved a house or building from within the city to a point outside the city or to move a house or building through or across the city, without giving the city secretary notice of such intent ten (10) days prior to such move, obtaining approval at a regular meeting of the city council and securing a permit therefor as herein provided. The permit shall be obtained in the following manner: 
(1)  Application shall first be made to the city secretary who shall be furnished full information as to the then location of the house or building or structure to be moved and the location to which it is desired to be moved. 
(2)  The application shall further be accompanied by a statement by the house mover of all obstructions that will be along the route that will in any way interfere with the moving of the house. This includes, but is not limited to, all bridges, culverts, telephone poles, wires, trees, shrubbery, light poles, signs, awnings or any other obstruction along the route. 
(3)  A map showing the route to be taken by the house mover shall accompany the application. The application shall further state the route desired to be traveled by the house mover, but this route must be approved by the city manager. The city manager shall have the right to change the route or to give a different route. Final approval of the route shall be within the sole discretion of the city council, which shall have the right and authority to require such conditions of moving, including the hours when moving will be permitted, number of policemen required to ensure protection of the public, and emergency traffic measures to be taken, as it deems necessary for the public convenience and safety. 
(4)  The application shall further state the date when the removal is to be commenced, probable time for completion, the total length, width, and height of the structure when mounted to be moved. 
(5)  The application shall also be accompanied with a detailed set of plans and drawings showing all construction and any structural alterations or additions to be made on the house after it has been moved into the city, if allowed by the city council; provided, however, that the building inspector may require other material to accompany the application which may be reasonably necessary for him to decide whether or not a building permit can be issued on such house or structure on which the application is based. Before any house-moving permit may be issued, the person so desiring to move the house shall obtain a building permit if the structure is to be moved from outside the city to within the city or from one (1) place in the city to another place in the city. If the house, building, or structure is to be moved outside the city limits, no building permit shall be required. 
(6)  At the time application is made to the city secretary for a permit to move any house, building, or structure as provided for in this article, the person making such application shall present a written clearance to the city manager from each of the utility companies, and any other person owning or having any overhead wires or cables which cross any street, alley, or other public way in the city along the route the house, building, or structure is to be moved. Such clearance shall approve the route over which the house, building, or structure is to be moved, and the written clearance shall also indicate that satisfactory arrangements have been made with the companies, firms, or corporations for the payment of the services of the company in the cutting or lifting of wires, removing cables, and raising cables, and for the removal of poles or other structures of the companies. No wire or cable shall be touched by any person other than an employee or designated representative of the firm or utility owning the wire or cable. 
(Code 1976, § 4-32; Ord. No. 83-672, § 2, 8-9-93) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10.  
Sec. 4-166. - Same—Building inspector to examine application and report. 
Upon presentation of a proper application for a building-moving permit to the city secretary, the building inspector or his assistant shall examine the property to be moved, the location where the building or other structure is to be placed, and the proposed route of moving; and if he determines that such building or structure can be moved along the proposed route to the proposed location without undue damage to the streets, alleys, or other public property, and the moving of such building or other structure along such proposed route could be accomplished without danger or hazard to public or private property or to the public generally and would not cause or lead to undue or continued congestion of traffic, and if he further determines that the movement of such structure can be made in compliance with all ordinances of the city and statutes of the state and that a building permit can be issued on the property and that after moving the house or structure within the city it would comply with all ordinances of the city, then he shall report his findings in writing to the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 4-33)  
Sec. 4-167. - Same—Application filing period. 
(a)  The application for a permit required by this article, with all supporting papers required by this article, shall be filed with the city manager not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date it is desired to move such building or other structure; and no permit herein provided for shall be issued until the end of the fifteen-day period after the filing of such application; provided, however, that the city manager shall forward the application to the city council along with the recommendations of the building inspector and city manager. These recommendations shall be in writing stating the findings made by the city manager and building inspector and their reasons for recommending either approval or disapproval of a permit to move such house or other structure. The city council shall then consider the application and recommendations, and may either approve the application to move such house or structure, deny such application, or postpone taking any action on the application for a period of not more than thirty (30) days from the date upon which application was filed with the city manager. If at the end of this thirty-day period the city council has taken no action, the application shall be deemed denied, and shall be void and of no effect. 
(b)  Where the house, building, or other structure sought to be moved is to be relocated within the city limits, the city council, before approving the application and recommendations, shall hold a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given by posting same in the city hall, stating the time and place of the hearing, which time shall be not earlier than ten (10) days from the date of posting. At least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing, the city secretary shall mail notification of the hearing to all owners of property adjacent to the site of the proposed relocation, as well as to all owners of property within two hundred (200) feet from the street frontage of the site of the proposed relocation (including the owners of property on the opposite side of the street within two hundred (200) feet). 
(Code 1976, § 4-34) 
Cross reference— Building inspector generally, § 4-41 et seq.  
Sec. 4-168. - Same—Not to be issued when there are delinquent taxes; fee; notification of utilities. 
(a)  After the application for a permit required by this article has been approved by the city council, the person desiring to move a house, shall take the application to the tax assessor and collector of the city, who shall first check and see if there are any delinquent taxes due or owing against the property for which application is made to be removed; and if there are any delinquent taxes, the tax assessor and collector shall not issue the permit until all taxes have been paid on the property for which application is made. After the property has been checked and the tax assessor is satisfied as to the taxes on such property, then he shall issue the house-moving permit. The tax assessor and collector of the city shall charge and collect before the issuing of such permit for the moving of any house, building, or structure, a fee in such amount as established by the city council from time to time. 
(b)  The person to whom a permit is issued shall immediately notify the chief of the fire department and any and all companies maintaining any electric or telephone wires across or along any street or streets included in the designated route along which such building or other structure is to be moved, of the issuance of such permit, and shall state when same is to be moved and probable length of time necessary for such removal, and in addition, shall notify all gas, water, electric, and telephone companies maintaining service wires or lines to the building or other structure proposed to be moved, of the issuance of such permit and the time that it is proposed to move such building or other structure in ample time to allow the disconnection of such utility service lines to such building or other structure. 
(Code 1976, § 4-35)  
Sec. 4-169. - Removal of wires, cables, etc. 
A person, after receiving a permit to move a house, building, or structure, and after having obtained written clearance from the utility companies, and any other person owning or having overhead wires and cables across any street, alley, or public way in the city, along the route of which the house, building, or structure will pass, shall give twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the companies, not including Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, for such persons to cut any wires necessary to be cut, for the lifting of wires necessary, removing cables, and the removal of poles or structures along the route. After such notification has been received, it shall be the duty of such person to furnish agents or employees, whose duties it shall be to cut and repair such wires of the particular person by whom they are employed, with which the house or structure being moved may come in contact and which it shall be necessary to cut, raise, or remove, in order to permit the house, building, or structure to be moved along the streets, alleys, or other public property of the city. No such person shall furnish any agents or employees in excess of those actually required to do the particular job necessary or to charge any unreasonable rates for such services rendered. 
(Code 1976, § 4-36)  
Sec. 4-170. - Crossing intersections with traffic signals. 
No person while engaged in the moving of a building or structure within the city shall enter or cross any intersection containing an overhead traffic signal unless it is done in the presence of an employee or designated representative of the city building inspector. A charge of five dollars ($5.00) per hour will be made by the city for each man for time spent for the benefit of the mover. An additional charge of three dollars ($3.00) per hour will be made for each additional man needed. Policemen required for moving of the structure shall be arranged for by the person engaged in such moving operations, and shall be employed at the sole expense of such person. 
(Code 1976, § 4-37) 
Cross reference— Traffic-control signs, signals and devices, § 11-141 et seq.  
Sec. 4-171. - Damage to property prohibited. 
All house movers and other persons engaged in the moving of a house or other structure shall proceed in a careful manner in accordance with the terms of the permit granted therefor and at and within the time set therefor in such permit, and shall not in any manner injure or destroy trees, grass plots, curbing, or sidewalks, or in any manner interfere with the property of individuals; and no person, while engaged in the moving of any building or other structure, shall damage, injure, or destroy any public or private property, including trees, shrubs, and grass plots, without the consent of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 4-39)  
Sec. 4-172. - Leaving building overnight. 
Whenever, in the moving of any house, structure, or building, it shall become necessary that the house, structure, or building remain overnight en route, it shall be the duty of the person, moving same to set proper barricades and warning lights at each street intersection nearest both sides of the house and to keep same properly lighted throughout the night or nights together with warning lights on all sides of the house, building, or structure. Any such house, structure, or building shall at no time be left overnight on any state or federal highway. Location of the site of any such stop shall have the prior approval of the city building inspector before such stop is made. 
(Code 1976, § 4-40)  
Sec. 4-173. - Rules relating to moving. 
The following rules and regulations pertaining to the proposed movement routes and hours for moving shall be strictly observed: 
(1)  On state highways: 
a.  No structure exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be moved along any state highway passing within the city, except structures in excess of twenty-five (25) feet may be granted permits after such measures have been taken to provide for the public safety as deemed necessary by the city manager and provided prior written approval has been obtained from the state highway department, and such movement shall be made only between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:30 a.m. 
b.  No structure shall be moved along any state highway passing within the city between the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m., or 4:00 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. 
(2)  On thoroughfares other than state highways: 
a.  No structure shall be moved along any thoroughfare of the city during the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m., or 4:00 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. 
b.  No building or structure shall be moved at any time on Saturdays. 
c.  On thoroughfares forty-four (44) feet or more in width, no structure in excess of twenty-five (25) feet in width shall be moved except during the hours of 12:00 midnight to 5:30 a.m. 
d.  On thoroughfares less than forty-four (44) feet in width, no structure in excess of twenty (20) feet in width shall be moved except during the hours of 12:00 midnight to 5:30 a.m. 
(3)  On all other streets: No structure shall be moved along any street within the city where the width of the structure exceeds the curb-to-curb width of the street. 
(4)  Central business district: No structure shall be moved in or along the city's fire limits except between the hours of 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. 
(5)  Extreme height of mounted structures: No building, structure, or part thereof, shall be moved along any street, alley, or highway within the city if the extreme height of such building, structure, or part thereof shall, when mounted, exceed the height of twenty-five (25) feet from the surface of the street, alley, or highway along which such structure is to be moved. 
(6)  Waiver of height and width restrictions: The city manager shall have the sole discretion to waive restrictions as to the height and width of the building or other structure being removed if and when there are no trees or structures along or overhanging the route along which such building or other structure is to be moved. 
(Code 1976, § 4-41)  
Sec. 4-174. - Building remaining on street after expiration of permit, etc. 
If any house, building, or structure being moved remains on the streets or other property of the city after the expiration of the permit to move such house or building, the person moving the house, building, or structure shall pay to the city the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each day or fraction of a day that such house or building is left on the streets or other property of the city after the expiration of the moving permit. 
(Code 1976, § 4-42)  
Sec. 4-175. - Penalties. 
(a)  Generally. Any person who shall own, move, or assist in moving upon, along, or across any street, avenue, alley, public ground, lot, or open space in the city, any house, structure, or other building, without first obtaining a permit to do so as required hereby, or without complying with the terms and conditions of this article and the terms and conditions of the permit granted, or who, having begun the moving of any house, structure, or building under a permit, shall fail to continue such moving with all reasonable dispatch and speed so as not to unreasonably obstruct any street, avenue, alley, or public ground, or who shall in any other manner violate any of the provisions of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Failing to cut or repair wires. Any corporation operating or using any line or lines or electric wires along the designated route, which has been notified, or any of its agents, of the intention to move the house, which shall fail to furnish any agent or employee to cut or repair the wires that may be necessary to permit the house to be moved along the designated route, and which shall fail to furnish such agent or employee so as not to delay the work of removing of the house, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 4-38)  
Secs. 4-176—4-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19. 
 
Sec. 4-191. - System established. 
(a)  A system of street numbering is hereby established and a baseline is designated as follows: 
Beltline Road, changing to Mansfield Road, where Beltline Road turns north shall be the baseline for the purpose of building numbering and each street running east and west, or substantially in that course, shall begin for the purpose of such numbering, at the east or west side of Clark Road, or an imaginary line running north and south extended on Clark Road, as the case may be, with the number of one hundred (100) increasing block by block from such initial point to the corporate limits, as it now exists, or may hereafter be extended; and each street running north and south or substantially with that course shall begin at the north or south side of Beltline Road as the case may be, with the number of one hundred (100) increasing block by block from such initial point to the corporate limits, as they now exist, or may hereafter be extended. 
(b)  Addresses shall be issued so that odd numbers shall appear on the north and west side of the street. Even numbers shall appear on the south and east side of the street. 
(Ord. No. 86-850, § 1, 5-27-86)  
Sec. 4-192. - Official numbering plan must be followed. 
(a)  Buildings must be numbered in compliance with this article and in accordance with the plan delineating and prescribing the method of numbering buildings which is on file in the office of the building official. 
(b)  The building official shall designate the official number which is to be placed on each building. (A person may request an official number designation by submitting a legal description of the property to the building official.) 
(Ord. No. 86-850, § 2, 5-27-86)  
Sec. 4-193. - Specifications. 
(a)  The official number required by this article shall be of a durable material which will not tarnish, fade, corrode or peel on account of the action of the elements and shall be of a color contrasting to its background. 
(b)  Numbering shall be a minimum of three (3) inches in height and visible from the public street, alleyway, and/or access. Buildings not visible from the street shall also be numbered and visible at the street entrance(s) to the property. Nothing herein shall prohibit any number from being printed by any person when such character of material used will, in the judgment of the building inspector, be equal in strength, durability, and service to the specifications required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 86-850, § 3, 5-27-86)  
Sec. 4-194. - Placement by owner. 
(a)  Each owner, agent of the owner, or the occupant of any building situated in the city shall display or permit to be displayed, in a conspicuous place, an official building number so that it may be plainly visible from both the front and rear of such building or dwelling. 
(b)  Buildings and dwellings with accessible alleyways are required to place numbers on the rear of their premises. 
(c)  Numbers printed on the curb shall not meet the requirements of this section. 
(d)  The number must be placed prior to completion of the new building or, in the case of commercial, a change of tenant. 
(Ord. No. 86-850, § 4, 5-27-86)  
Sec. 4-195. - Basic units of space for numbering. 
The basic unit of space for numbering along public streets and public accesses is twenty-five (25) feet; however, in shopping centers, townhouse areas, apartment areas, and other building complexes where the building official determines that the twenty-five-foot unit is not adequate, he may assign a basic unit of ten (10) feet. 
(Ord. No. 86-850, § 5, 5-27-86)  
Sec. 4-196. - Numbering within building complexes. 
(a)  A building complex composed of multiple structures must have an official number assigned to each building. Each unit within each building must also be assigned an official number. If there is sufficient street frontage, each unit or building may be assigned an official street address number. The official number must be prominently posted on the building so that it is visible, where possible, from the nearest vehicular access. The official number for each unit must be conspicuously posted on the unit. 
(b)  If a building is situated within a complex in such a way that it is not visible from a vehicular access, the owner shall post and maintain directional signs along the nearest vehicular access indicating the location of the building by number and unit numbers. 
(Ord. No. 86-850, § 6, 5-27-86)  
Sec. 4-197. - Directional signs within building complexes. 
(a)  In a building complex composed of multiple structures which contains internal vehicular accesses, if each official building number is not discernible from the public street, the owner of the building complex shall post directional signs at each entrance to the complex and at each intersection of vehicular accesses, other than public streets. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, an "entrance" to a complex is a point at which vehicular access to the complex, other than a public street, intersects with a public street. 
(c)  The directional signs must indicate the direction to buildings and units by number, must be legible from the vehicular access, and must be painted with a color which is in contrast to the background. 
(Ord. No. 86-850, § 7, 5-27-86)  
Sec. 4-198. - Diagram of mall areas. 
The owners of a building complex which contains a mall area shall submit to the police and fire departments a diagram of the complex, indicating the location of each business. When a change in business location or tenants is made, the owner shall advise the police and fire departments in writing of the change. 
(Ord. No. 86-850, § 8, 5-27-86)  
Secs. 4-199—4-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAE 
 
Sec. 4-216. - Installation, etc., permit—Required. 
No parabolic or dish-type antennae shall be erected, constructed, altered or maintained on any lot within the city without first obtaining from the city a permit for the installation of same. 
(Ord. No. 85-763, § 1, 3-12-85) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10.  
Sec. 4-217. - Same—Application, fee. 
Any person desiring to place parabolic or dish-type antennae on property within the corporate limits of the city shall first obtain a permit from the city by applying to the city manager or his designee, providing plans for the installation of such parabolic or dish-type antennae and complying with the requirements set forth in this article concerning number and placement of such antennae. The fee for such permit shall be such sum as established by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 85-763, § 3, 3-12-85)  
Sec. 4-218. - Number and placement. 
All parabolic or dish-type antennae located outside of a building shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The maximum number of antennae per residential lot shall be one (1). 
(2)  All setback requirements for property lines provided in all applicable city ordinances shall be observed and compliance therewith shall be required. 
(3)  No antennae may be located in a front or side yard. 
(4)  No parabolic or dish-type antennae shall be roof mounted. 
(Ord. No. 85-763, § 2, 3-12-85; Ord. No. 85-781, § 1, 4-9-85)  
Sec. 4-219. - Penalty; sanctions. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall, upon conviction in the municipal court, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this article, the city attorney or anyone acting on his own behalf may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this article. Such application for relief may include seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent injunction. 
(Ord. No. 85-763, §§ 4, 5, 3-12-85)  
Secs. 4-220—4-235. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - SIGNS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-514, § 1, adopted August 27, 2013, repealed the former Art. XII., §§ 4-236—4-248, 4-261—4-265, 4-268 and enacted a new Art. XII as set out herein. The former Art. XII pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-236. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Attached sign shall mean any sign attached to, applied to, applied on or supported by any part of a building (such as a wall, roof, window, canopy, awning, arcade or marquee) which encloses or covers usable space. 
Awning shall mean a shelter supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building. 
Awning sign shall mean a sign whose message is directly applied to an awning of a building. 
Banner signs (temporary) shall mean possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation; applied to non-rigid light weight fabric or similar material; intended to be hung without frames. 
Billboard is a sign which promotes or advertises commodities or services available at a location other than where the sign is located and shall include those signs whose message space is available for lease, rent or hire. 
Canopy shall mean a roof-like structure designed to provide protection for objects, pedestrians and vehicles. 
Canopy sign shall mean a sign mounted on or attached to a canopy. 
Changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS) shall mean a sign which permits light to be turned on or off intermittently or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any illuminated sign on which illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color. A CEVMS sign does not include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard. 
Commercial sign shall mean any sign containing or conveying a commercial message. 
Commercial message shall mean wording on any sign, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
Conforming sign shall mean a sign which is lawfully in place and which complies with all lawful regulations. 
Construction sign shall mean any temporary sign identifying the property owner, architect, contractor, engineer, landscape architect, decorator or mortgagee engaged in the construction or improvement of the premises on which the sign is located. 
Controlled sign shall mean any sign which is visible from and intended to be seen by travelers on any public roads. 
Decorative flag shall mean a flag or banner that contains no name, initials, logos, insignia or similar items and is used primarily to attract attention or convey a message. 
Development sign shall mean any temporary, on-site promotional sign pertaining to the development of land. 
Directional sign shall mean any onsite sign to direct the public to entrances, exits, and services relating to the property. 
Directory sign shall mean any sign listing occupants within shopping centers, industrial sites, retail districts, office districts, and commercial sites. 
Façade shall mean any separate face of a building, including parapet walls and omitted wall lines, or any part of a building oriented in the same direction, or in directions within forty-five (45) degrees of one another, which are to be considered as part of a single façade. 
Face shall mean the surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated, not including the sign structure or frame. 
Ground sign shall mean any sign which is erected on vertical framework consisting of uprights supported by the ground. 
Illuminated sign shall mean any sign which has characters, letters, figures, or designs illuminated by electric lights, luminous tubes, or other means that are specifically placed to draw attention to, to light up, or to provide nighttime viewing of the subject matter on the sign face. 
Kiosk sign shall mean a free-standing structure, owned or leased and controlled by or on behalf of the city, located in city rights-of-way, featuring a City of Cedar Hill identification panel at the top of each structure, for the city's use in displaying directional information to new homes, developments, municipal or community events or facilities, emergency services, businesses, churches and other non-commercial establishments and locations lawfully operating with a certificate of occupancy within the city limits of the City of Cedar Hill. Kiosk signs are subject to the provisions of section 4-246 of this chapter. 
Logo shall mean a design or insignia of an organization, individual, company or product which is commonly used in advertising to identify that organization, individual, company or product. 
Multi-tenant sign shall mean any sign that advertises more than one (1) business or occupant. 
Menu board sign shall mean an outside sign utilized by the public patronizing a drive-through business as to bill of fare or other products or services. 
Mural sign shall mean noncommercial pictures, which do not depict advertising, logos, or images of a product or service which is sold on the premises, painted on, or attached to the exterior walls. 
Non-commercial sign shall mean any sign that does not contain or is not used to convey a commercial message. 
Nonconforming sign shall mean any sign which does not now conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located or the zoning chapter standards, but that did meet all requirements prior to adoption or amendment of this article. 
Official sign shall mean a sign erected by public officers or public agencies within their territorial jurisdiction for the purpose of carrying out an official duty or responsibility. 
On-site sign shall mean any sign identifying or advertising a business, person, organization or activity installed on the same premises which such business, person, organization or activity is located. Activity includes the manufacture or sale of the products of a business. Any non-commercial signs are deemed "on-site" and are allowed wherever signs are allowed in accordance with provisions of this chapter, the objective criteria set forth in the Tables "Attachment A and Attachment B"* [] which are incorporated herein as if fully set forth and made a part hereof. 
Off-premises sign shall mean any sign, commonly known as a billboard, that advertises a business, person, activity, goods, products or services not located on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained, or that directs persons to a location other than the premises where the sign in installed and maintained. 
Pennant shall mean a device typically made of a lightweight plastic, fabric or other material usually triangular in shape and attached to a single cord. 
Political sign shall mean any temporary sign or advertisement promoting the candidacy of a person running for governmental office or promoting a position on an issue to be voted on at a governmental election. 
Portable and/or display sign shall mean a sign or display surface temporarily fixed to a standardized advertising or structure which can be regularly moved from location at periodic intervals and is not permanently affixed to the real property. 
Premises shall mean for any developed property, an area of real property constituting the lot, parcel or tract of land which encompasses all the buildings, structures, appurtenances and land held under common ownership and devoted to common use, including a shopping center; for any undeveloped property premises shall mean an area of real property constituting a lot, parcel or tract of land. 
Projecting sign shall mean a sign that is attached or affixed perpendicularly or more perpendicularly than parallel to a building wall or structure other than a pole and extends or projects from it more than twelve (12) inches. 
Protective sign means any sign which is commonly associated with safeguarding the permitted uses of the occupancy, including but not limited to, "bad dog", "no trespassing" and "no solicitors". 
Real estate sign shall mean any temporary sign pertaining to the sale or rental of property. 
Residential district shall mean a district zoned for residential use in the City of Cedar Hill Comprehensive Zoning Chapter excluding multi-family. 
Sign area calculation of, shall mean the actual area of the face of the sign, unless the sign is not of a regular (square, rectangle, triangle, and circle) shape. In the case of an irregular-shaped sign, the gross surface area shall be calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of the sign by no more than four (4) rectangles. The sum of these rectangles shall be the gross surface area. However for each rectangle over one (1), the maximum allowed square footage shall be reduced by ten (10) percent. Sign area shall not be less than illuminated area of the sign. 
In the event two (2) or more signs share a single structure, each sign or panel may be considered separately for square footage purposes, except that the combined footage of such signs cannot exceed the total square footage allowed for the sign. 
Sign code application area shall mean the corporate limits of the city and the area of its extraterritorial jurisdiction as defined by V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, § 42.021. 
Vehicle sign shall mean signs mounted on a vehicle, including trailers, normally licensed by the State of Texas. 
Temporary sign shall mean any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other like materials, with or without frames which is not permanently attached to the ground, wall or building, and which is intended to be displayed for a short period of time only. 
Visibility triangle shall mean a triangle sight area, at all intersections, which shall include that portion of public right-of-way and any corner lot within the adjacent curb lines and a diagonal line intersecting such curb lines at points thirty-five (35) feet back from their intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 2014-529, § 1, 1-28-14; Ord. No. 2015-558, § 1, 7-14-15) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
*Note—Attachment A and Attachment B are located after Div. 1. 
 
Sec. 4-237. - Permit—Required. 
Except as provided in sections 4-242 and 4-261 through 4-265 any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation desiring to place, locate, erect, construct, reconstruct, replace, renovate, repair or alter any part of a sign, including the face, supporting structure or other integral part regulated by this division must have obtained a written permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13)  
Sec. 4-238. - Same—Prerequisites for submission. 
Before any permit required by section 4-237 may be submitted for formal issuance, the applicant shall comply with the following requirements, and all items and materials required for submission shall be filed with the building official as prescribed herein: 
(1)  A written application on a form prescribed by the city, which requires the following information: 
a.  Name of applicant. 
b.  Complete address and telephone number of applicant. 
c.  The business or occupation of the applicant, together with the full legal name of the business, the full address and telephone number of the business. 
d.  The street address and legal description of the site of the proposed placement, together with the name, complete address and telephone number of the owner of such site. 
(2)  The applicant shall submit design drawings for approval showing construction details for the sign and sign structure, together with a plot plan showing the placement of the sign on the property or structure. Signs which exceed ten (10) feet in height above the ground shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. 
(3)  A schematic drawing showing the proposed placement and location of lights or illuminating effects to be placed upon such sign. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13)  
Sec. 4-239. - Decision on permit; appeal. 
Within ten (10) days after determining that the application for a sign permit is complete, the building official shall either approve the application or deny the application based upon the objective criteria set forth herein, unless the application is submitted in conjunction with an application for a building permit, in which case the building official must render his decision no later than the date of final action on such permit. In the event the sign permit application is denied, the building official shall specify the section or sections of the sign regulations with which the application is inconsistent. 
The applicant may appeal the denial of a sign permit application by the building official to the sign review board of appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the building official's decision. The board shall consider and take action and render a recommendation on the appeal within twenty-one (21) days after the notice of appeal has been filed. The board shall determine whether the decision of the building official shall be reversed, sustained or modified. See section 4-248(4) for exception procedures. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13)  
Sec. 4-240. - Non-commercial signs. 
A non-commercial sign shall be authorized in any location that a commercial sign is allowed under this article XII, or as otherwise authorized by law, and shall be located, designed and constructed to the same specifications as such authorized commercial sign. Temporary detached non-commercial signs will be allowed in accordance with Attachment B* []. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
*Note—Attachment B is located after Div. 1. 
 
Sec. 4-241. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4-242. - Certain signs exempted from permit regulation. 
The following signs may be erected or maintained without the issuance of a permit by the city: 
(1)  Signs advertising the sale or lease of property upon which they are located: 
a.  Undeveloped property: Signs of this nature no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet will be allowed for maximum of one (1) year. 
b.  Residential property: Signs pertaining to the sale or rental of property not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area and pertaining only to the property on which they are located and nameplates not exceeding one (1) square foot in area, containing only the name of the occupant of the premises. 
(2)  Signs erected for the protection of life or property including those which provide information about utility lines. 
(3)  Signs that are not visible from public roads or obviously not erected for the purpose of their message being seen from public roads. 
(4)  Official signs. 
(5)  Signs of not more than thirty-two (32) square feet showing the name of a ranch or farm. 
(6)  Directional signs or traffic signs. 
(7)  Political campaign signs. Political campaign signs are not regulated under this chapter and are subject only to the provisions of chapter 4, article XII, division 2 and chapter 19, article VI of this Code of Ordinances. 
(8)  Seasonal decorations and displays during the period beginning November first of each year and ending the first Monday after January first of the next succeeding year. 
(9)  Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the display of a national flag and/or state flag whose size does not exceed forty (40) square feet and which flag is displayed upon a flagpole which does not exceed thirty (30) feet in height. All national flags or state flags in excess of the foregoing sizes must apply for an exception. 
(10)  Signs in residential housing districts with dimensions less than set forth in Attachment B* [] are exempt from permit. 
(11)  Kiosk signs. 
(12)  Mural signs 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 2014-529, § 1, 1-28-14; Ord. No. 2016-578, § 1, 12-8-15) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
*Note—Attachment B is located after Div. 1. 
 
Sec. 4-243. - Prohibited signs. 
(1)  No sign shall be erected or altered to include animation, parts which move, or flashing or blinking lights which may be distracting to motorists. This prohibition does not include time and temperature signs. 
(2)  Advertising by means of a balloon or other inflated sign anchored to the ground, a building or other structure is prohibited. 
(3)  No illuminated sign shall be permitted to produce visual discomfort for viewers on other properties or on adjacent streets. Moving, flashing, intermittently lighted, changing color, beacons, revolving or similarly constructed signs shall not be allowed. 
(4)  No person shall cause to be erected or maintained any sign using any combination of forms, words, colors or lights which imitate emergency signs or signals. 
(5)  Searchlights are specifically prohibited. 
(6)  No person shall attach any sign, paper or material, or shall paint, stencil or write any name, number (except house numbers) or otherwise permanently mark on any sidewalk, curb, gutter or street. 
(7)  Signs located on public property including, but not limited to, signs attached to any public utility pole or structure, street light, tree, fence, fire hydrant, bridge, curb, sidewalk, park bench, or other location on public property. 
(8)  Off-premises temporary real estate directional signs are prohibited. 
(9)  No sign shall be located on or project over the roof of a building. 
(10)  No person shall paint a sign or attach a sign, other than a nameplate sign or a protective sign, to the outside of a fence, railing or a wall which is not a structural part of a building, whether or not such fence, railing or wall is on the property line. 
(11)  Subject to the subsection (14) herein, no sign shall be allowed which moves by any means. 
(12)  The use of exposed tubes which contain luminescent inert gases, including, but not limited to, neon, argon and krypton, and which are visible from the exterior of structures, is specifically prohibited except as an attached sign which shall conform to this chapter. 
(13)  It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign any obscene, indecent or immoral matter. 
(14)  Vehicular signs are prohibited except for the following: 
a.  Vehicles of the town. 
b.  Vehicles owned and operated by another governmental entity. 
c.  The primary purpose of the vehicle on which the vehicular sign is located is not for display of the sign. 
d.  The signs are painted upon or applied directly to an integral part of the vehicle. 
e.  The vehicle on which the vehicle sign is located is not used primarily as static displays advertising a product or service. 
(15)  Projecting signs. 
(16)  Decorative flags and pennants. 
(17)  Billboards shall not be permitted. 
(18)  Prohibition of new off-premises signs. From and after the effective date, no new construction permit shall be issued for the erection of an off-premises sign, including but not limited to a new off-premises CEVMS or the conversion of an existing non-CEVMS off-premises sign to a CEVMS, within the sign code application area. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13)  
Sec. 4-244. - Standards. 
All signs regulated by this division and erected from and after March 12, 1991, shall meet the standards imposed herein. Signs which were in existence and in place on such date and which meet the standards imposed by the chapter shall be classified as "conforming signs." Signs which were in existence and in place on such date and do not meet the standards imposed by this chapter shall be classified as "nonconforming signs." The maximum sign area prescribed herein shall be applied to a sign with one (1) face. A sign constructed with more than one (1) face shall contain in the aggregate of all faces not more than twice the maximum area prescribed. The maximum interior angle between sign faces shall be ninety (90) degrees. Sign standards shall be as follows: 
(1)  Design requirements: 
a.  Size: The area of signs shall be measured by the smallest square, rectangle, circle or combination thereof which will encompass the entire sign. The maximum size limitations shall apply to each side of the sign individually, but exclude the base or structural support members. See definition of sign area calculation. 
b.  Lighting: Signs may be illuminated, subject to the following restrictions: Lights which are not effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the roadway and which cause glare or effectively impair or otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle are prohibited. 
c.  Height: The height of a sign shall be measured as follows: 
1.  Ground or pole sign within one hundred (100) feet of a street abutting the property on which the sign is located: From the top of the curb to the nearest street adjacent thereto or, if there is not curb, from a point six (6) inches above the edge of the road surface to the top of the sign structure. 
d.  Construction: All signs constructed according to this division will be allowed no more than two (2) sides: 
1.  All signs greater than ten (10) feet in height must have construction drawings with an engineer's seal of a licensed, professional engineer, and such drawing shall be submitted to the city with the application for a permit. All component parts and materials, as well as the completed structure, shall have tolerances and strength of at least thirty (30) pounds per square foot. 
2.  An electrical sign or signs which require electric power must have the Underwriters Laboratories (UL) label. 
(2)  Location and spacing. 
a.  Permanent detached signs shall be in compliance with the following table: See Attachment A* [], incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
b.  Attached signs shall be installed in compliance with the following schedules: 
1.  An attached sign located at a height up to thirty-six (36) feet or less, the sign area is limited to two (2) square feet of sign area for each lineal foot of building frontage not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
2.  An attached sign located at a height of thirty-six (36) feet shall be permitted an increase in maximum effective area. Such increases shall not exceed four (4) square feet in effective area for each additional one (1) foot of height above thirty-six (36) feet measured from the base of the sign. 
3.  Attached signs may be located on each façade; however, the sum of the effective area of all attached signs shall not exceed twice the allowable effective area as specified in above subsections (a) and (b). 
4.  Maximum letter/logo height of attached signs shall be determined by the following schedule (the sign height shall be measured from the base of the sign to the ground): 
Sign Height 
(feet) 	Maximum Letter/Logo 
Height 
(inches) 
0—20 	30 
21—48 	36 
49—100 	48 
 
Letter heights in excess of the amounts stated shall be approved only by the sign review board of appeals. The above table represents the maximum letter and/or logo height in each individual sign height category. Where the sign is totally composed of individual mounted letters, either one (1) letter or logo may be twenty-five (25) percent taller than the specified maximum letter/logo height. 
5.  A metal back is required for all attached wall signs. Wood back or faces are prohibited. 
6.  There shall be only one (1) sign for each façade for each tenant. 
7.  No attached sign shall extend above the roof or façade height. 
8.  Window signs: Signs in windows facing public right-of-way are limited to forty (40) percent of the window area per façade. 
9.  Directional signs attached to the building shall not count against the sign area or number of signs listed above. 
10.  Special exceptions: 
A.  Buildings larger than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet and with a minimum setback from the street of one hundred (100) feet will be allowed attached signs that are in compliance with the following: 
1.  One (1) attached sign will be limited in area to seven and one-half (7.5) percent of the front façade of the building. For each additional sign placed on the building the maximum amount of sign face total for the building façade will be reduced by one-half (½) percent. 
2.  Maximum letter/logo height shall be limited to the following: 
(a)  Buildings with a setback of one hundred (100) to one hundred fifty (150) feet a maximum letter height of five (5) feet. 
(b)  Buildings with a setback of one hundred fifty-one (151) to two hundred (200) feet a maximum letter height of six (6) feet. 
(c)  Buildings with a setback of two hundred (200) to three hundred (300) feet a maximum letter height of eight (8) feet. 
(d)  Buildings with a setback of three hundred (300+) feet a maximum letter height of ten (10) feet. 
3.  This exception shall apply to only one (1) façade of any building. All other façades shall comply with this section. 
4.  Free standing building with a minimum building foot print of seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet is allowed attached sign on all sides that are in compliance with (1) and (2) above. 
c.  Menu boards signs: 
1.  Shall be located behind the front of the building. 
2.  Will be limited to no more than two (2) signs per drive thru lane. 
3.  Shall be no greater than thirty-two (32) square feet. 
4.  Shall be no taller than eight (8) feet in height. 
5.  A permit for each sign is required. 
6.  A menu board does not count towards the number of detached signs allowed on the property. 
d.  Portable signs: 
1.  Portable signs may not exceed four (4) feet by eight (8) feet per side in size or thirty-two (32) square feet in total area. 
2.  Before erecting a portable sign, a permit must be obtained. The fee shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00). Portable signs may be erected for no more than two (2) weeks at a time. Each business address may have a portable sign once each year for fourteen (14) consecutive days. 
3.  No more than two (2) portable signs may be placed per city block, and no portable sign shall be closer than five hundred (500) feet from another portable sign. 
4.  Portable signs shall not be placed on the city right-of-way and shall be placed so as not to obstruct the vision of traffic. 
5.  Portable signs shall not employ flashing, intermittent or neon lights. Signs with interior light faces are permitted. 
6.  Churches and schools are exempt from the permit fee for portable signs. 
e.  Special event signs: 
Special events and other temporary signage in addition to the permissible signs authorized herein, the following temporary on-premises signs are permitted: 
Upon approval of a special sign permit, banners, pennants, search lights, streamers and balloons may be displayed to alert the public of business grand openings, special sales or events. Special event signage shall be contained to the location that has obtained the permit. All signage shall be made of safe materials and erected and displayed in a safe manner. 
1.  Special event signage shall not be erected, placed or displayed without first obtaining a permit. 
2.  Special event signage shall be permitted for duration of no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days. 
3.  No more than four (4) special event permits shall be issued for any one (1) business during any calendar year. 
4.  Special event permits cannot be issued in a consecutive nature. A minimum of thirty-day interval must pass from the expiration of one (1) special event permit to the issuance of another permit. 
5.  Applicant shall submit permit applications with a drawing that shows the size, shape, content, height, type of materials and location of such signage. The permit fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
6.  Any signage erected in violation of this article or decreed unsafe shall be subject to immediate removal. 
f.  Temporary signs shall be incompliance with the following table: See Attachment B* [], incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
g.  Canopy signs: 
1.  Shall not exceed in length seventy-five (75) percent of the length of the canopy face and not more than eighty (80) percent of the canopy height. 
2.  Shall not project above or below the face of the canopy. 
3.  Shall not be more than one (1) sign or logo per elevation of the canopy. 
4.  No more than four (4) canopy signs per premises will be allowed. 
5.  In no case shall sign or logo exceed twenty (20) square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
*Note—Attachment A is located after Div. 1. 

--- () --- 
*Note—Attachment B is located after Div. 1. 
 
Sec. 4-245. - Reserved.  
Sec. 4-246. - Sign kiosks. 
(1)  The city council may, by duly executed license agreement, grant the exclusive right to design, erect and maintain kiosk signs within Cedar Hill. 
(2)  Kiosk signs must be designed and constructed according to the specifications contained in the aforementioned license agreement. 
(3)  Prior to erecting any kiosk sign, the licensee shall submit a sign location map to the code enforcement supervisor and the building official for approval. 
(4)  Kiosk sign installations shall include break-away design features as required for traffic signs in the street right-of-way. 
(5)  No signs, pennants, flags or other devices for visual attention or other appurtenances shall be attached to kiosk signs. 
(6)  Kiosk signs shall not be illuminated. 
(7)  Individual sign panels on kiosk signs shall have a uniform design and color. 
(8)  Kiosk signs shall not interfere with the use of sidewalks, walkways, bike and hiking trails; shall not obstruct the visibility of motorists, pedestrians or traffic control signs; shall not be installed in the immediate vicinity of street intersections; and shall comply with the requirements of the twenty-five-foot visibility triangle or other visibility easements. 
(9)  Kiosk signs shall be used by the city to provide directional information to new homes, developments, municipal or community events or facilities, emergency services, businesses, churches and other non-commercial establishments and locations lawfully operating with a certificate of occupancy within the city limits of the City of Cedar Hill. Such directional information will be provided upon request and application to the city or its designee, by a qualified establishment or entity, on a first come first served basis, pursuant to the terms and conditions of this ordinance. Directional information to any establishment or entity shall be limited to a maximum of one panel, per side, per kiosk. 
(10)  The city shall use the kiosk signs to display only the names of, and directional information to, new homes, developments, municipal or community events or facilities, emergency services, businesses, churches and other non-commercial establishments and locations lawfully operating within the city limits of the City of Cedar Hill. Pricing or other advertising or marketing information will not be displayed on the city's kiosk signs. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 2015-558, § 2, 7-14-15)  
Sec. 4-247. - Enforcement and penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or shall fail to comply therewith or with any requirement thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be liable for a fine in an amount to not exceed that allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13)  
Sec. 4-248. - Nonconformance and exceptions. 
(1)  Purpose. Every sign or other advertising structure in existence upon adoption of this article which violates or does not conform to the provisions hereof shall not be moved, altered or repaired unless it is made to comply with all provisions of this article. For the purposes of this section, alteration or repair shall mean at least sixty (60) percent of the replacement cost of the subject sign. The building official shall determine whether the proposed alteration or repair exceeds sixty (60) percent of the replacement cost. 
(2)  Damaged nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs which are damaged in excess of sixty (60) percent of their current value must be demolished and not repaired unless such proposed repairs would bring the sign into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Condemnation; notice: Signs adjudged by the building official to be structurally unsafe or to be more than fifty (50) percent destroyed or dilapidated may be condemned. A condemnation letter will be sent to the owner of the property, listed on the city tax roll, stating that the sign must be removed within fifteen (15) days of the receipt of the letter. If the sign is not removed within the period allotted, the city may remove the sign at the property owner's expense. 
(4)  Board established; appeals and exceptions. Appeals and exceptions to these regulations shall be heard by five (5) or more members of the building appeals and advisory board. The building official shall be ex officio member and shall act as staff to the board. The board shall have the authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the enforcement of the signs regulations and the authority to make recommendations to the city council. The board may consider appeals from a decision of the building official on a sign permit, and may grant exceptions on the basis that the application of such regulations and/or standards will, by reason of exceptional circumstances or surroundings, constitute a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. 
(a)  Required information. The applicant shall first file a written application for exception form furnished by the building inspections department. Every such application shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
2.  Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the property on which the sign will be located. 
3.  Name, address, and telephone number of person or firm erecting the sign. 
4.  A description of the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
5.  Location of the building structure or lot upon which the sign is to be attached or erected. 
6.  Message to be contained on proposed sign. 
7.  State the valuation of proposed work. 
8.  The signature of the permittee or his authorized agent. 
9.  Name of business for which the sign application has been made. 
(b)  Plans and specifications. Scaled plans or dimensional sign detail shall be submitted in duplicate with each application for a permit and contain the following information: 
1.  Drawing of sign indicating the sign message or copy. 
2.  Elevation plan of the building showing the proposed sign on the building, the length of the elevation, and any other existing signs on the elevation along with the dimensions of such signs. 
3.  Site plan indicating street frontage, property lines, sign visibility triangles, proposed and existing rights-of-way, location of sign on property, relationship of proposed sign to ingress and egress points, and relationship of proposed sign to any other signs within a sixty-foot spacing of the proposed sign and location of all detached signs on the site. 
(c)  Quorum. All cases brought before the board, under this chapter, must be heard by no less than five (5) members. A concurring vote of five (5) members is required to grant a variance of this chapter or to overrule any decision or interpretation made under this chapter by the building official. 
(d)  Board decision. The decision of the board shall be final as to administrative remedies. No appeal to the board for the same variance on the same piece of property shall be allowed prior to the expiration of two (2) years. Any variance granted by the board expires unless a permit securing the variance has been applied for within ninety (90) days from the date of the decision. An applicant whose sign permit is denied by the board may appeal the board's decision to the city council. The appeal request must be submitted in writing within ten (10) days of the board's decision. 
The board is empowered to approve variances to the provisions of this chapter in the following areas: 
1.  Height regulations; 
2.  Area regulations; 
3.  Setback regulations; 
4.  Material regulations; 
5.  Number of signs. 
A variance shall not be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor shall it be based solely on economic gain or loss. In order to grant a variance from this chapter the board must determine that: 
1.  The requested variance does not violate the intent of this chapter; 
2.  The requested variance will not adversely affect surrounding properties; 
3.  The requested variance will not adversely affect public safety; 
4.  Special conditions exist which are unique to this applicant or property; 
5.  That the sign had not been installed prior to obtaining a permit. An applicant is not eligible for a variance if the sign was installed prior to obtaining a sign permit. 
(e)  Changeable electronic variable message sign approval process. 
1.  Changeable electronic variable message (CEVMS) sign may be approved for onsite advertising through the following procedure. 
2.  Procedure. A property owner or the owner's authorized representative may file with the building official an application to allow the placement of a CEVMS in a sign code compliant location. Upon filing of an application, the building official will within ten (10) business days determine if the application is complete. If incomplete, the form shall be returned to the applicant noting areas of deficiency. If complete, the application will be sent to the building appeals and advisory board for a public hearing. The building appeals and advisory board shall make a recommendation to the city council for approval or denial. The city council shall hear the request at the next scheduled city council meeting, in accordance with the preset schedule for meeting, for a public hearing. 
3.  CEVMS criteria 
A.  Sign must be in compliance with the attached or detached sign regulations for sign height, area and setbacks set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The development on which the sign is proposed has a structure or structures that contain a minimum of seven hundred thirty thousand (730,000) square feet of area. 
C.  The platted tract or tracts of land within the development shall contain a minimum of seventy-four (74) acres of land. 
D.  The property on which the sign is proposed to be located must front highway sixty-seven (67) or a public street that runs parallel to highway sixty-seven (67) and is visible from the highway. 
E.  A CEVMS shall not emit an audible sound. 
F.  No CEVMS shall be approved within a two-mile radius of another CEVMS. 
(f)  Each applicant applying for a variance to the board shall pay a filing fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). If the variance is requested for multiple signs at one (1) location, an additional fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each sign in excess of one (1) shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13) 
ATTACHMENT "A" 
Permanent Sign 
Detached Sign Table 
(D) Zoning District 	Land Use 	Land Condition 	Time Limit 	Sign Structure Type 	(A) Max Area (sq. ft.) 	(A) Max Height (feet) 	(A) Min. Setback (feet) 	Max # of signs Permitted 
All zoning districts 	Vacant land 		None 	None 	0 	0 		None 
All zoning districts 	Lot occupied by a single family dwelling 		None 		1 			1 per parcel 
All non-single family and non-multifamily zoning districts (E) 	Lot occupied by a non-residential building 	Frontage along Hwy. 67 	None 		240 	40 	0 	(F) 
		Frontage along street other than Hwy. 67 and within 200 ft. of Hwy. 67 	None 		240 	40 	8 	(F) 
		Frontage along street other than Hwy. 67 and >201 ft but <500 from Hwy. 67 	None 		180 	30 	8 	(F) 
		Frontage along street other than Hwy. 67 and more than 500 ft from Hwy. 67 	None 		64(B) 	20 	8(B) 	
All multifamily zoning districts 	Lot occupied by apartment or a non-residential structure 		None 		40 	20 	10 	1 per street frontage(C) 
All single family zoning districts 	Occupied by a non-residential structure 	Lot is one acre or more 	None 		64 	20 	8 	1 per parcel 
	Lot occupied by a ranch/farm 	Lot is one acre or more 	None 		32 			1 per parcel 
 
(A) = If the lot is within the Uptown Overlay Zoning District and is NOT located between Clark Road and Belt Line Road then: Maximum height = 8, Maximum area = 64 feet and minimum setback is 8 feet. The maximum area may be increased to 100 sq. ft. if the minimum setback is increased to 15 feet. 
(B) = Maximum sign area may be increased to 100 square feet if the minimum sign setback from property line is increased to 15 feet. 
(C) = After the initial 750 feet of street frontage, an additional detached shall be allowed for each additional 600 feet of frontage or portion thereof. 
(D) = Single family districts includes SF-7, SF-8.5, SF-10, SF-15, SF-22, SF-E, SF-RR, & PD districts for residential uses; Multifamily districts = MF and PD-MF zoning districts & nonresidential districts = NS, LR, C, CC, IP and I zoning districts. 
(E) = Multi-tenant signs must be approved by sign board. 
(F) = 1 sign per each 450 feet of lot road frontage with a minimum sign spacing of 225 feet. 
(G) = Electric supply to sign must be under ground. 
ATTACHMENT "B" 
Temporary Signs 
Detached Sign Table 
Land Use Condition 	Land Size Condition 	Zoning District 	Time Limit 	Max Area (sq. ft.) 	Max Height (feet) 	Min. Setback 	Max # of Signs Permitted 
Vacant/undeveloped land 	5 acres or more 	All districts 	Temporary 
1 year or until sale 	100 	8 	None 	1 per street frontage 
	Less than 5 acres 	Non-single family and multifamily districts 	Temporary 
1 year or until sale 	32 	8 	None 	1 per street frontage 
	Less than 5 acres 	Residential districts 	Temporary 
1 year or until sale 	8 	6 	None 	1 per street frontage 
Land development 	Non-residential districts 	Up to 90% complete 	100 	20 	None 	1 per lot 
	Residential districts 	Up to 90% complete 	100 	20 	None 	1 per development 
Building construction 	Non-residential districts 	Up to 90% complete 	32 	8 	None 	5 per development 
	Residential districts 	Up to 90% complete 	16 	6 	None 	1 per lot 
Occupied by a non-residential structure 	Non-residential districts 	Temporary 
1 year or until sale 	32 	10 	None 	1 per street frontage 
Lot occupied by a single family dwelling 	Residential districts 	Temporary 
1 year or until sale 	8 	6 	None 	1 per lot 
  
Secs. 4-249—4-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TEMPORARY POLITICAL SIGNS 
 
Sec. 4-261. - Definition. 
As used in this division, the term "political sign" shall mean any temporary sign or advertisement promoting the candidacy of a person running for governmental office or promoting a position on an issue to be voted on at a governmental election. Political signs are not regulated under division 1. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 2014-529, § 2, 1-28-14)  
Sec. 4-262. - Preemption to an extent by statute. 
To the extent regulation of political signs by a municipality is preempted and controlled by V.T.C.A. Local Govt. Code, § 216.903 or V.T.C.A. Election Code, §§ 61.003 and 85.036, those sections apply herein as if fully set forth. To the extent political signs are not subject to such statutory regulation; they shall be regulated as any other non-commercial signs as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 2014-529, § 2, 1-28-14)  
Sec. 4-263. - Prohibited in public rights-of-way. 
Subject to the provisions of chapter 19, article VI of this Code, no person shall place or cause to be placed a political sign in or on any public right- of-way within the corporate limits of the city. This section does not prohibit the posting of political signs during a voting period on the premises of a public building being used as a polling place or early voting polling place if posted outside the area of one hundred (100) feet from an outside door through which a voter may enter the polling place. A voting period as used in this section shall mean the "voting period" defined in V.T.C.A. Election Code, § 61.003(b) and the "early voting period" defined in V.T.C.A. Election Code, § 85.001. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 2014-529, § 2, 1-28-14; Ord. No. 2016-578, § 2, 12-8-15)  
Sec. 4-264. - Prohibited on utility poles. 
No person shall place or cause to be placed a political sign on any utility pole or tower within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 2014-529, § 2, 1-28-14)  
Sec. 4-265. - Nonconforming signs declared public nuisance. 
In addition to the penalties prescribed in this division, any political sign not posed in accordance with the provisions of this division shall be deemed a public nuisance and shall be subject to removal by the candidate, property owner, city official, or when a proposition is involved, the person advocating the vote described on the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2013-514, § 2, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 2014-529, § 2, 1-28-14)  
Secs. 4-266—4-280. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - RESERVED[17] 

Footnotes: 
--- (17) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-682, § 1, adopted Aug. 27, 2019, repealed Art. XIII, which pertained to storage buildings and derived from the Code 1976, §§ 14-97.1—14-97.5, 14-97.7; and Ord. No. 82-633, §§ 1—5, 7, adopted July 13 1982. 
 
Secs. 4-281—4-300. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - FENCES AND FREESTANDING WALLS[18] 

Footnotes: 
--- (18) --- 
Editor's note— Nonamendatory Ord. No. 97-314, § 1, adopted March 25, 1997, has been included herein as Art. XIV, § 4-301, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 4-301. - Requirements for fences and freestanding walls. 
(a)  Encroachment on public property. No fence, guy wires, braces or any post of such fence shall be constructed upon or caused to protrude over property that the city or that the general public has domination and control over, owns, or has an easement over, under, around or through, except upon utility easements which are permitted to be fenced. 
(b)  Construction within easements. 
(1)  Permission to build a fence upon a utility easement does not remove the obligation of the owner of said fence to remove the fence upon demand of the utility company. Removal of the fence and any rebuilding of the fence shall be the responsibility of the owner of said fence and at the owner's expense. 
(2)  Fences shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as not to interfere with utility lines. 
(3)  Fences shall be designed, constructed and maintained so as not to interfere with normal drainage. 
(c)  Maintenance of fees. A fence or fences shall be maintained by the owner of the property so as to comply with the requirements of this chapter and in good condition, which condition shall not deviate from the maintenance standard as follows: 
(1)  The fence shall not be out of vertical alignment more than twenty-five (25) degrees. 
(2)  Any and all broken, damaged, removed or missing parts of said fence shall be replaced within ten (10) days of the event causing noncompliance herewith, with the same material, size, shape and quality of the original fence to which the repair is being made. 
(3)  Except in cases where a fence or fences are ordered to be constructed on property as a result of a specific order of the city council or through operation of the Zoning Ordinances of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, the above requirements shall not be construed so as to not allow a fence or fences to be removed. 
(d)  Fence not to create a traffic hazard. It shall be unlawful to erect, maintain, suffer or permit any fence on any corner lot in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard. Failure of the owner, agent or occupant to remove such obstruction within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice shall constitute a violation of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 97-314, § 1, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 4-302. - Fences in residential areas. 
(1)  Any person wishing to construct a new fence shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the city. The permit application shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the location of the fences on the property. 
(2)  Any person replacing more than fifty (50) percent of a fence shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the city. The permit application shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the location of the fences on the property. 
(3)  The permit fee for a fence shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(4)  Any fence or wall located to the rear of the minimum required front yard line shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
(5)  Except as provided by subsection (5) below, no fence or wall shall be permitted in front of any single-family or townhouse structure except platted lots within the rural residential or single-family estate district or lots greater than one (1) acre in area where the fence may be constructed to the front property line. No fence shall be erected in any front yard or side yard which is adjacent to a public street. No residential fence shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to a public street except in cases where the side or rear building line of the yards on continuous corner lots adjoin the fence may be constructed out to the property line of said side yard. 
(6)  Decorative fences with openings not less than fifty (50) percent of the fence area and not exceeding three (3) feet in height are permitted in front yards. Chain link, woven wire mesh or similar materials are not considered decorative fencing. 
(7)  No barbed wire or high voltage electrical fencing shall be allowed except as used for farm or ranching purposes on undeveloped land over three (3) acres in size. 
(8)  Gates designed for vehicular access shall be set back from the property or right-of-way line a minimum of twenty (20) feet, and shall have gates designed to swing inward and away from the property or right-of-way line. If gates are to be of the sliding type, they shall operate (i.e., slide) fully within the property into which the gates give access, and they shall not encroach (i.e., project or slide over) any neighboring property line or street/alley right-of-way line. 
(9)  Fences around swimming pools shall comply with Appendix G of the current adopted International Residential Code. 
(10)  See Section 23-5.4.10 of the City of Cedar Hill Zoning Code for sight visibility requirements. 
(11)  Special purpose fencing, such as fencing around tennis courts, is permitted. 
(12)  Appeals and exception to the fence regulations. Appeals and exceptions to these regulations shall be heard by five (5) or more members of the building appeals and advisory board. The building official shall be ex officio member and shall act as staff to the board. The board shall have the authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the enforcement of the fence regulations. The board may consider appeals from a decision of the building official on a fence permit, and may grant exceptions on the basis that the application of such regulations and/or standards will, by reason of exceptional circumstances or surroundings, constitute a practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. 
a.  Required information. The applicant shall first file a written application for exception form furnished by the building inspections department. Every such application shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
2.  Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property on which fence will be located. 
3.  A site plan showing the fences location on the property. 
4.  Pay application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
b.  Quorum. All cases brought before the board, under this section, must be heard by no less than five (5) members. A majority vote of the members is required to grant a variance of this section or to overrule any decision or interpretation made under this section by the building official. 
c.  Board decisions. The decisions of the board shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2011-457, § 1, 9-13-11)  
Secs. 4-303—4-310. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - TRENCH SAFETY PROGRAM[19] 
Footnotes: 
--- (19) --- 
Cross reference— Building and related permits generally, § 4-1 et seq.; building inspector, § 4-41 et seq.; trench safety for public or private constructions, § 4-66; excavations and cuts, § 19-16 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-311. - Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations for trench excavations; report of violations. 
(a)  Any person applying for a building permit for which a trench excavation will exceed a depth of five (5) feet shall be provided with a copy of the then-existing OSHA regulations for trench excavations. 
(b)  Any violations of such trench safety regulations observed by the city building inspectors shall be reported to the Department of OSHA and to the job superintendent on a particular site. 
(Ord. No. 88-959, §§ 3, 4, 2-23-88) 
Editor's note— Sections 3 and 4, Ord. No. 88-959, adopted Feb. 23, 1988, being not specifically amendatory of this Code; have been included as § 4-311 at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 4-312—4-320. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS[20] 

Footnotes: 
--- (20) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 88-958, §§ 2—5, adopted Feb. 23, 1988, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as Art. XV, Div. 2, §§ 4-321—4-324, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 4-321. - Trench safety requirements—Bid specifications and contract. 
On any public construction project for the city in which trench excavation will exceed a depth of five (5) feet, the bid specifications and the contract shall provide the following: 
(1)  Require the contractor to construct any trench safety system in accordance with Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards, as currently set forth in 29 CFR 1926.650—1926.653; 
(2)  The apparent low bidder, after bid opening but before formal execution of the contract, shall be required to present to the city a trench safety system prepared and sealed by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas. The contractor shall be required to provide the soil borings necessary to design the trench safety plan; 
(3)  Include a current copy of the OSHA regulations or standards. 
(Ord. No. 88-958, § 2, 2-23-88)  
Sec. 4-322. - Same—Submission of program; separate pay item; inspections. 
(a)  On all public construction projects, the bid specifications and the contract shall require the contractor to develop and submit to the city a safety program which is consistent with OSHA standards and regulations and which governs the presence and activities of individuals working in and around the trench excavations. 
(b)  A separate pay item for the trench safety program shall be included in the bid specifications and in the contract. The contractor shall also be required to make daily inspections of the trench safety systems to ensure that the systems meet OSHA requirements. 
(Ord. No. 88-958, § 3, 2-23-88)  
Sec. 4-323. - Responsibility for ensuring safety. 
The bid specifications and the contract shall provide that the contractor, and not the owner, is responsible for ensuring the safety of those persons working in and around the trench excavations. 
(Ord. No. 88-958, § 4, 2-23-88)  
Sec. 4-324. - Other requirements. 
The city council of the city hereby specifically authorizes the city manager or his designee(s) to incorporate specific language into the bid specifications and contract documents, not inconsistent with this division, state and/or federal laws, which he deems necessary to accomplish the purposes of this division. 
(Ord. No. 88-958, § 5, 2-23-88)  
Secs. 4-325—4-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVI. - LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS[21] 

Footnotes: 
--- (21) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 86-887, §§ 1—9, adopted Dec. 16, 1986, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as Art. XVI, §§ 4-331—4-340 at the discretion of the editor. The "Selected Plant List" and a set of diagrams illustrating street yards, which were attached to the ordinance, have not been set out herein but are available for inspection in the appropriate city offices. 
 
Sec. 4-331. - Purposes. 
The purposes of these provisions area as follows: 
(1)  To aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance of contributing to the processes of air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge and storm-water runoff retardation, while at the same time aiding in noise, glare and heat abatement; and 
(2)  To ensure that the local stock of native trees and vegetation is replenished; and 
(3)  To assist in providing adequate light and air while preventing overcrowding of land; and 
(4)  To provide visual buffering and enhance the beautification of the city; and 
(5)  To safeguard and enhance property values to protect public and private investment; and 
(6)  To preserve and protect the unique identify and environment of Cedar Hill's economic base, attracted to the city by such factors; and 
(7)  To conserve energy; and 
(8)  To protect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 86-887, § 1, 12-16-88)  
Sec. 4-332. - Definitions. 
[The following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:] 
Application. Unless otherwise provided, these regulations shall apply only to that property to be developed for nonsingle-family residential use. 
Buffering. The use of landscaping (other than mere grass on flat terrain) or the use of landscaping along with beams, walls or decorative fences that at least partially and periodically obstruct the view from the street, in a continuous manner, of vehicular use areas, parking lots and their parked cars and detention ponds. 
Corner lot. A corner lot is situated at the junction of two (2) or more streets, or of two (2) segments of a curved street, forming an angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
Dripline. Periphery of the area underneath a tree which would be encompassed by perpendicular lines dropped from the farthest edges of the crown of the tree. 
Landscaped area. That area within the boundaries of a given lot which is devoted to and consists of plant material including, but not limited to, grass, trees, shrubs, flowers, vines and other groundcover, native plant materials, planters, brick, stone, natural forms, water forms, aggregate and other landscape features, but not including the use of smooth concrete or asphalt; provided, however, that the use of brick, stone aggregate or other inorganic materials shall not predominate over the use of organic plant materials. 
Lot. Land consisting of one (1) or more legal lots or a part of a legal lot being developed on a single development or on a part of a phased development. 
Owner. That person who has legal title to the property, or a lessee, agent, employee or other person acting on behalf of the titleholder with authorization to do so. 
Protected tree. A tree(s) designated by the owner or the city which may have historical designation, act as a local landmark, or provide soil stability in existing streams or creek beds, or have a trunk circumference of sixty (60) inches or more, measured four and one-half (4½) feet above natural grade. 
Removal. Removal, as applied to protected trees, means uprooting, severing the main trunk of the tree, or an act which causes, or may reasonably be expected to cause, the tree to die including, but not limited to, damage inflicted upon the root system by machinery, storage of materials, or soil compaction; substantially changing the natural grade above the root system or around the trunk; excessive pruning; or paving with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious materials in a manner which may reasonably be expected to kill the tree. 
Street yard. The area of a lot which lies between the street right-of-way line and the actual front wall line of the building, as such building wall line extends from the outward corners of the building, parallel to the street, until it intersects the side property lines. In determining the actual definition, steps and unenclosed porches shall be excluded, but such building wall line shall follow and include the irregular indentions of the building. A front building wall is a building wall fronting on a street. 
On corner lots, the street yard shall consist of all the area of such lot between all abutting street right-of-way lines and their corresponding actual front building wall lines, as such lines are imaginarily extended in the manner provided above. 
When there are multiple buildings on a lot, the street yard shall consist of all the area of the lot between the street right(s)-of-way and an imaginary line beginning at one (1) side of the property line, running parallel to the street, connecting to the frontmost corner of the building wall fronting the street and nearest such side property line, then following and connecting the frontmost walls of all buildings fronting on the street, and then extending to the other side property line, running parallel to the street. If a building has a rounded front, the front building wall corners shall be the points closest to the side boundaries. Provided, that isolated buildings (e.g., fast food restaurants in a shopping center, photo processing dropoffs, bank drive-throughs, etc.) shall not be considered in delineating the street yard. 
Notwithstanding all of the foregoing, on land used only for parking purposes or only as a commercial or private parking lot, the street yard shall consist of the area between the street right-of-way line and the back property line. 
Note— See the editor's note to this article. 
Tree. A tree shall be defined as follows and will qualify as such if either of the following are met: 
(1)  A woody plant having a present height greater than ten (10) feet and a trunk diameter greater than two (2) inches; 
(2)  A plant listed as a tree in any of the following: 
(a)  A tree listed in the selected plant list provided by the city; 
(b)  A tree listed in "The Trees of North Texas" by Robert Vines. 
Note— See the editor's note to this article. 
(Ord. No. 86-887, § 2, 12-16-88)  
Sec. 4-333. - Removal of protected trees. 
No owner shall remove or cause the removal of any protected tree without first securing approval from the city, except as provided below: 
(1)  When any protected tree sustains damage in the form of a broken trunk, broken limbs or uprooting, which creates a hazard to life or property, no application shall be required for the removal of the damaged part or parts of the tree, provided that the removal is effected before the beginning of the fifth business day following the occurrence of the damage, and provided further, that the building inspection department may extend this period in the case of widespread and extensive storm damage; 
(2)  When site plan/plat approval by the city council is required for any development, the actual or schematic locations of such existing trees as would be protected shall be shown on all site plans/plats and such site plans/plats depicting any such trees shall be submitted to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 86-887, § 3, 12-16-88)  
Sec. 4-334. - Application procedure. 
(a)  When site plant or plat review by the city is required for any nonresidential development, the site plan or plat shall contain the information listed below: 
(1)  The date, scale, north point, title and name of owner; 
(2)  The location of existing boundary lines and dimensions of the tract; 
(3)  The approximate centerline of existing watercourses; the appropriate location of significant drainage features; the location and size of the existing and proposed streets and alleys; the existing and proposed utility easements on or adjacent to the lot, and existing and proposed sidewalks adjacent to the street; 
(4)  The location, size and type (tree, shrub, groundcover or grass) of proposed landscaping in proposed landscaped areas; and the location and size of proposed landscaped areas; 
(5)  The location and species of existing trees in the street yard and parking lots, having trunks ten (10) inches or larger in diameter, and the approximate size of their crowns. 
(6)  Information necessary for verifying whether the required tree requirements have been met under section 4-336(c)(1) and (2), as applicable; 
(7)  An indication of how the applicant plans to protect the existing trees, which are proposed to be retained, from damage during construction; 
(8)  The proposed irrigation system, as provided by section 4-336(i); 
(9)  The certification by a landscape architect, registered in the State of Texas, that the plans satisfy the requirements of these landscaping regulations. The certification is not required when the street yard area is ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less; 
(10)  The approximate crown size, species and common name, and location of each tree designated as a protected tree; 
(11)  The reason for the proposed removal of any tree designated as a protected tree. 
(b)  Landscaping plans approved by the city as part of a site plan/plat shall not require further approval by the building official, if the site plan/plat approved contained all information listed in subsections (a)(1) through (11) above. 
(c)  An inspection fee, in an amount to be set by the city council from time to time by ordinance, shall be collected by the building official or his designee at the time of application for a final plat. 
(d)  The building official shall not issue an occupancy permit prior to the approval of the landscape plan and completion of all planting and other landscape improvements designated on each plan; however, when adverse seasonal planting conditions exist, the building official may issue a temporary permit not to exceed nine (9) months. 
(e)  If at the time of final acceptance by the city, the required landscaping is not yet in place, the owner shall make fiscal arrangements satisfactory to the city in the amount of two dollars ($2.00) per square foot of required landscaping not yet in place to ensure that such required landscaping shall be installed. Any owner wishing to make such fiscal arrangements must also grant license to the city to enter upon the land for the purposes of installing the required landscaping in the event that such landscaping is not in place at the time of the inspection required by the preceding subsection. Such fiscal arrangements shall be released if the required landscaping is in place at the time of such inspection. 
(Ord. No. 86-887, § 4, 12-16-88)  
Sec. 4-335. - Application of requirements. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided below, these landscaping regulations shall apply to all nonsingle-family residentially zoned land located in the city. Such landscaping requirements shall become applicable as to each individual nonsingle-family residential lot at such time as an application for a building permit on such lot is made. These requirements remain with any subsequent owner. 
(b)  A common development which includes more than one (1) lot shall be treated as one (1) lot for the purposes of satisfying these landscaping regulations. Split ownership, planning in phases, construction in stages, and/or multiple building permits for a project shall not prevent it from being a common development as referred to above. Each phase of a phased project shall comply with these requirements. 
(c)  These requirements shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Building permits for restoration, within a period of twelve (12) months, of a building which has been damaged by fire, explosion, flood, tornado, riot or act of a public enemy; 
(2)  Building permits for restoration of buildings with a recognized city historic designation; 
(3)  Building permits for remodeling, as long as the front and side exterior walls of the building remain in the same location; 
(4)  Where a preliminary plat or site plan is filed with the city secretary prior to January 1, 1987. 
(Ord. No. 86-887, § 5, 12-16-88)  
Sec. 4-336. - Landscaping requirements. 
I. Landscaping standards for local retail, commercial, apartment and special use districts. 
(a)  On all lots platted from previously unplatted land, zoned or rezoned or granted a conditional use permit, at least twenty (20) percent of the area of the street yard shall be landscaped area. All of the required landscape area shall be located in the street yard. 
(b)  All of the required tree plantings, either proposed or existing, shall be located in the street yard area. 
(c)  At least one (1) tree of at least three (3) inches in caliper (either existing or planted) shall be included and replaced as necessary as per the following ratios: 
(1)  In street yards less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, one (1) tree per one thousand (1,000) square feet or fraction thereof or street yard; 
(2)  In street yards between ten thousand (10,000) and one hundred ten thousand (110,000) square feet, one (1) tree per two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or fraction thereof of over ten thousand (10,000) square feet is added to the requirement of ten (10) trees. 
(3)  In street yards over one ten thousand (10,000) square feet, one (1) tree per five thousand (5,000) square feet or fraction thereof street yard area over one hundred ten thousand (110,000) square feet is added to the requirement of fifty (50) trees. 
Tree specifications and definitions shall be referenced to the "American Standard for Nursery Stock". 
An existing or planted tree which is at least eight (8) inches in diameter, or at least six (6) inches in diameter and at least fifteen (15) feet tall, shall be planted in a permeable area no less than four (4) feet wide. 
(d)  Preservation of existing trees. Tree credits shall be awarded, based on the following criteria: 
(1)  The existing trees shall be in a healthy, vigorous, growing condition; 
(2)  The area below the dripline shall remain undisturbed, either by cutting or filling, in the development process; 
(3)  The developer/owner shall not put an impervious material under the dripline. Permeable pavements will be considered as impervious materials. 
(e)  Credits toward landscaping requirements. Each square foot of landscaped area which is permeable and within the area encompassed by the dripline of a tree shall count as one and one-half (1.5) square feet of landscaped area for the purposes of satisfying the requirements of subsection (a) above, as applicable. Thus, each square foot of landscaped area which is permeable and contiguous to the landscaped area within the dripline shall count as one and one-half (1.5) square feet of landscaped area for the purposes of satisfying the requirements of subsection (a), as applicable. In foregoing one hundred fifty (150) percent credit shall be subject to the following limitations. Neither overlapping dripline areas, nor areas contiguous to the dripline areas which overlap, shall be counted twice. Moreover, a tree dripline area shall not qualify for credit under this subsection if (1) less than one-half (1.5) of the dripline area is permeable cover; (2) there have been any damaging changes in the original grade of the dripline under the tree, or (3) the total of such area receiving such credit around the tree exceeds the total square footage of landscaped area within the dripline. 
(f)  Replacement of preservation trees. Should any tree designated for preservation in the landscaped plan die at any time after approval of the landscape plan or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the owner shall replace the tree with the equivalent species or a tree which will obtain the same height, spread and growth characteristics. The replacement tree shall be three (3) inches in caliper and installed as directed by this article. Failure to make the replacements within ninety (90) days after notification by the city shall result in a fine as outlined in this article. 
(g)  The existing natural landscape character (especially native junipers), oaks, elms and pecan trees) shall be preserved to the extent reasonable and feasible. In an area of the street yard containing a stand of trees, the owner shall use best good faith efforts to preserve such trees. In determining whether there is compliance with this subsection, the building official shall consider topographical constraints on design, drainage, access and egress, utilities, and other factors reasonably related to the health, safety and welfare of the public which necessitated disturbance of the existing natural landscape character, economic usefulness of the property without disturbance of its natural character, the nature and quality of the landscaping installed to replace it, and such other factors as may be relevant and proper. 
Indiscriminate clearing or stripping of the natural vegetation on a lot is expressly prohibited. 
Vehicular use areas, parking areas, parking lots and their parked vehicles shall have effective buffering from the street view. 
(h)  A minimum amount of the total area of all vehicular use areas and parking areas of a lot shall be devoted to landscaped islands, peninsulas, or medians. The minimum total area in such islands, peninsulas and medians in the street yard shall be ninety (90) square feet for each twelve (12) parking spaces. The minimum total area in such islands, peninsulas and medians in the remainder of the lot (i.e., the nonstreet yard) shall be sixty (60) square feet for each twelve (12) parking spaces therein. 
The number, size and shape of islands, peninsulas and medians in both street yards and nonstreet yards shall be at the discretion of the owner; however, no parking space shall be located further than fifty (50) feet from a permeable landscaped island, peninsula or median. All islands, peninsulas and medians required in the areas stated above shall be more or less evenly distributed throughout such parking areas, respectfully; however, the distribution and location of landscaped islands, peninsulas and medians may be adjusted to accommodate existing trees or other natural features, so long as the total area requirements for landscaped islands, peninsulas and medians for the respective parking areas above are satisfied. 
(i)  All required landscaping shall be irrigated by one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  An underground sprinkling system; 
(2)  A hose attachment within one hundred (100) feet of all landscaping; provided, however, a hose attachment within two hundred (200) feet of all landscaping in nonstreet yards shall be sufficient. 
(j)  All landscaping which is in required landscaped areas and which is adjacent to pavement shall be protected with concrete curbs or equivalent barriers when necessary to protect trees. 
(k)  Landscaping in landscaped areas shall not obstruct the view between the street and the access drives and parking aisles near the street yard entries and exits, nor shall any landscaping which creates an obstruction of view be located in the radius of any curb return. 
(l)  Landowners are encouraged to landscape the areas within the nonpaved street right-of-way abutting their land. Provided, however: 
(1)  The city may at any time require such landscaping to be removed, and the city shall not be responsible or liable in the event any landscaping in the right-of-way must be removed or is requested to be moved by the city; 
(2)  Such landscaping in the right-of-way shall observe the provisions of the city pertaining to traffic and pedestrian safety; 
(3)  Any underground sprinkler systems, planters or other permanent structures placed in the right-of-way shall require a license agreement with the city. When any other governmental jurisdiction is trustee of the public right-of-way at the particular location in question, arrangements must be made with such other jurisdiction. 
II. Landscaping standards for industry and industrial park districts. 
(a)  A landscaping plan shall be submitted as part of the building permit submittals. 
(b)  Not less than five (5) percent of the gross land area shall be provided as permanent landscaped area. 
(c)  All of the required landscape area shall be located in the street yard. 
(d)  All of the required tree plantings either proposed or existing shall be located in the street yard area. 
(e)  At least one (1) tree of at least three (3) inches in caliper shall be included and replaced as necessary as per the following rations: 
(1)  If five (5) percent of gross land area is of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, one (1) tree per one thousand (1,000) square feet or fraction thereof of gross land area. 
(2)  If five (5) percent of gross land area is between ten thousand (10,000) and one hundred ten thousand (110,000) square feet, one (1) tree per two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or fraction thereof of over ten thousand (10,000) square feet is added to the requirement of ten (10) trees. 
An existing or planted tree which is at least eight (8) inches in diameter, or at least six (6) inches in diameter and at least fifteen (15) feet tall, shall be considered as two (2) trees for purposes of satisfying this subsection. All newly planted trees shall be planted in a permeable area no less than four (4) feet wide. 
(f)  All required landscaping shall be irrigated by one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  An underground sprinkling system. 
(2)  A hose attachment within one hundred (100) feet of all landscaping. 
(g)  A minimum amount of the total area of all vehicular use areas and parking areas of a lot shall be devoted to landscaped islands, peninsulas, or medians. The minimum total area in such islands, peninsulas and medians shall be ninety (90) square feet for each twelve parking spaces. 
The number, size and shape of the islands, peninsulas and medians shall be at the discretion of the owner; however no parking space shall be located further than fifty (50) feet from a permeable landscaped island, peninsula or median. All islands, peninsulas and medians required in the areas stated above shall be more or less evenly distributed throughout such parking areas, however the distribution and location of the landscaped islands, peninsulas, and medians may be adjusted to accommodate existing trees or other natural features, so long as the area requirement for landscaped island, peninsula or median for the parking areas are satisfied. 
(h)  All landscaping which is [in] required landscaped areas and which is adjacent to pavement shall be protected with concrete curbs or equivalent barrier when necessary to protect trees. 
(Ord. No. 86-887, § 7, 12-16-88; Ord. No. 97-320, § 1, 5-13-97)  
Sec. 4-337. - Alternative compliance. 
Notwithstanding all of the foregoing provisions, a landscape plan which is alternative to strict compliance with the various landscape requirements above may be approved by the city council, if recommended by the building official and if the city council finds that such plan is as good or better than a plan in strict compliance with the various landscaping requirements herein contained in accomplishing the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 86-887, § 7, 12-16-88)  
Sec. 4-338. - Appeals. 
If a protected tree removal application is denied, the applicant therefor may appeal such action to the city council by filing written notice of such appeal with the parks and recreation department within ten (10) days of notice to such applicant of the denial of the application. The city council shall have thirty (30) days from the date of appeals to review such denial. The city council may affirm or reverse the determination of the parks and recreation department. If the city council fails to act within thirty (30) days, the appeal shall be automatically granted, and the approval shall be granted per the original application. 
(Ord. No. 86-887, § 8, 12-16-88)  
Sec. 4-339. - Conflicts with departmental rules. 
In any case where engineering, design standards or departmental rules establish conditions that cannot be met in a specific situation without removal of a protected tree, the policy, standard or rule shall be reviewed by the city to determine what specific adverse effect would result from waiver or modification of such, to the extent necessary to save the tree. If it is determined that there is no serious and imminent adverse effect, the standard, policy or rule may be modified or waived prior to the expiration of ten (10) working days from the date of the application for approval for tree removal. 
(Ord. No. 86-887, § 9, 12-16-88)  
Sec. 4-340. - Penalty for article violation. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article of the Code of Ordinances, as amended hereby, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 86-887, § 11, 12-16-88)  
Secs. 4-341—4-350. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVII. - INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE[22] 

Footnotes: 
--- (22) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-590, § 2, adopted August 23, 2016, repealed the former Art. XVII, §§ 4-351, 4-352, and enacted a new Art. XVII as set out herein. The former Art. XVII pertained to 2009 International Residential Code and derived from Ord. No. 2009-376, adopted January 13, 2009. 
 
Sec. 4-351. - Adoption of the 2015 International Residential Code. 
The 2015 International Residential Code is hereby adopted and incorporated in its entirety as though fully set out at length herein, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and the provisions of such code shall be controlling in the installation, alteration or repair of one and two family dwellings and the inspection thereof; within the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-590, § 2, 8-23-16)  
Sec. 4-352. - 2015 International Residential Code additional requirements and amendments. 
(1)  Section R101.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the Residential Code for One- and Two Family Dwellings of Cedar Hill and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein to as "this code". 
(2)  Section R102.4 is amended to read as follows: 
R102.4 Referenced codes and standards. The codes, when specifically adopted, and standards referenced in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each reference and as farther regulated in Sections R102.4.1 and R102.4.2. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference made to NFPA 70 or the Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and manufacturer's instructions shall apply. 
(3)  Section R104.10.1 is deleted. 
(4)  Section R105.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
R105.1.1 Required permit for excavation. Prior to any work performed on a property for the purpose of One and Two Family Dwellings a permit must be issued for the disturbance and/or addition of any soil in the preparation of the construction site. 
(5)  Section R105.2 is amended to read as follows: 
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemption from permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization of any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
Building: 
1.  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons (18927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1. 
2.  Sidewalks and driveways on private property. 
3.  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops, and similar finish work. 
4.  Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep. 
5.  Swings and other playground equipment. 
6.  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support. 
Electrical: 
1.  Listed cord-and-plug connected temporary decorative lighting. 
2.  Reinstallations of attachment plug receptacles but not the outlets therefor. 
3.  Replacement of branch circuit overcurrent devices of the required capacity in the same location. 
4.  Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy. 
5.  Minor repair work, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
Gas: 
1.  Portable heating, cooking or clothes drying appliances. 
2.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
3.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
Mechanical: 
1.  Portable heating appliance 
2.  Portable ventilation appliances. 
3.  Portable cooling unit. 
4.  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this code. 
5.  Replacement of any minor part that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
6.  Portable evaporative cooler. 
7.  Self-contained refrigeration systems containing 10 pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant or that are actuated by motors of 1 horsepower (746 W) or less. 
8.  Portable fuel cell appliances that are not connected to a fixed piping system and are not interconnected to a power grid. 
Plumbing: 
1.  The stopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this code. 
2.  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
(6)  Section R105.3.1.1 is deleted. 
(6.5)  105.5 Expiration. All permits issued shall comply with the following: 
1.  Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or such work does not receive an inspection for a period of 180 days. 
2.  The Building Official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extensions shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. If granted, the extension shall not exceed the maximum completion timeframe from original permit issuance as described below. 
3.  All residential structures less than or equal to 10,000 square feet shall be completed within 24 months of permit issuance, and structures greater than 10,000 square feet shall be complete final inspections within 36 months of permit issuance. Failure to comply with stated time limits will result in the property being declared a public nuisance and may result in the demolition of the structure by the city at the owner's expense. 
4.  Appeals for extensions to the building completion time limit must be submitted to and approved by the Building Appeals and Advisory Board prior to the permit expiration date. The application for extension shall be submitted and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
5.  The re-permitting fee shall be one-half of the original building permit fee. 
(7)  Section R105.10 is added to read as follows: 
R105.10 Re-permitting. All projects shall be re-permitted after the original permit expires. The re-permit shall become invalid unless the work authorized is commenced within 90 days after issuance or if the work authorized by the re-permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 90 days after the work is commenced. The contractor or owner shall contact the Building Inspector each month to show project progression. 
(8)  Section R106.1.4 is deleted. 
(9)  Section R106.2 is amended to read as follows: 
R106.2 Site plan. The construction documents submitted with the application for permit shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site and distances from lot lines. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or plot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify the requirement for a site plan when the application for permit is for alteration or repair or when otherwise warranted. 
All permit applications in the Lake Ridge Subdivision shall be required to submit a detailed lot grading plan, sealed by a Registered Professional Engineer in the State of Texas. 
A precise grade survey shall be submitted at the time of final inspection. The precise grade survey must be sealed by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor in the State of Texas and match the engineered grading plan submitted at time of applying for the building permit. If an engineered grading plan was not required to be submitted at the time of applying for the permit the precise grade survey shall show drainage flow for the lot. 
(10)  Section R108.7 is added to read as follows: 
R108.7 Re-inspection Fee. A fee as established by city council resolution may be charged when: 
1.  The inspection called for is not ready when the inspector arrives; 
2.  No building address or permit card is clearly posted; 
3.  Approved plans are not on the job site available to the inspector; 
4.  The building is locked or work otherwise not available for inspection when called; 
5.  The job site is red-tagged twice for the same item; 
6.  The original red tag has been removed from the job site; and /or 
7.  Violations exist on the property including failure to maintain erosion control, trash control, or tree protection. 
8.  Any re-inspection fees assessed shall be paid before any more inspections are made on that job site. 
(11)  Section R109.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
R109.1.3 Floodplain Inspections. For construction permitted in areas prone to flooding as established by Table R301.2 (1), upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the building official may require submission of documentation, prepared and sealed by a registered design professional, of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, required in Section R322. 
(12)  Section R110 is deleted. 
(13)  Section R202 is amended to provide the following definitions: 
TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units separated by property lines in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two sides. 
(14)  Table R301.2 (1) is amended to read as follows: 
R301.2 (1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria Table. 
Ground Snow load 	- 	5 lb/ft 2 
Wind Speed (d)(mph) 	- 	115 (3-sec-gust)/76 fastest mile 
Seismic Design Category (f,g) 	- 	A 
Weathering (a) 	- 	Moderate 
Frost line depth (b) 	- 	6" 
Termite (c) 	- 	Very heavy 
Winter Design Temp (e) 	- 	22°F 
Ice Barrier Under-Layment Required(h) 	- 	No 
Flood Hazards (h) 	- 	FEMA 
Air Freezing Index (i) 	- 	150 
Mean Annual Temp (j) 	- 	64.9°F 
**Footnotes remain unchanged** 	
 
(15)  Section R302.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R302.1 Exterior walls. Construction, projections, openings and penetrations of exterior walls of dwellings and accessory buildings shall comply with Table R302.1(l); or dwellings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section P2904 shall comply with Table R302.1(2). 
Exceptions: 
1.  Walls, projections, openings or penetrations in walls perpendicular to the line used to determine the fire separation distance. 
2.  Walls of dwellings and accessory structures located on the same lot. 
3.  Detached tool sheds and storage shed, playhouses and similar structures exempted from permits are not required to provide wall protection based on location on the lot. Projections beyond the exterior wall shall not extend over the lot line. 
4.  Detached garages accessory to a dwelling located within 2 feet (610 mm) of a lot line are permitted to have roof eave projections not exceeding 4 inches (102 mm). 
5.  Foundation vents installed in compliance with this code are permitted. 
6.  Open non-combustible carport structures may be constructed when also approved within adopted ordinances. 
(16)  Section R302.3 is amended to read as follows: 
R302.3 Two-family dwellings. Dwelling units in two-family dwellings shall be separated from each other by wall and/or floor assemblies having not less than a 1 -hour fire-resistance rating when tested in accordance with ASTM E 119 or UL 263. Fire resistance-rated floor/ceiling and wall assemblies shall extend to and be tight against the exterior wall, and wall assemblies shall extend from the foundation to the underside of the roof sheathing. 
Exceptions: 
1.  A fire-resistance rating of 1/2 hour shall be permitted in buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA13. 
2.  Wall assemblies need not extend through attic spaces when the ceiling is protected by not less than 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum board and an attic draft stop constructed as specified in Section R302.12.1 is provided above and along the wall assembly separating the dwellings. The structural framing supporting the ceiling shall also be protected by not less than 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board or equivalent. 
3.  Two-family dwelling units that are also divided by a property line through the structure shall be separated as required for townhouses. 
(17)  Section R302.5.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R302.5.1 Opening protection. Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than 1 3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 1 3/8 inches (35 mm) thick, or 20-minute fire-rated doors. 
(18)  Section R303.3 is amended to read as follows: 
R303.3 Bathrooms. Bathrooms, water closet compartments and other similar rooms shall be provided with aggregate glazing area in windows of not less than 3 square feet (0.3 m2) one-half of which must be openable. 
Exception: The glazed areas shall not be required where artificial light and a local exhaust system are provided. The minimum local exhaust rates shall be determined in accordance with Section Ml507. Exhaust air from the space shall be exhausted directly to the outdoors unless the space contains only a water closet, a lavatory, or water closet and a lavatory may be ventilated with an approved mechanical recirculating fan or similar device designed to remove odors from the air. 
(19)  Section R310.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R311.1.1 Emergency escape and rescue opening required. Basements, habitable attics, habitable spaces and every sleeping room shall have not less than one operable emergency escape and rescue opening. Where basements contain one or more sleeping rooms, an emergency escape and rescue opening shall be required in each sleeping room, Emergency escape and rescue openings shall open directly into a public way, to a yard or court that opens to a public way. 
Exception: Kitchen and dining rooms are not required to comply. Storm shelters and basements used only to house mechanical equipment not exceeding a total floor area of square feet (15.58m 2 ). 
(20)  Section R313 is deleted. 
(21)  Section R315.2.2 is amended to read as follows: 
R315.2.2 Alterations, repairs and additions. Where alterations, repairs or additions requiring a permit occur, or where one or more sleeping rooms are added or created in existing dwellings, the individual dwelling unit shall be equipped with carbon monoxide alarms located as required for new dwellings. 
Exception: 
1.  Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, such as the replacement of roofing or siding or the addition or replacement of windows or doors, or the addition of a porch or deck is exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(22)  Section R322.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R322.1 General. Buildings and structures, when permitted to be constructed in flood hazard areas. (Including A or V Zones) as established in Table R301.2 (1) shall be designed and constructed as required in accordance with the provisions contained in this section or by other local provisions as applicable. 
Exception: Buildings and structures located in whole or in part in identified floodways as established in Table R301.2 (1) shall be designed and constructed in accordance with ASCE24. 
(23)  Section R322.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R322.2.1 Elevation requirements. 
1.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas not designated as Costal A Zones shall have the lowest floor elevated 2 feet above the design flood elevation. 
2.  Buildings and structures in flood hazard areas designated as Costal A Zones shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus 2 foot (610 mm) or to the design flood elevation whichever is higher. 
3.  In areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), buildings and structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least as high above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or at least 2 feet (610 mm) if a depth number is not specified. 
4.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides shall be elevated to or above the design flood elevation. 
Exception: Enclosed areas below the design flood elevation, including basements whose floors are not below grade on all sides, shall meet the requirements of Section R322.2.2. 
(24)  Section R322.3.2 is amended to read as follows: 
R322.3.2 Elevation requirements. 
1.  All buildings and structures erected within costal high hazard areas shall be elevated so that the lowest portion of all structural members supporting the lowest floor, with the exception of mat or raft foundations, piling, pile caps, columns, grade beams and bracing, is: 
1.1.  Located at or above the design flood elevation, if the lowest horizontal structural members is oriented parallel to the direction of wave approach, where parallel shall mean less than or equal to 20 degrees (0.35 rad) from the direction of approach, or 
1.2.  Located at the base flood elevation plus 2 feet (610 mm), or the design flood elevation, whichever is higher, if the lowest horizontal structural member is oriented perpendicular to the direction of wave approach, where perpendicular shall mean greater than 20 degrees (0.35 rad) from the direction of approach. 
2.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides are prohibited. 
3.  The use of fill for structural support is prohibited. 
4.  Minor grading, and the placement of minor quantities of fill, shall be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios and walkways. 
Exception: Walls and portions enclosing areas below the design flood elevation shall meet the requirements of Sections R322.3.4 and R322.3.5. 
(25)  Section R401.3 is amended to read as follows: 
R401.3 Drainage. Surface drainage shall be diverted to a storm sewer conveyance or other approved point of collection so as to not create a hazard. Lots shall be graded to drain surface water away from foundation walls. The grade shall fall a minimum of 6 inches (152mm) within the first 10 feet (3049mm). 
Exceptions: 
1.  Where lot lines, walls, slopes or other physical barriers prohibit 6 inches of fall within 10 feet (3048mm), the final grade shall slope away from the foundation at a minimum slope of 5 percent and the water shall be directed to drains or swales to ensure drainage away from the structure. Swales shall be sloped a minimum of 2 percent when located with 10 feet (3048mm) of the building foundation. Impervious surfaces within 10 feet (3048mm) of the building foundation shall be sloped a minimum of 2 percent away from the building. 
2.  Building sites in the shall be elevated a minimum of 2 feet above street level or on lots below street level elevated 2 feet above existing grade at finish floor. 
(26)  Section R403.1.8 is amended to read as follows: 
R403.1.8 Foundations on expansive soils. Structural & Geotechnical Requirements for Single Family Dwellings in the Eagle Ford Shale Formation. 
All foundations for Single Family dwellings built in the Eagle Ford Shale areas, as shown on exhibit A, shall be designed and constructed in accordance with these parameters: 
1.  A geotechnical investigation must be done under the direct supervision of a Registered Professional Engineer in the State of Texas with a specialty in Geotechnical Engineering. 
2.  The soils report must include appropriate design recommendations and recommendations for foundation movement vertically as well as overall tilt. Parameters must be provided to allow proper structural design of the foundation. 
3.  Minimum of one soil test boring shall be taken at the specific location on the lot or tract. 
4.  The foundation shall be designed by a Registered Professional Engineer with a specially in Structural Engineering. The foundation shall be designed to the following standards: 
a.  Soils with Potential Vertical Rise (PVRs) less than 1". Turns down slab with no sub-grade treatment are permissible. 
b.  Soils with PVRs between 1" and 2" stiffened foundation slabs, no sub-grade preparation required. 
c.  Soils with PVRs between 2" and 4" stiffened slabs permitted, but require appropriate sub-grade preparation, such as select fill, water or lime injection. 
d.  Soils with PVRs greater than 4". Structurally suspended beam and slab foundations supported on drilled piers bearing on suitable material below the expansive material zone. 
e.  The Potential Vertical Rise (PVR) shall be calculated per Texas Department of Transportation Method, Tex 124-E. 
5.  Consideration must be taken into account regarding tilt on sites where this is a factor. 
6.  The Structural Engineer of Record shall inspect the foundation prior to the pouring of concrete. 
7.  The Structural Engineer shall submit a written report of the foundation inspection to the Building Inspection Department. 
(27)  Section R602.6.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R602.6.1 Drilling and notching of top plate. When piping or ductwork is placed in or partly in an exterior wall or interior load-bearing wall, necessitating cutting, drilling or notching of the top plate by more than 50 percent of its width, a galvanized metal tie not less than 0.054 inch thick (1.37 mm) (16 Ga) and 5 inches (127 mm) wide shall be fastened across and to the plate at each side of the opening with not less than eight l0d (0.148 inch diameter) having a minimum length of 1 1/2 inches (38 mm) at each side or equivalent. Fasteners will be offset to prevent splitting of the top plate material. The metal tie must extend a minimum of 6 inches past the opening. See figure R602.6.1. 
(28)  Figure R602.6.1 is amended to read as follows: 
 
Top Plat Framing to Accommodate Piping 
(29)  Section R703.8.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R703.8.4.1 Size and spacing. Veneer ties, if strand wire, shall not be less in thickness than No. 9 U.S. gage [(0.148 in.) (4 mm)] wire and shall have a hook embedded in the mortar joint, or if sheet metal, shall be not less than No. 22 U.S. gage by [(0.0299 in.) (0.76 mm)] 7/8 inch (22 mm) corrugated. Each tie shall support not more than 2.67 square feet (0.25 m2) of wall area and shall be spaced not more than 24 inches (610 mm) on center horizontally and 24 inches (610 mm) on center vertically. 
In stud framed exterior walls, all ties shall be anchored to studs as follows: 
1.  When studs are 16 inch (407mm) on center stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 24 inches (737mm) vertically starting approximately 12 inches (381 mm) from the foundation; or 
2.  When studs are 24 inches (610 mm) on center stud ties shall be spaced no further apart than 16 inches (483 mm) vertically starting approximately 8 inches (254 mm) from the foundation. 
Exception: In Seismic Design Category D 0 , Di, or D 2 or townhouses in Seismic Design Category C or in wind areas of more than 30 pounds per square foot pressure (1.44 kPa), each tie shall support not more than 2 square feet (0.2 m 2 ) of wall area. 
(30)  Section R902.1 is amended to read as follows: 
R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Section R904 and R905. Class A, B or C roofing shall be installed. Class A, B and C roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry and exposed concrete roof deck. 
2.  Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or copper shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or slate installed on noncombustible decks. 
3.  Class A roof assemblies include minimum 16 ounces per square foot coper sheets installed over combustible decks 
4.  Class A roof assemblies included slate installed over underlayment over combustible decks. 
5.  Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on one-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 240 square feet. 
(31)  Section R903.4 is amended to read as follows: 
R903.4 Roof Drainage. Roof drains shall be installed at each low point of the roof. 
(32)  Section N1101.4.1 is added to read as follows: 
N1101.4.1(R102.1.2) Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. Regardless of the program or the path to compliance, each 1- and 2- family dwelling shall be tested for air and duct leakage as prescribed in Section N1102.4(R402.4) and N1103.3.3(R403.3.3) respectively. 
(33)  Section N1101.6 (R202) is amended to read as follows: 
Dynamic Glazing. Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible ability to change its performance properties, including U-factor, solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC), or visible transmittance (VT). 
(34)  Section N1102.2.14 (R402.2.14) is added to read as follows: 
N1102.2.14 (R402.2.14) Insulation installed in walls. To insure that insulation remains in place, insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel sheathing, netting or other equivalent materials approve by the building official. 
(35)  Section N1102.2.3.2 (R402.3.2) is amended to read as follows: 
N1102.2.3.2 (R402.3.2) Glazed fenestration SHGC. An area-weighted average of fenestration products more than 50-percent glazed shall be permitted to satisfy the SHGC requirements. 
Dynamic glazing shall be permitted to satisfy the SHGC requirements of Table R402.1.2 provided the ration of the higher to lower labeled SHGC is greater than or equal to 2.4, and thedynamic glazing is automatically controlled to modulate the amount of solar gain into the space in multiple steps.Dynamic glazing shall be considered separately from other fenestration, and area-weighted averaging with other fenestration that is not dynamic glazing shall not be permitted. 
Exception:Dynamic glazing is not required to comply with this section when both the lower and higher labeled SHGC already comply with the requirements of Table N1102.1.2 (R402.1.2). 
Where vertical fenestration is shaded by an overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device, the SHGC required in Table N1102.1.2 (R402.1.2) shall be reduce by using the multipliers in Table N1102.1.5 (R402.3.2) SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections. 
(36)  Table N1102.1.5 (R402.3.2) is added to read as follows: 
Table N1102.1.5 (R402.3.2) SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections a 
Projection Factor 	SHGC Multiplier (all Other Orientation) 	SHGC Multiplier (North Oriented) 
0-0.10 	1.00 	1.00 
>0.10-0.20 	0.91 	0.95 
>0.20-0.30 	0.82 	0.91 
>0.30-0.40 	0.74 	0.87 
>0.40-0.50 	0.67 	0.84 
>0.50-0.60 	0.61 	0.81 
>0.60-0.70 	0.56 	0.78 
>0.70-0.80 	0.51 	0.76 
>0.80-0.90 	0.47 	0.75 
>0.90-1.00 	0.44 	0.73 
a : north oriented means within 45 degrees of true north. 
 
(37)  Section N1102.4.1.2 (402.4.1.2) is amended to read as follows: 
N1102.4.1.2 (R402.4.1.2) Testing. The building or dwelling unit shall be tested and verified as having an air leakage rate not exceeding five air changes per hour in Climate Zones 1 and 2, and three air changes per hour in Climate Zones 3 through 8. Testing shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM E 779 or ASTM E 1827 and reported at a pressure of 0.2 inch w.g. (50Pascals). Where required by the code official, testing shall be conducted by an approved third party. A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to the code official. Testing shall be performed at any time after creation of all penetrations from the building thermal envelope. 
During Testing: 
1.  Exterior windows and doors, fireplace and stove doors shall be closed, but not sealed, beyond the intended weather stripping or other infiltration control measures. 
2.  Dampers including exhaust, intake, makeup air, back draft and flue dampers shall be closed, but not sealed beyond intended infiltration control measures. 
3.  Interior doors, if installed at the time of the test, shall be open. 
4.  Exterior doors for continuous ventilation systems and heat recovery ventilators shall be closed and sealed. 
5.  Heating and cooling systems, if installed at the time of test shall be turned off. 
6.  Supply and return registers, if installed at the time of test, shall be fully open. 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration testing certified by national or state originations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
(38)  Section Nil 03.3.3 (R403.3.3.3) is amended to read as follows: 
N1103.3.3 (R403.3.3) Duct testing (Mandatory). Ducts shall be pressure tested to determine air leakage by one of the following methods: 
1.  Rough-in test: Total leakage shall be measured with a pressure differential of 0.1 in w.g. (25 Pa) across the system, including the manufacturer's air handler enclosure if installed at the time of the test. All registers shall be taped or otherwise sealed during the test. 
2.  Postconstruction test: Total leakage shall be measured with a pressure differential of 0.1 inch w.g. (25Pa) across the entire system, including the manufacturer's air handler enclosure. Registers shall be taped or otherwise sealed during the test. 
Exception: A duct air leakage test shall not be required where the duct and air handler are located entirely within the building thermal envelope. 
A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to the code official. 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration testing certified by national or state originations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
(39)  Section N1105.6.2 (R405.6.2) is amended to read as follows: 
N1105.6.2 (R405.6.2) Specific approval. Performance analysis tools meeting the applicable provisions of Section N1105 (R405) shall be permitted to be approved based on meeting a specified threshold for a jurisdiction. The code official shall be permitted to approve tools for a specified application or limited scope. 
Acceptable performance software simulation tools may include, but are not limited to, REM Rate ™, Energy Gauge and IC3. Other performance software programs accredited by RESNET BESTEST and having the ability to provide a report as outlined in N1105.4.2 (R405.4.2) may also be deemed acceptable performance simulation programs and may be considered by the building official. 
(40)  Table N1106.4 (406.4) is amended to read as follows: 
TABLE N1106.4 (R406.4) 1 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	65 
 
1 This table is effective until August 31, 2019 
TABLE N1106.4 (R406.4) 2 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	63 
 
2 This table is effective from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2022 
(41)  Section Ml305.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
M1305.1.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances requiring access shall be provided with an opening and a clear and unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance, but not less than 30 inches (726 mm) height and 22 inches (559 mm) wide and not more than 20 feet (6096 mm) long measured along the centerline of the passageway from the opening to the appliance. The passageway shall have continuous solid flooring in accordance with Chapter 5 not less than 24 inches (610 mm) wide. A level service space at least 30 inches (762 mm) deep and 30 inches (762) wide shall be present along all sides of the appliance where access is required. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger and large enough to allow removal of the largest appliance. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, access to the attic space shall be provided by one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb. (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
Exception: 
1.  The passageway and level service space are not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed through the required opening. 
2.  Where the passageway is unobstructed and not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) high and 22 inches (559 mm) wide for its entire length, the passageway shall be not more than 50 feet (15250 mm) long. 
(42)  Add Section 1411.1.1 to read as follows: 
M1411.1.1 Testing of Refrigerating Systems. All refrigerating systems shall comply with one of the following testing methods; 
1.  Pressure Test. Pressurize the system with dry nitrogen to 500psi and hold that pressure for 24 hours. 
2.  Vacuum Test. System must be evacuated to a level of 300 microns and could not rise to more than 600 microns after isolating the vacuum pump. 
(43)  Section Ml411.3 is amended to read as follows: 
M1411.3 Condensate disposal. Condensate from all cooling coils or evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to a sanitary sewer through a trap, by means of a direct or indirect drain. Such piping shall maintain a minimum horizontal slope in the direction of discharge of not less than 1/8 unit vertical in 12 unit horizontal (1-percent slope). Condensate shall not discharge into a street, alley or other areas where it would cause a nuisance. 
(44)  Section M1411.3.1 is amended to read as follows: 
M1411.3.1 Auxiliary and secondary drains systems. In addition to the requirements of Section M1411.3, a secondary drain and auxiliary drain pan shall be required for each cooling or evaporator coil where damage to any building components will occur as a result of overflow from the equipment drain pan or stoppage in the condensate drain piping. Such piping shall maintain a minimum horizontal slope in the direction of discharge of not less than 1/8 unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (1-percent slope). Drain piping shall be a minimum of %-inch (19mm) nominal pipe size. One of the following methods shall be used: 
1.  An auxiliary drain pan with a separate drain shall be installed under the coils on which condensation will occur. The auxiliary pan drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert the occupants in the event of a stoppage of the primary drain. The pan shall have a minimum depth of 1.5 inches (38 mm), shall not be less than 3 inches (76mm) larger than the unit or the coil dimensions in with and length and shall be constructed of corrosion-resistant material. Galvanized sheet steel pans shall have a minimum thickness of not less than 0.0236-inch (0.6010 mm) (No. 24 Gage). Nonmetallic pans shall have a minimum thickness of not less than 0.0625 inch (1.6 mm). 
2.  A separate overflow drain line shall be connected to a drain pan installed with the equipment. The overflow drain shall discharge to a conspicuous point of disposal to alert occupants in the event of a stoppage of the primary drain. The overflow drain line shall connect to the drain pan at a higher level than the primary drain connection. 
3.  An auxiliary drain pan without a separate drain line shall be installed under the coil on which condensation will occur. This pan shall be equipped with a water level detection device conforming to UL 508 that will shut off the equipment served prior to overflow of the pan. The pan shall be equipped with a fitting to allow for drainage. The auxiliary drain pan shall be constructed in accordance with Item 1 of this section. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
4.  A water level detection device conforming to UL 508 shall be installed that will shut off the equipment served in the event that the primary drain is blocked. The device shall be installed in the primary drain line, the overflow drain line or the equipment supplied drain pan, located at a point higher than the primary drain line connection and below the overflow rim of such pan. A water level detection device may be installed only with prior approval of the building official. 
(45)  Section M1411.3.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
M14.11.3.1.1 Water-level monitoring devices. On down-flow units and other coils that do not have secondary drain or provisions to install a secondary or auxiliary drain pan, a water-level monitoring device shall be installed inside the primary drain pan. This device shall shut off the equipment served in the event that the primary drain becomes restricted. Devices shall not be installed in the drain line. A water level detection device may be installed only with the prior approval of the building official. 
(46)  Section M2005.1 is amended to read as follows: 
M2005.1 General. Water heaters shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 28, the manufacturer's installation instructions and the requirements of this code. Tank-less water heaters installed in an attic shall conform to the requirements of Section Ml 305.1.3. Gas-fired water heaters shall conform to the requirements in Chapter 24. Domestic electric water heaters shall conform to UL 174. Oiled-fired water heaters shall conform to UL 732. Thermal solar water heaters shall comply with Chapter 23 and UL 174. Solid fuel-fired water heaters shall comply with UL 2523. 
(47)  Section M2005.2 is amended to read as follows: 
M2005.2 Prohibited locations. Fuel-fired water heaters shall not be installed in a room used as a storage closet. Water heaters located in a bathroom shall be installed in a sealed enclosure so that combustion air will not be taken from the living space. Access to such enclosure may be from the bedroom or bathroom when through a solid door, weather-stripped in accordance with the exterior door air leakage requirements of theInternational Energy Conservation Code and equipped with an approved self-closing device. Installation of direct-vent water heaters within an enclosure is not required. 
Water heaters of the storage type in a single-family residence shall not be located in the attic. 
(48)  Section M2005.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
M2005.2.1 Water heater access. Access to tank-less water heaters that are located in an attic or under floor crawl space is permitted to be through a closet located in a sleeping room or bathroom where ventilation of those spaces is in accordance with this code. 
(49)  Section G2408.2 (305.3)is amended to read as follows: 
G2408.2 (305.3) Elevation of ignition source. Equipment and appliances shall be elevated not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor in hazardous locations and public garages, private garages, repair garages, motor fuel-dispensing facilities and parking garages. For the purpose of this section, rooms or spaces that are not part of the living space of a dwelling unit and that communicate directly with a private garage through openings shall be considered to be part of the private garage. 
(50)  Section G2408.3 is amended to read as follows: 
G2408.3 (305.5) Private garages. Appliances located in private garages shall be installed a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor. 
(51)  Section G2412.5 is amended to read as follows: 
G2412.5 (401.5) Identification. For other than steel pipe, exposed piping shall be identified by a yellow label marked "Gas" in black letters. The marking shall be spaced at intervals not exceeding 5 feet (1524 mm). The marking shall not be required on pipe located in the same room as the equipment served. 
Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING 
1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure 
Do Not Remove" 
(52)  Section G2413.3 is amended to read as follows: 
G2413.3 (402.3) Sizing. Gas piping shall be sized in accordance with one of the following: 
1.  Pipe sizing tables or sizing equations in accordance with Section G 2413.4. 
2.  The sizing tables included in a listed piping system's manufacturer's installation instructions. 
3.  Other approved engineering methods. 
Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of 1/2" (18 EDH). 
(53)  Section G2415.2.1 is added to read as follows: 
G2415.2.1 Identification. Both ends of each section of medium pressure gas piping shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING: ½ to 5 psi gas pressure- Do Not Remove" 
(54)  Section G2415.2.2 is added to read as follows: 
G2415.2.2 CSST Sizing. Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of ½ inch (18EDH). 
(55)  Section G2415.12 (404.12) is amended to read as follows: 
G2415.12 (404.12) Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (457 mm) below grade, except as provided for in Section G2415.12.1. 
(56)  Section G2417.1 (406.1) is amended to read as follows: 
G2417.1 (406.1) General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in Sections 2417.1.1 through 2417.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the Building Official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, material, power and labor necessary for the inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribed in the following tests. 
(57)  Section G2417.4 (406.4) is amended to read as follows: 
G2417.4 (406.4) Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a manometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. 
(58)  Section G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) is amended to read as follows: 
G2417.4.1 (406.4.1) Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be not less than 3 psig (20kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For test requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diaphragm diameter of three and one half inches (3½"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrementation and pressure range not to exceed 6psi for tests requiring a pressure of 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3 ½"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range on to exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa) (1/2psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.9 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. 
Diaphragm gauges used for testing must display a current calibration and be in good working condition. The appropriate test must be applied to the diaphragm gauge used for testing. 
(59)  Section G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) is amended to read as follows: 
G2417.4.2 (406.4.2) Test duration. The test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Building Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes. 
(60)  Section G2420.1.4 (406.1) is added to read as follows: 
G2420.1.4 (406.1) Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be is engaged by movement of the supporting piping. 
(61)  Section G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) is amended to read as follows: 
G2420.5.1 (409.5.1) Located within the same room. The shutoff valve shall be located in the same room as the appliance. The shutoff valve shall be within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the appliance, and shall be installed upstream of the union, connector or quick disconnect device it serves. Such shutoff valves shall be provided with access. Appliance shutoff valves located in the firebox of a fireplace shall be installed in accordance with the appliance manufacturer's instructions. A secondary shutoff valve must be installed within 3 feet (914 mm) of the firebox if appliance shutoff is located in the firebox. 
(62)  Section G2421.1 (410.01) is amended to read as follows: 
G2421.1 (410.1) Pressure regulators. A line pressure regulator shall be installed where the appliance is designed to operate at a lower pressure than the supply system. Line gas pressure regulators shall be listed as complying with ANSI Z21.80. Access shall be provided to pressure regulators. Pressure regulators shall be protected from physical damage. Regulators installed on the exterior of the building shall be approved for outdoor installation. 
Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in Section M 1305. 
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic opening. 
(63)  Section G2422.1.2.3 (411.1.3.3) is amended to read as follows: 
G2422.1.2.3 (411.1.3.3) Prohibited locations and penetrations. Connectors shall not be concealed within, or extended through, walls, floors, partitions, ceilings or appliance housings. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Rigid steel pipe connectors shall be permitted to extend through openings in appliance housings. 
2.  Fireplace inserts that are factory equipped with grommets, sleeves or other means of protection in accordance with the listing of the appliance. 
(64)  Section G2439.7 is amended to read as follows: 
G2439.7 (614.6) Domestic clothes dryer exhaust ducts. Exhaust ducts for domestic clothes dryers shall conform to the requirements of Sections G2439.5.1 through G2439.5.6. The size of duct shall not be reduced along its developed length nor at the point of termination. 
(65)  Section G2445.2 (621.2) is amended to read as follows: 
G2445.2 (621.2) Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole source of comfort heating in a dwelling unit. 
Exception: Existing approved unvented room heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Building Official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in International Fuel Gas Code Section 108.7 of the Fuel Gas Code as adopted. 
(66)  Section G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) is amended to read as follows: 
G2448.1.1 (624.1.1) Installation requirements. The requirements for water heaters relative to access, sizing, relief valves, drain pans and scald protection shall be in accordance with this code. 
(67)  Section P2603.5.1 is amended to read as follows: 
P2603.5.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of 12 inches (304 mm) below grade. 
(68)  Section P2714.1 is amended to read as follows: 
P2714.1 Sink waste outlets. Kitchen sinks shall be provided with a minimum two (2) inch drain line and a clean out. Other sinks shall be provided with waste outlets not less than 1.5 inches (38 mm) in diameter. A strainer, crossbar or other device shall be provided to restrict the clear opening of the waste outlet. Sinks on which a waste grinder is installed shall have a waste opening of not less than 3.5 inches (89 mm) in diameter. 
(69)  Section P2716.1 is amended to read as follows: 
P2716.1 Food waste grinder waste outlets. Food waste grinders shall be connected to a two (2) inch drain line and a trap arm of not less than 1 ½ inches (38 mm) in diameter. 
(70)  Section P2717.2 is amended to read as follows: 
P2717.2 Sink and dishwasher. The combined discharge from a dishwasher and a one- or two-compartment sink, with or without a food-waste disposer, shall be served by a trap of not less than 1 ½ inches (38mm) in outside diameter to a 2 inch drain line. The dishwasher discharge pipe or tubing shall raise to the underside of the counter and be fastened or otherwise held in the position before connection to the head of the food-waste disposer or to a wye fitting in the sink tailpiece. 
(71)  Section P2718.1 is amended to read as follows: 
P2718.1 Waste connection. Clothes washing machines shall be provided with a waste line and cleanout of not less than two (2) inches in diameter. The discharge from a clothes washing machine shall be through an air break. 
(72)  Section P2801.6.1 is amended to read as follows: 
P2801.6.1 Pan size and drain. The pan shall be not less than 1 ½ inches (38 mm) in depth and shall be of sufficient size and shape to receive all dripping and condensate from the tank or water heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe having a diameter of not less than¾ inch (19 mm). Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those materials listed in Table 2906.5. Multiple pan drains may terminate to a single discharge piping system when approve by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufacturer's installation instruction and installed with these instructions. 
(73)  Section P2801.7 is amended to read as follows: 
P2801.7 Water heaters installed in garages. Water heaters shall be elevated not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the garage floor. 
(74)  Section 2804.6.1 is amended to read as follows: 
P2804.6.1 Requirements for discharge pipe. The discharge piping serving a pressure relief valve, temperature relief valve or combination thereof shall: 
1.  Not be directly connected to the drainage system. 
2.  Discharge though an air gap. 
3.  Not be smaller than the diameter of the outlet of the valve served and shall discharge full size to the air gap. 
4.  Serve a single relief device and shall not connect to piping serving any other relief device or equipment. 
Exception: Multiple relief devices may be installed to a single T&P discharge piping system when approve by the administrative authority and permitted by the manufacturer's installation instruction and installed with those instructions. 
5.  Discharge to the pan serving the water heater or storage tank, to a waste receptor or to the outside. 
6.  Discharge in a manner that does not cause personal injury or structural damage. 
7.  Discharge to a termination point that is readily observable by the building occupants. 
8.  Not be trapped. 
9.  Be installed to flow by gravity. 
10.  Terminate not more than 6 inches (152 mm) and not less than two times the discharge pipe diameter above the floor or waste receptor flood level rim. 
11.  Not have a threaded connection at the end of the piping. 
12.  Not have valves or tee fittings. 
13.  Be constructed of these material indicated in Section P2906.5 or material tested, rated and approved for such use in accordance with ASME A112.4.1 
14.  Be one nominal size larger than the size of the relief-valve outlet, where the relief-valve discharge piping is constructed of PEX or PE-RT tubing. The outlet end of such tubing shall be fastened in place. 
(75)  Section P2902.5.3 is amended to read as follows: 
P2902.5.3 Lawn Irrigation Systems. The potable water supply system to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric-type vacuum breaker, a pressure type vacuum breaker, a double-check assembly or a reduced pressure principal backflow preventer. A valve shall not be installed downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where chemicals are introduced into the system, the potable water supply shall be protected against backflow by a reduced pressure principal backflow preventer. 
(76)  Section P2902.5.3.1 is added to read as follows: 
P2902.5.3.1 Landscape Irrigation. Minimum Standards for Landscape Irrigation Systems. The landscape irrigation rules promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and contained in Chapter 344, Subchapter E and F, §§344.50-344.65 Texas Administrative Code, as the same may be from time to time amended, are hereby adopted by reference as the landscape irrigation rules of the City. 
(77)  Section P3003.9.2 is amended to read as follows: 
P3003.9.2 Solvent cementing. Joints surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. A purple primer that conforms to ASTM F 656 shall be applied. Solvent cement not purple in color and conforming to ASTM D 2564, CSA B137.3, CSA B181.2 or CSA B182.1 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. The joints shall be made while the cement is wet and shall be in accordance with ASTM D 2855. Solvent cement joints shall be permitted above and below ground. 
(78)  Section P3005.2.3 is amended to read as follows: 
P3005.2.3 Building drain and building sewer junction. There shall be a two-way cleanout on the main waste line located within three (3) feet of the exterior wall of the building. Two-way cleanout tees shall not be used on lines deeper than three (3) feet. A non-corrosive identifying marker shall be located on the structure adjacent to the exterior main cleanout stamped CO. 
(79)  Section P3111 is deleted. 
(80)  Section P3112.2 is amended to read as follows: 
P3112.2 Installation. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment shall be roughed in above the floor and may be vented by extending the vent as high as possible, but not less than the drain-board height and then returning it downward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immediately downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The return vent shall be connected to the horizontal drain through a wye-branch fitting and shall, in addition, be provided with a foot vent taken off the vertical fixture vent by means of a wye-branch immediately below the floor and extending to the nearest partition and then through the roof to the open air or may be connected to other vents at a point not less than six (6) inches (152 mm) above the flood level rim of the fixtures served. Drainage fittings shall be used on all parts of the vent below the floor level a minimum slope of one-quarter (1/4) inch per foot (20.9 mm/m) back to the drain shall be maintained. 
The return bend used under the drain-board shall be a one (1) piece fitting or an assembly of a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius), a ninety (90) degree (1.6 radius) and a forty-five (45) degree (0.79 radius) elbow in the order named. Pipe sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this Code. 
The island sink drain, upstream of the return vent, shall serve no other fixtures. An accessible cleanout shall be installed in the vertical portion of the foot vent. 
(81) Section E3406.2 is amended to read as follows: 
E3406.2 Conductor material. Conductors used to conduct current shall be copper. The use of aluminum wiring shall be prohibited. 
(82)  Section E3406.3 is amended to read as follows: 
E3406.3 Minimum size of conductors. The minimum size of conductors for branch circuits shall be No. 14 AWG copper. The minimum size of service conductors shall be as specified in Chapter 36. The minimum size of class 2 remote control, signaling and power-limited circuits conductors shall be as specified in Chapter 43. 
(Ord. No. 2009-376, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2012-465, §§ 1, 2, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 2016-590, § 1, 8-23-16; Ord. No. 2017-631, § 1, 10-24-17)  
Sec. 4-353. - Enforcement of penalty. 
Any person, firm partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas such violation shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00, and each and every instance of the violation of this Ordinance constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2009-376, § 4, 1-13-09)  
Secs. 4-354—4-360. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XVIII. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES[23] 
Footnotes: 
--- (23) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-297, §§ 2—6, adopted September 24, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as Art. XVIII, §§ 4-361—4-365, was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-361. - Definitions. 
Antenna: A transmitting and/or receiving device used in telecommunications that radiates or captures radio signals. 
Lattice tower: A guyed or self-supporting three-or four-sided, open steel frame structure used to support telecommunications equipment. 
Monopole: A structure composed of a single spire used to support telecommunications equipment. 
Residential district: Any section of the city zoned for single-or multi-family homes. 
Roof and/or building mount facility: A telecommunications facility in which antennas are mounted to an existing structure. 
Telecommunication tower: A stand alone structure consisting of a support structure, antenna and associated equipment. The support structure may be a wooden pole, monopole, lattice tower, light standard, or other vertical support. 
Telecommunications facility: An unmanned facility consisting of equipment for the reception, switching and/or receiving of wireless telecommunications. Such facility may be elevated (either building-mounted or ground-mounted) transmitting and receiving antennas, low power mobile radio service base station equipment, and interconnection equipment. The categories of facility types include: (1) roof and/or building mount facilities, and (2) telecommunication towers. 
(Ord. No. 96-297, § 2, 9-24-96)  
Sec. 4-362. - General policies for site selection telecommunication facilities. 
With any zoned district, sites should be located in the following order of preference: 
(1)  On existing structures such as buildings, and communication towers. 
(2)  In locations where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings, or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening. 
(Ord. No. 96-297, § 3, 9-24-96)  
Sec. 4-363. - Regulations for telecommunication sites. 
(a)  Telecommunication towers and antennas are a permitted use in any zoned district, except for residential if the following requirements are satisfied. 
(1)  The tower is a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from any residential zoning district or use. 
(2)  Tower height, excluding antenna array, does not exceed: 
a.  Seventy-five (75) feet, if the tower is at least two hundred (200) but less than two hundred fifty (250) feet from any residential district or use; 
b.  One hundred (100) feet, if the tower is at least two hundred fifty (250), but less than five hundred forty (540) feet from any residential district or use; 
c.  One hundred twenty (120) feet, if the tower is five hundred forty (540) feet or more from any residential district or use. 
(3)  The antenna array does not exceed tower height by more than ten (10) feet. 
(4)  All guys and guy anchors are set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any property line. 
(5)  The tower is erected and operated in compliance with current Federal Communication Commission and other applicable federal and state standards. 
(6)  The tower is of monopole construction if located within five hundred forty (540) feet of any residential district or use. 
(b)  The requirement of subsection (a)(1) above shall be waived: 
(1)  If there are no more than two residential uses within two hundred (200) feet of the tower base. 
(2)  If the proposed tower is erected to replace existing poles and either: 
a.  The pole replaced is a functioning utility pole or light standard within a utility easement or public right-of-way, recreation facility light pole or telecommunication tower; or 
b.  Replacement tower height, including antenna array, does not exceed: 
1.  The height of the original utility, light standard, or recreation facility pole by more than ten (10) feet; or 
2.  The height of the original telecommunication tower and antenna array by more than ten (10) feet; and 
3.  The replacement tower does not obstruct a public sidewalk, public alley, or other public right-of-way; and 
4.  Pole function is not significantly altered. 
(3)  Towers erected to be used by a public agency for police, fire, EMS, 911, or other similar public emergency communications for the city. 
(c)  Distances in this section shall be measured along a single straight line between the center of the tower base and the nearest point on any property line of a residential zoning district or use. For the purposes of applying the restrictions set forth in subsection (a)(1), (2) and (6), the term "residential district or use" excludes property that is: 
(1)  Vacant and unplatted; 
(2)  Used as a public or private primary or secondary educational facility; 
(3)  Used as a college or university education facility; 
(4)  Owned by the United States, the State of Texas or the City of Cedar Hill, and not used for residential uses; 
(5)  Used primarily for religious assembly; 
(6)  Occupied by nonresidential, nonconforming use(s); or 
(7)  Any other site similar to those listed above and determined by the city to be consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(d)  Landscaping. The entire facility must be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with its environment. The telecommunications tower itself must be camouflaged to blend with the surrounding environment through the use of color, materials and design. The entire facility and its landscape must be maintain in accordance to the regulations and codes of the city. A sample of the intended design must be submitted to the city at the time of application. 
(e)  Accessory buildings. A single-story unmanned accessory building of no more than three hundred (300) square feet gross floor area is permissible to store equipment needed to send and to receive transmissions but may not include offices or long term storage of vehicles. 
(f)  Abandonment. Telecommunication facilities which are not in use for six (6) months shall be removed by the owner of said telecommunication facility. This removal shall occur within ninety (90) days of the end of such six-month period. Upon removal, the site shall be revegetated to blend with the existing surrounding vegetation. 
(g)  Inspections. The city reserves the right to make inspections of any telecommunication facility within corporate limits of the city to ensure structural integrity. Based upon the results of the inspection, the city may require repair or removal of the telecommunications facility. 
(h)  Roof and/or building mount facility. Antennas on the rooftop or above a structure shall be screened, constructed and/or colored to match the structure to which they are attached and may not exceed the height of the rooftop or structure by more than ten (10) feet. Antennas mounted on the side of a building or structure shall be painted to match the color of the building or structure or the background against which they are most commonly seen. If an accessory equipment shelter is present, it must blend with the surrounding building(s) in architectural character or color. 
(i)  Application Requirements. Any person, firm, corporation, or any other entity desiring to build a telecommunication facility within the corporate city limits of the city must obtain a building permit, pay appropriate fees and submit a signed application that includes all materials and information detailed herein. 
(1)  Name of applicant. 
(2)  Address of applicant. 
(3)  Location of proposed site. 
(4)  Type of support structure and antenna and height. 
(5)  Photos and/or drawings of all equipment, structures and antennas. 
(6)  Names and addresses of telecommunication providers or users of the proposed tower or antenna. 
(7)  Applicants master antenna/tower plan for the city and surrounding area, if necessary. 
(8)  Detailed account of co-location efforts. 
(9)  If a new tower is allowed, the owner must certify in writing a willingness to allow co-location at the new site, as well as the technological and fiscal feasibility of co-location. 
(10)  Any other requirement of this ordinance. 
(j)  A telecommunication tower that fails to meet the requirements of this section may be authorized by a special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 96-297, § 4, 9-24-96)  
Sec. 4-364. - Application fee. 
The city will charge an application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for telecommunication towers located within the corporate city limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-297, § 5, 9-24-96)  
Sec. 4-365. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation or any other entity violation any of the provisions of this article or failing to comply with the requirements of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the maximum allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 96-297, § 6, 9-24-96)  
Secs. 4-366—4-380. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS FOR STEEL ANTENNA TOWERS, ANTENNA TOWERS, AND ANTENNA SUPPORTING STRUCTURES[24] 

Footnotes: 
--- (24) --- 
Editor's note— Nonamendatory Ord. No. 97-335, § 1, adopted Sept. 9, 1997, has been included herein as Div. 2, §§ 4-381—4-386, at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 4-381. - Objectives and standards. 
(a)  The objective of these standards is to provide minimum criteria for specifying and designing steel antenna towers and antenna supporting structures. These standards describe the requirements for the construction and maintenance of steel antenna towers and antenna supporting structures. These standards apply to steel antenna towers and antenna supporting structures for all classes of communications service, such as AM, CATV, FM, microwave, cellular, TV, VHF, two-way radio, pager services, etc. 
(b)  Standards for steel antenna towers and antenna supporting structures shall be as follows here and below: 
(Ord. No. 97-335, § 1, 9-9-97)  
Sec. 4-382. - Zoning and platting. 
(a)  The land must be zoned for tower use by the City of Cedar Hill or be in compliance with Div. 1 of this article, §§ 4-361—4-365. 
(b)  The property must be platted in accordance with the subdivision regulations, Ch. 20 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 97-335, § 1, 9-9-97)  
Sec. 4-383. - Design requirements. 
(a)  The tower and guy wires must all be located on same tract of land. 
(b)  All towers properties shall be surrounded by a fence. Tower base and guy anchors should be protected by a six (6) foot tall fence with at least three (3) strands of barbed wire on top. All fences shall be kept in good repair. 
(c)  All towers to be constructed shall be able to support equipment that is capable of transmitting five (5) television broadcast signals and ten (10) FM broadcast signals. 
(d)  All antennas required by this section shall be located at or above one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet above sea level. 
(e)  A panel antenna may be used to meet the FM broadcast signal requirements. 
(f)  A tower cross section showing antenna types and locations shall be provided by the applicant. 
(g)  Steel antenna towers and antenna supporting structures shall be designed and engineered in compliance with ANSI/TIA/EIA-222-F-1996, or to current design standard. 
(Ord. No. 97-335, § 1, 9-9-97)  
Sec. 4-384. - Permitting requirements. 
(a)  A site plan must be submitted showing the following: 
(1)  Property boundaries and adjacent property lines and streets. 
(2)  Tower and guy wire locations. 
(3)  Building location and square feet. 
(4)  Drive and parking area location and material. 
(5)  Fence locations with height and material specified. 
(6)  Tower cross section showing antenna types and location with elevations above sea level specified. 
(b)  A building permit is required before adding or replacing any antenna, transmission line, or appurtenance involving a three-inch or larger line. A permit is also required for adding or replacing antenna or transmission line located more than five hundred (500) feet above the tower base. Building permit submittals shall contain the following; 
(1)  A certification signed and sealed by a registered engineer at the State of Texas attesting to structural integrity of the tower as it is planned to be loaded and during all points of construction. The certification shall include a written description of the method, materials, equipment, tools, and personnel to be used in the installation of the antenna and a statement that the tower is structurally capable of withstanding such construction activities. 
(2)  Provide city with projected fall pattern for all new towers. 
(c)  All tower owner companies shall sign attached indemnity agreement prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(d)  Tower owners shall provide the city with FAA's Determination of No Hazard to Air Navigation. 
(e)  All existing towers requesting a building permit will be required to be in compliance with the following sections of these regulations: subsection 4-383(b); subsections 4-384 (b), (c), (d); and subsections 4-385(a), (b). 
(Ord. No. 97-335, § 1, 9-9-97) 
Editor's note— The attached form to Ord. No. 97-335 of the indemnity agreement has not been set out herein but is available at the offices of the city.  
Sec. 4-385. - Modifications and maintenance. 
(a)  Steel antenna towers and antenna supporting structures shall submit to the city a structural analysis performed by a registered professional structural engineer whenever there is a change in antennas, and/or appurtenances, involving three-inch or larger transmission lines. 
(b)  Owners of towers shall perform periodic tower inspection and maintenance to assure safety and extend the tower's service life. A major inspection of each tower must be performed every three (3) years for guyed towers and every five (5) years for monopoles and self supporting towers. A report containing information on the following items shall be submitted to the city upon completion of each inspection: 
(1)  A tower inspection crew is to be hired by the tower owner to perform the tower inspection. 
(2)  Tower inspection crews shall use a city provided inspection report (see attachment A). 
(3)  The inspection crews report will then be reviewed by a registered professional engineer familiar with tower construction to review the report and make repair recommendations. 
(4)  The registered professional engineer will then submit a letter to the city verifying that the repairs have been made to the tower. 
(5)  The tower inspection crew and registered professional engineer shall be hired by the tower owner and be an independent contractor. 
(6)  The city is to be provided with the tower inspection report, engineer repair recommendation letter, engineer repairs and maintenance completed letter by the tower owner once the inspection process is completed. 
(7)  All existing guyed towers shall begin submitting major inspection reports in 1998. Existing monopole and self supporting towers will be subject to a major inspection five (5) years after the tower was permitted or beginning in 1998. 
(Ord. No. 97-335, § 1, 9-9-97)  
Sec. 4-386. - Nonconformity and termination of use. 
(a)  Existing or new tower owners that are required to receive a building permit for any reason, must sign an indemnity agreement provided by the city. 
(b)  Future special uses granted by the city council may be subject to time limits and other considerations as determined at the time of approval. 
(c)  Abandoned or vacated towers must be disassembled and removed from the city. The tower grounds will then be returned to their original condition. 
(Ord. No. 97-335, § 1, 9-9-97)  
Secs. 4-387—4-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIX. - INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE[25] 

Footnotes: 
--- (25) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-441, §§ 1, 2, 4, adopted May 24, 2011, repealed the former Art. XIX, §§ 4-401, 4-402, and enacted a new Art. XIX as set out herein. The former Art. XIX pertained to 2006 International Energy Conservation Code and derived from Ord. No. 2010-402, §§ 2, 4, 1-26-10. 
 
Sec. 4-401. - Adoption of the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code. 
The 2015 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby adopted and incorporated in its entirety as though fully set out at length herein, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and the provisions of such code shall be controlling in the construction of new, and alteration of existing, buildings and the inspection thereof within the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2011-441, § 2, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 2016-609, § 1, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 4-402. - 2015 International Energy Conservation Code additional requirements and amendments. 
(1)  Section C102.1.2 is amended to read as follows: 
C102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. 
(2)  Section C202 is amended to read as follows: 
Projection Factor. The ratio of the horizontal depth of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device, divided by the distance measured vertically from the bottom of the fenestration glazing to the underside of the overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device. 
(3)  Section C402.2.7 is added to read as follows: 
C402.2.7 Insulation installed in walls. To insure that insulation remains in place, insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel sheathing, netting or other equivalent materials approved by the building official. 
(4)  Section R102.1.2 is added to read as follows: 
R102.1.2 Alternative compliance. A building certified by a national, state, or local accredited energy efficiency program and determined by the Energy Systems Laboratory to be in compliance with the energy efficiency requirements of this section may, at the option of the Code Official, be considered in compliance. The United States Environmental Protection Agency's Energy Star Program certification of energy code equivalency shall be considered in compliance. Regardless of the program or the path to compliance, each 1- and 2-family dwelling shall be tested for air and duct leakage as prescribed in Section R402.4 and R403.3.3 respectively. 
(5)  Section R202 is amended to read as follows: 
Dynamic Glazing. Any fenestration product that has the fully reversible ability to change its performance properties, including U-factor, solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC), or visible transmittance (VT) 
(6)  Section R402.2.14 is added to read as follows: 
Section R402.2.14 Insulation installed in walls. To insure that insulation remains in place, insulation installed in walls shall be totally enclosed on all sides consisting of framing lumber, gypsum, sheathing, wood structural panel sheathing, netting or other equivalent materials approve by the building official. 
(7)  Section R402.3.2 is amended to read as follows: 
R402.3.2 Glazed fenestration SHGC. An area-weighted average of fenestration products more than 50-percent glazed shall be permitted to satisfy the SHGC requirements. 
Dynamic glazing shall be permitted to satisfy the SHGC requirements of Table R402.1.2 provided the ration of the higher to lower labeled SHGC is greater than or equal to 2.4, and the dynamic glazing is automatically controlled to modulate the amount of solar gain into the space in multiple steps. Dynamic glazing shall be considered separately from other fenestration, and area-weighted averaging with other fenestration that is not dynamic glazing shall not be permitted. 
Exception: Dynamic glazing is not required to comply with this section when both the lower and higher labeled SHGC already comply with the requirements of Table R402.1.2. 
Where vertical fenestration is shaded by an overhang, eave or permanently attached shading device, the SHGC required in Table R402.1.2 shall be reduce by using the multipliers in Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections. 
(8)  Table R402.3.2 is added to read as follows: 
Table R402.3.2 SHGC Multipliers for Permanent Projections a 
Projection Factor 	SHGC Multiplier (all Other Orientation) 	SHGC Multiplier (North Oriented) 
0—0.10 	1.00 	1.00 
> 0.10— 0.20 	0.91 	0.95 
> 0.20— 0.30 	0.82 	0.91 
> 0.30— 0.40 	0.74 	0.87 
> 0.40— 0.50 	0.67 	0.84 
> 0.50— 0.60 	0.61 	0.81 
> 0.60— 0.70 	0.56 	0.78 
> 0.70— 0.80 	0.51 	0.76 
> 0.80— 0.90 	0.47 	0.75 
> 0.90— 1.00 	0.44 	0.73 
 
a: North oriented means within 45 degrees of true north. 
(9)  Section R402.4.1.2 is amended to read as follows: 
R402.4.1.2 Testing. The building or dwelling unit shall be tested and verified as having an air leakage rate not exceeding five air changes per hour in Climate Zones 1 and 2, and three air changes per hour in Climate Zones 3 through 8. Testing shall be conducted in accordance with ASTM E 779 or ASTM E 1827 and reported at a pressure of 0.2 inch w.g. (50Pascals). Where required by the code official, testing shall be conducted by an approved third party. A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to the code official. Testing shall be performed at any time after creation of all penetrations from the building thermal envelope. 
During Testing: 
1.  Exterior windows and doors, fireplace and stove doors shall be closed, but not sealed, beyond the intended weather stripping or other infiltration control measures. 
2.  Dampers including exhaust, intake, makeup air, back draft and flue dampers shall be closed, but not sealed beyond intended infiltration control measures. 
3.  Interior doors, if installed at the time of the test, shall be open. 
4.  Exterior doors for continuous ventilation systems and heat recovery ventilators shall be closed and sealed. 
5.  Heating and cooling systems, if installed at the time of test shall be turned off. 
6.  Supply and return registers, if installed at the time of test, shall be fully open. 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration testing certified by national or state originations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
(10)  Section R403.3.3.3 is amended to read as follows: 
R403.3.3 Duct testing (Mandatory). Ducts shall be pressure tested to determine air leakage by one of the following methods: 
1.  Rough-in test: Total leakage shall be measured with a pressure differential of 0.1 in w.g. (25 Pa) across the system, including the manufacturer's air handler enclosure if installed at the time of the test. All registers shall be taped or otherwise sealed during the test. 
2.  Postconstruction test: Total leakage shall be measured with a pressure differential of 0.1 inch w.g. (25Pa) across the entire system, including the manufacturer's air handler enclosure. Registers shall be taped or otherwise sealed during the test. 
Exception: A duct air leakage test shall not be required where the duct and air handler are located entirely within the building thermal envelope. 
A written report of the results of the test shall be signed by the party conducting the test and provided to the code official. 
Mandatory testing shall only be performed by individuals that are certified to perform air infiltration testing certified by national or state originations as approved by the building official. The certified individuals must be an independent third-party entity, and may not be employed; or have any financial interest in the company that constructs the structure. 
(11)  Section R405.6.2 is amended to read as follows: 
R405.6.2 Specific approval. Performance analysis tools meeting the applicable provisions of Section R405 shall be permitted to be approved based on meeting a specified threshold for a jurisdiction. The code official shall be permitted to approve tools for a specified application or limited scope. Acceptable performance software simulation tools may include, but are not limited to, REM Rate TM , Energy Gauge and IC3. Other performance software programs accredited by RESNET BESTEST and having the ability to provide a report as outlined in R405.4.2 may also be deemed acceptable performance simulation programs and may be considered by the building official. 
(12)  Table R406 is amended to read as follows: 
TABLE R406.4 1 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	65 
 
1 This table is effective until August 31, 2019. 
TABLE R406.4 2 
MAXIMUM ENERGY RATING INDEX 
CLIMATE ZONE 	ENERGY RATING INDEX 
3 	63 
 
2 This table is effective from September 1, 2019 to August 31, 2022. 
(Ord. No. 2011-441, § 2, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 2016-609, § 2, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 4-403. - Enforcement of penalty. 
Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other entity that violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every instance of the violation of this article constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-441, § 2, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 2016-609, § 4, 12-13-16)  
Secs. 4-404—4-420. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XX. - INTERNATIONAL FUEL GAS CODE[26] 

Footnotes: 
--- (26) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-383, §§ 1, 2, 4, adopted June 9, 2009, repealed the former Art. XX, §§ 4-421, 4-22, and enacted a new Art. XX as set out herein. The former Art. XX pertained to 2000 International Fuel Gas Code and derived from Ord. No. 2003-177, § 1, 10-14-03. 
 
Sec. 4-421. - Adoption of 2015 International Fuel Gas Code. 
The 2015 International Fuel Code is hereby adopted and incorporated in its entirety as though fully set out at length herein, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and the provisions of such code shall be controlling in the installation, alteration or repair of buildings and the inspection thereof within the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2009-383, § 2, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2012-488, § 2, 9-25-12; Ord. No. 2016-600, § 1, 10-11-16)  
Sec. 4-422. - 2015 International Fuel Gas Code additional requirements and amendments. 
(1)  Section 102.2 is amended to read as follows: 
102.2 Existing installations. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, a provision in this code shall not require the removal, alteration or abandonment of, nor prevent the continued utilization and maintenance of, existing installations lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this code. 
Exception: Existing dwelling units shall comply with Section 621.2. 
(2)  Section 102.8 is amended to read as follows: 
102.8 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to NFPA 70 or the National Electrical Code (NEC) shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the listing and the manufacturer's installation instructions shall apply. 
(3)  Section 106.6.2 is amended to read as follows: 
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work shall be as adopted by resolution of the governing body of the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Section 106.6.3 is amended to read as follows: 
106.6.3 Fee Refunds. The code official shall establish a policy for authorizing the refunding of fees. 
(5)  Section 109.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
109.1.1 Fee. An application fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) is required for hearing of appeal. 
(6)  Section 202 is amended by adding the following definition: 
Unvented Room Heater. An unvented heating appliance designed for stationary installation and utilized to provide comfort heating. Such appliances provide radiant heat or convection heat by gravity or fan circulation directly from the heater and do not utilize ducts. 
For the purpose of installation, this definition shall also include "Unvented Decorative Appliances." 
(7)  Section 305.3 is amended to read as follows: 
305.3 Elevation of equipment and appliances. Equipment and appliances shall be elevated not less than 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor in public garages, private garages, repair garages, motor fuel-dispensing facilities and parking garages. For the purpose of this section, rooms or spaces that are not part of the living space of a dwelling unit and that communicate directly with a private garage through openings shall be considered to be part of the private garage. 
(8)  Section 305.5 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 305.5 Private garages. Appliances located in private garages shall be installed with a minimum clearance of 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor. 
(9)  Section [M] 306.3 is amended to read as follows: 
[M] 306.3 Appliances in attics. Attics containing appliances shall be provided with an opening and unobstructed passageway large enough to allow removal of the largest component of the appliance. The passageway shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high and 22 inches (559mm) wide and not more than 20 feet (6096 mm) in length when measured along the centerline of the passageway from the opening to the equipment. The passageway shall have continuous unobstructed solid flooring not less than 24 inches (610 mm) wide. A level service space not less than 30 inches (762 mm) deep and 30 inches (762 mm) wide shall be present at the front or service side of the appliance. The clear access opening dimensions shall be a minimum of 20 inches by 30 inches (508 mm by 762 mm), or larger where such dimensions are not large enough to allow removal of the largest component of the appliances. A walkway to an appliance shall be rated as a floor as approved by the building official. As a minimum, access to the attic space shall be provided by one of the following: 
1.  A permanent stair. 
2.  A pull down stair with a minimum 300 lb (136 kg) capacity. 
3.  An access door from an upper floor level. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The passageway and level service space arc not required where the appliance is capable of being serviced and removed through the required opening. 
2.  Where the passageway is not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) high for its entire length, the passageway shall be not greater than 50 feet (15250 mm) in length. 
(10)  Section [M] 306.3.1 is amended to read as follows: 
[M] 306.3.1 Electrical requirements. A luminaire controlled by a switch located at the required passageway opening and a receptacle outlet shall be provided at or near the equipment location in accordance with the National Electrical Code. Low voltage wiring of 50 Volts or less shall be installed in a manner to prevent physical damage. 
(11)  Section [M] 306.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
[M] 306.4.1 Electrical requirements. A luminaire controlled by a switch located at the required passageway opening and a receptacle outlet shall be provided at or near the equipment location in accordance with the National Electrical Code. Low voltage wiring of 50 volts or less shall be installed in a manner to prevent physical damage. 
(12)  Section [M] 306.5 is amended to read as follows: 
[M] 306.5 Equipment and appliances on roofs or elevated structures. Where equipment and appliances requiring access are installed on roofs or elevated structures at an aggregate height exceeding 16 feet (4877 mm), such access shall be provided by a permanent approved means of access. Permanent exterior ladders providing roof access need not extend closer than 12 feet (2438mm) to finish grade or floor level below and shall extend to the equipment and appliance's level service space. Such access shall not require climbing over obstructions greater than 30 inches high (762 mm) or walking on roofs having a slope greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33-percent slope). 
Permanent ladders installed to provide the required access shall comply with the following minimum design criteria. 
1.  The side railing shall extend above the parapet or roof edge not less than 30 inches (762 mm). 
2.  Ladders shall have a rung spacing not to exceed 14 inches (356 mm) on center. 
3.  Ladders shall have a toe spacing not less than 6 inches (152 mm) deep. 
4.  There shall be a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) between rails. 
5.  Rungs shall have a minimum diameter of 0.75-inch (19 mm) and shall be capable of withstanding a 300-pound (136.1 kg) load. 
6.  Ladders over 30 feet (9144 mm) in height shall be provided with offset sections and landings capable of withstanding a load of 100 pounds per square foot (488.2 kg/m 2 ). 
7.  Ladders shall be protected against corrosion by approved means. 
Catwalks installed to provide the required access shall be not less than 24 inches wide (610 mm) and shall have railings as required for service platforms. 
Exception: This section shall not apply to Group R-3 occupancies. 
(13)  Section [M] 306.5.1 is amended to read as follows: 
[M] 306.5.1 Sloped roofs. Where appliances, equipment, fans or other components that require service are on roofs having slopes greater than 4 units vertical in 12 units horizontal and having an edge more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at such edge, a catwalk at least 16 inches in width with substantial cleats spaced not more than 16 inches apart shall be provided from the roof access to a level platform at the appliance. The level platform shall be provided on each side of the appliance to which access is required to service, repair or maintenance. The platform shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in any dimension and shall be provided with guards. The guards shall extend not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the platform, shall be constructed so as to prevent the passage of 21 inch diameter (533mm) sphere and shall comply with the loading requirements for guards specified in the International Building Code. 
(14)  Section 306.7 is added to read as follows: 
306.7 Water heaters above ground or floor. When the attic, roof, mezzanine or platform in which a water heater is installed is more than eight (8) feet (2438 mm) above the ground or floor level, it shall be made accessible by a stairway or permanent ladder fastened to the building. 
(15)  Section 401.5 is amended to read as follows: 
401.5 Identification. For other than steel pipe, exposed piping shall be identified by a yellow label marked "Gas" in black letters. The marking shall be spaced at intervals not exceeding 5 feet (1524 mm). The marking shall not be required on pipe located in the same room as the equipment served. Both ends of each section of medium pressure corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall identify its operating gas pressure with an approved tag. The tags are to be composed of aluminum or stainless steel and the following wording shall be stamped into the tag: 
"WARNING: 1/2 to 5 psi gas pressure, Do Not Remove" 
(16)  Section 402.3 is amended to read as follows: 
402.3 Sizing. Gas piping shall be sized in accordance with one of the following: 
1.  Piping sizing tables or sizing equations in accordance with Section 402.4. 
2.  The sizing tables included in a listed piping system's manufacturer's installation instructions. 
3.  Other approved engineering methods. 
Exception: Corrugated stainless steel tubing (CSST) shall be a minimum of ½" (18 EHD). 
(17)  Section 404.12 is amended to read as follows: 
404.12 Minimum burial depth. Underground piping systems shall be installed a minimum depth of 18 inches (458 mm) to the top of pipe below grade. 
(18)  Section 406.1 is amended to read as follows: 
406.1 General. Prior to acceptance and initial operation, all piping installations shall be inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the requirements of this code. The permit holder shall make the applicable tests prescribed in Sections 406.1.1 through 406.1.5 to determine compliance with the provisions of this code. The permit holder shall give reasonable advance notice to the code official when the piping system is ready for testing. The equipment, materials, power and labor necessary for the inspections and test shall be furnished by the permit holder and the permit holder shall be responsible for determining that the work will withstand the test pressure prescribe in the following tests. 
(19)  Section 406.4 is amended to read as follows: 
406.4 Test pressure measurement. Test pressure shall be measured with a manometer or with a pressure-measuring device designed and calibrated to read, record, or indicate a pressure loss caused by leakage during the pressure test period. The source of pressure shall be isolated before the pressure tests are made. 
(20)  Section 406.4.1 is amended to read as follows: 
406.4.1 Test pressure. The test pressure to be used shall be not less than 3 psig (20 kPa gauge), or at the discretion of the Code Official, the piping and valves may be tested at a pressure of at least six (6) inches (152 mm) of mercury, measured with a manometer or slope gauge. For test requiring a pressure of 3 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one half inches (3 ½"), a set hand, 1/10 pound incrimination and pressure range not to exceed 6 psi for tests requiring a pressure 3 psig. For tests requiring a pressure of 10 psig, diaphragm gauges shall utilize a dial with a minimum diameter of three, and one-half inches (3 ½"), a set hand, a minimum of 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not to exceed 20 psi. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48kPa) (½ psi) and less than 200 inches of water column pressure (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall not be less than ten (10) pounds per square inch (69.9 kPa). For piping carrying gas at a pressure that exceeds 200 inches of water column (52.2 kPa) (7.5 psi), the test pressure shall be not less than one and one-half times the proposed maximum working pressure. 
(21)  Section 406.4.2 is amended to read as follows: 
406.4.2 Test duration. The test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than fifteen (15) minutes. For welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in excess of fourteen (14) inches water column pressure (3.48 kPa), the test duration shall be held for a length of time satisfactory to the Code Official, but in no case for less than thirty (30) minutes. 
(22)  Section 409.1.4 is added to read as follows: 
409.1.4 Valves in CSST installations. Shutoff valves installed with corrugated stainless steel (CSST) piping systems shall be supported with an approved termination fitting, or equivalent support, suitable for the size of the valves, of adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration but in no case greater than 12-inches from the center of the valve. Supports shall be installed so as not to interfere with the free expansion and contraction of the system's piping, fittings, and valves between anchors. All valves and supports shall be designed and installed so they will not be disengaged by movement of the supporting piping. 
(23)  Section 410.1 is amended to read as follows: 
410.1 Pressure regulators. A line pressure regulator shall be installed where the appliance is designed to operate at a lower pressure than the supply pressure. Line gas pressure regulators shall be listed as complying with ANSIZ21.80. Access shall be provided to pressure regulators. Pressure regulators shall be protected from physical damage. Regulators installed on the exterior of the building shall be approved for outdoor installation. Access to regulators shall comply with the requirements for access to appliances as specified in Section 306. 
Exception: A passageway or level service space is not required when the regulator is capable of being serviced and removed through the required attic opening. 
(24)  Section 621.2 is added to read as follows: 
621.2 Prohibited use. One or more unvented room heaters shall not be used as the sole source of comfort heating in a dwelling unit. 
Exception: Existing approved unvented heaters may continue to be used in dwelling units, in accordance with the code provisions in effect when installed, when approved by the Code Official unless an unsafe condition is determined to exist as described in Section 108.7. 
(Ord. No. 2009-383, § 2, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2012-488, § 2, 9-25-12; Ord. No. 2016-600, § 2, 10-11-16)  
Sec. 4-423. - Enforcement of penalty. 
Any person, firm partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas such violation shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00, and each and every instance of the violation of this section constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2009-383, § 4, 6-9-09; Ord. No. 2016-600, § 4, 10-11-16)  
Secs. 4-424, 4-425. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXI. - REGISTRATION OF GENERAL CONTRACTORS 
 
Sec. 4-426. - Registration required. 
All general contractors who apply for a building permit in the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, are required to be registered with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2007-316, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 4-427. - Registration information, documentation and fee. 
The following items must be submitted at the time of registration. 
(a)  A completed registration form, signed by the owner, managing partner or chief executive officer of the general contractor. 
(b)  A legible copy of the driver's license of the owner, managing partner or chief executive officer who signs the registration form. 
(c)  Home builders must submit a copy of their Texas Residential Construction Commission Registration Certificate. 
(d)  A registration fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. 
(e)  All registrations expire on December 31st of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2007-316, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 4-428. - Registration suspension or revocation or denial. 
A general contractor's registration may be suspended or revoked or denied by the Building Official for the City of Cedar Hill for the following reasons: 
(a)  The general contractor fails to finalize permits by obtaining the required inspections. 
(b)  The general contractor allows use or occupancy of a structure for which a permit was obtained without first obtaining the required certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  The general contractor has performed substandard work. 
(d)  Abandonment of a construction project. 
(e)  The prior abandonment of one or more construction projects by a general contractor or any owner, partner or an officer of the general contractor. 
(f)  A conviction of fraud or deceit in securing a registration or a permit. 
(g)  Conviction in municipal court of three (3) or more violations of any of the provisions of the building code committed within a period of twelve (12) consecutive months. 
(h)  Accumulation of two (2) decisions of the board to suspend registration. 
(i)  Accumulation within a period of twelve (12) months or two (2) forfeitures of appeals of stop work orders issued under the International Residential Code or International Building Code by continued work after the issuance of the stop work order. 
(Ord. No. 2007-316, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 4-429. - Revocation permanent. 
Revocation of registration shall be a full and final cancellation of such registration and shall be effective immediately after the expiration of the time period for an appeal to the building appeals and advisory board, if no appeal is timely made, or upon the final decision of the building appeals and advisory board after an appeal as provided in article II of this chapter. No general contractor whose registration is revoked shall be allowed to register again in the City of Cedar Hill under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-316, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 4-430. - Suspension or revocation or denial hearing. 
(a)  A Building Official of the City of Cedar Hill shall conduct the hearing on any proposed suspension, revocation or denial of a general contractor's registration. 
(b)  The general contractor shall be notified by mail fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing date. 
(c)  Should the contractor fail to appear at the scheduled time for the hearing the building official may proceed to hear the case. 
(d)  If the charges are found to be true by the building official, the registration may then be immediately suspended, revoked or denied. 
(e)  The contractor may not secure a permit for work or register under any different identification or corporate entity or other organization. 
(Ord. No. 2007-316, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 4-431. - Appeal. 
A general contractor may appeal a decision by the building official to suspend or revoke or deny a registration under the provisions of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-316, § 1, 6-12-07)  
Sec. 4-432. - Enforcement of penalty. 
Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other organizations who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, shall subject the offender to a fine in an amount not to exceed the maximum fine allowed by law. Each and every instance of the violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-316, § 2, 6-12-07)  
Secs. 4-433—4-460. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XXII. - RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND RENOVATION MATERIALS 
 
Sec. 4-461. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to the provisions of this article: 
(1)  National model code means a publication that is developed, promulgated, and periodically updated at a national level by organizations consisting of industry and government fire and building safety officials through a legislative or consensus process and that is intended for consideration by units of government as local law. National model code includes the International Residential Code, the National Electrical Code and the International Building Code. 
(2)  Residential building means a building having the character of a one-family or two-family dwelling or a multiple single-family dwelling that is not more than three (3) stories high with separate means of egress, including the accessory structures of the dwelling and that does not have the character of a facility used for the accommodation of transient guests or a structure in which medical, rehabilitative, or assisted living services are provided in connection with the occupancy of the structure. 
(3)  Commercial building means a building for the use or occupation of people for a public purpose or economic gain, or a residence if the building is a multi-family residence that is not defined as a residential building. 
(4)  Building code means any of the following adopted by the city, as amended: the International Building Code, the National Electrical Code; the International Mechanical Code; and the International Plumbing Code. 
(5)  Zoning ordinance means Ordinance No. 2001-64, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2019-684, § 2, 8-27-19)  
Sec. 4-462. - Prohibitions on enforcement. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision contained in the city's ordinances, regulations or rules to the contrary, an official responsible for enforcement of the city's zoning ordinance or building codes, as designated by city charter, ordinance or other authorization of the city, shall not: 
(1)  Prohibit or limit, directly or indirectly, the use or installation of a building product or material in the construction, renovation, maintenance, or other alteration of a residential or commercial building if the building product or material is approved for use by a national model code published within the last three (3) code cycles that applies to the construction, renovation, maintenance, or other alteration of the building; or 
(2)  Enforce a standard for a building product, material, or aesthetic method in construction, renovation, maintenance, or other alteration of a residential or commercial building if the standard is more stringent than a standard for the product, material, or aesthetic method under a national model code published within the last three (3) code cycles that applies to the construction, renovation, maintenance, or other alteration of the building. 
(b)  An applicant who proposes to use a building material, product or aesthetic method in the construction or alteration of a residential or commercial building that is prohibited or limited by the city's adopted zoning ordinance or building codes, as amended, or that is less stringent than the standard established by such ordinance or building codes, as amended, shall identify each provision in a national model code published within the last three (3) code cycles that approves the use of such building material, product or aesthetic method, as a necessary requirement of the application. 
(c)  An applicant may agree in writing to employ a building material, product or aesthetic method for use in the construction or alternation of a residential or commercial building that otherwise cannot be enforced under subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 2019-684, § 3, 8-27-19)  
Sec. 4-463. - Exemptions for ordinances, requirements and programs. 
The prohibitions in section 4-462 do not apply to the following ordinances, requirements or programs of the city or state, and the officials responsible for enforcement of the city's zoning ordinance and building codes, as designated by city charter, ordinance or other authorization of the city, shall apply all regulations and standards prescribed by such enactments, requirements or programs, whether such ordinances, requirements or programs are existing or hereafter adopted or established, to the fullest extent therein provided: 
(1)  A local amendment of a building code to conform to local concerns if the amendment does not conflict with subsections 4-462(a) or (b); 
(2)  A program established by a state agency that requires particular standards, incentives, or financing arrangements in order to comply with requirements of a state or federal funding source or housing program; 
(3)  A requirement for a building necessary to consider the building eligible for windstorm and hail insurance coverage under Chapter 2210, Texas Insurance Code; 
(4)  An ordinance or other regulation that regulates outdoor lighting that is adopted for the purpose of reducing light pollution and that: 
a.  Is adopted by a governmental entity that is certified as a Dark Sky Community by the International Dark-Sky Association as part of the International Dark Sky Places Program; or 
b.  Applies to outdoor lighting within five (5) miles of the boundary of a military base in which an active training program is conducted; 
(5)  An ordinance that regulates outdoor lighting and is adopted under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, subchapter B, chapter 229, or under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, subchapter B, chapter 240; or 
(6)  Installation of a fire sprinkler protection system under V.T.C.A., Occupation Code § 1301.551(i), or under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 775.045(a)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2019-684, § 4, 8-27-19)  
Sec. 4-464. - Exemptions for buildings. 
The prohibitions in section 4-462 do not apply to the following buildings, and the officials responsible for enforcement of the city's zoning ordinance and building codes, as designated by city charter, ordinance or other authorization of the city, shall apply all regulations and standards prescribed by those ordinances or codes to such buildings, whether such provisions are existing or hereafter adopted or established, to the fullest extent therein provided: 
(1)  A building located in a place or area designated for its historical, cultural, or architectural importance and significance by the city council prior to April 1, 2019; 
(2)  A building located in a zoning district designated by the city council after April 1, 2019 for its historical, cultural, or architectural importance and significance by the city, and for which the owner has voluntarily consented in writing to the application of the regulations or standards prohibited by section 4-462, including the following zoning districts and any district that may hereafter be created by the city council for its historical, cultural, or architectural importance and significance; 
(3)  A building located in a place or area designated for its historical, cultural, or architectural importance and significance that a municipality may regulate under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 211.003(b), if the municipality: 
a.  Is a certified local government under the National Historic Preservation Act (54 U.S.C. Section 300101 et seq.); or 
b.  Has an applicable landmark ordinance that meets the requirements under the certified local government program as determined by the Texas Historical Commission; 
(4)  A building located in an area designated as a historic district on the National Register of Historic Places; 
(5)  A building designated as a Recorded Texas Historic Landmark; 
(6)  A building designated as a State Archeological Landmark or State Antiquities Landmark; 
(7)  A building listed on the National Register of Historic Places or designated as a landmark by a governmental entity; 
(8)  a building located in a World Heritage Buffer Zone; and 
(9)  A building located in an area designated for development, restoration, or preservation in a main street city under the main street program established under V.T.C.A., Government Code § 442.014. 
(Ord. No. 2019-684, § 5, 8-27-19)  
Sec. 4-465. - Appeals. 
An applicant, landowner or other aggrieved person may appeal the decision of an official responsible for enforcement of the city's zoning ordinance or building codes, as designated by city charter, ordinance or other authorization of the city, applying a regulation or standard to the construction, renovation, maintenance, or other alteration of a residential or commercial building, which application is asserted to be prohibited by section 4-462, in the following manner: 
(1)  If the decision applies a requirement of a building code, to the building board of appeals, or if there is no building board, to the zoning board of adjustment; or 
(2)  If the decision applies a requirement of the zoning ordinance, to the zoning board of adjustment. 
The appeal shall identify the provision or provisions which the appellant alleges to have been applied in violation of section 4-462. The appeal shall be filed, processed and decided in the manner provided for appeals by the appellate entity herein designated. 
(Ord. No. 2019-684, § 6, 8-27-19)  
Chapter 5 - CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER RELIEF[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency actions by officers, agents or employees of city, § 2-31; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fire marshal, § 6-46 et seq.; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7; planning, Ch. 16; police, Ch. 17; public utilities, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 5-1—5-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-042, §§ 1—8, 10, 11, adopted Oct. 9, 1990, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been treated as superseding, in effect repealing, former Art. II of this chapter, §§ 5-16—5-26, relative to municipal disaster emergency services committee. Such provisions derived from §§ 7-1—7-11 of this city's 1976 Code. 
 
Sec. 5-16. - Organization. 
(a)  There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(b)  An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(c)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. The director may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(d)  The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 90-042, § 1, 10-9-90)  
Sec. 5-17. - Emergency management director; powers and duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)  Conduct of an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and recommendation for adoption by the city council of all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(4)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring their contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(5)  Direction and control of the operations of the Cedar Hill Emergency Management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(8)  Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)  Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the countrywide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)  Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)  Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)  Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(13)  Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act 1975 (V.T.C.S. article 6889-7). 
(Ord. No. 90-042, § 2, 10-9-90)  
Sec. 5-18. - Emergency operations plan. 
(a)  A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(b)  The City of Cedar Hill hereby adopts and shall institutionalize the use of the Incident Command System/National Incident Management System (ICS/NIMS) as directed by the Homeland Security Presidential Directive-5 (HSPD-5). The City of Cedar Hill will employ the ICS/NIMS in order to maintain command and control, organization and assignment responsibilities. The ICS/NIMS will provide a consistent nationwide template for all city departments, and command level personnel to work with federal, state, and other local jurisdictions to prevent, prepare for, respond to and recover from all domestic incidents regardless of cause, size or complexity. The ICS/NIMS directs all city departments to integrate the ICS/NIMS into functional and system wide emergency operations policies, plans, and procedures; train responders, supervisors and command level officers in ICS/NIMS; and conduct exercises with responders at all levels from multi-disciplines and jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 90-042, § 3, 10-9-90; Ord. No. 2005-245, § 1, 8-9-05)  
Sec. 5-19. - Interjurisdictional program. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Dallas and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an emergency management council for the County of Dallas and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as such program may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-042, § 4, 10-9-90)  
Sec. 5-20. - Override. 
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 90-042, § 5, 10-9-90)  
Sec. 5-21. - Liability. 
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety of the citizens of the city. Neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack of natural or manmade disaster, shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 90-042, § 6, 10-9-90)  
Sec. 5-22. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property. 
(Ord. No. 90-042, § 7, 10-9-90)  
Sec. 5-23. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. 
(d)  Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 90-042, § 8, 10-9-90)  
Sec. 5-24. - Limitations. 
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 90-042, § 10, 10-9-90)  
Secs. 5-25—5-40. - Reserved.  
Chapter 6 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Provisions relating to fires and fire prevention, art. IV, § 22. 
Cross reference— Alarm systems, Ch. 2.5; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; duties of fire department in relation to dangerous building regulations, § 4-142; civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 5; following fire apparatus prohibited, § 11-44; driving over fire hoses, § 11-45; parking prohibited in fire lanes, § 11-120; planning, Ch. 16; police, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19; subdivision regulations, Ch. 20; zoning code, ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Home-rule city's authority to provide fire protection, V.A.C.S. art. 1175(15), (25), (27). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Arson information reward. 
(a)  Offered. The city hereby offers a reward of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to anyone who secures and furnishes information necessary to and which results in the arrest and conviction of any person who commits the crime of arson within the corporate limits of the city. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(b)  Placards to be placed. Placards eight (8) inches by twelve (12) inches in size, showing that the reward is offered, must be placed in wooden frames under glass, inside of at least six (6) public buildings. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-31, 8-32)  
Secs. 6-2—6-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— International Building Code, § 4-61 et seq.; National Electrical Code, § 4-81 et seq.; International Mechanical Code, § 4-101 et seq.; International Plumbing Code, § 4-116 et seq.; 
 
Sec. 6-21. - Adoption. 
The 2015 edition of the International Fire Code is hereby adopted and incorporated in full, save and except such portions as are herein amended, deleted or added by section 6-30, and shall be in force from the effective date of this article and shall be controlling within the areas of jurisdiction of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 82-647, § 5, 12-14-82; Ord. No. 89-1016, § 1, 3-14-89; Ord. No. 95-206, § 1, 3-14-95; Ord. No. 2000-10, § 1, 1-25-00; Ord. No. 2004-195, § 1, 1-27-04; Ord. No. 2006-278, §§ 1, 2, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2011-459, § 2, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 2017-624, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 6-22. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, it shall be held to mean the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(b)  Whenever the words "corporate counsel" are used in the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, they shall be held to mean the City Attorney for the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(c)  Whenever the phrase "Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention" or word "Chief" are used in this ordinance and the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, it shall be held to mean the Fire Chief of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas or the Chief's authorized representative. 
(d)  Whenever the phrase "Bureau of Fire Prevention" is used in this ordinance and the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, it shall be held to mean the Fire Department of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(e)  Whenever the word "City" is used in the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, it shall be held to mean the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(f)  Whenever the words "Police Chief" are used in the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, they shall be held to mean the Chief of Police of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(g)  Whenever the words "Building Official" are used in the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, they shall be held to mean the Building Official of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(h)  Whenever the words "fleet vehicle" are used in the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, they shall be held to mean a motor vehicle which is one of a group of motor vehicles, owned or operated as a unit and used in the ongoing course of business. 
(Code 1976, § 8-8.53; Ord. No. 76-441, § 3, 12-14-76; Ord. No. 2017-624, § 2, 8-29-17) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 6-23. - Establishment and duties of bureau of fire prevention. 
(a)  The 2015 edition of the International Fire Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the fire department of the city, which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  The fire marshal in charge of the bureau of fire prevention shall be appointed by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1976, § 8-8.52; Ord. No. 76-441, § 2, 12-14-76; Ord. No. 2004-195, § 1, 1-27-04; Ord. No. 2006-278, §§ 1, 2, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2011-459, § 2, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 2017-624, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 6-24. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids outside above-ground tanks is to be prohibited. 
The limits referred to in Section 5704 of the 2015 edition of the International Fire Code in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids in outside above-ground tanks is prohibited are hereby established as follows: Any area within the city limits unless a permit therefore has been issued by the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 1976, § 8-8.54; Ord. No. 76-441, § 4, 12-14-76; Ord. No. 2004-195, § 1, 1-27-04; Ord. No. 2006-278, §§ 1, 2, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2011-459, § 2, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 2017-624, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 6-25. - Establishment of limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is to be restricted. 
The limits referred to in Section 6109 of the 2015 edition of the International Fire Code in which the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted are hereby established as follows: Any area within the city limits unless a permit there for has been issued by the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 1976, § 8-8.55; Ord. No. 76-441, § 5, 12-14-76; Ord. No. 2004-195, § 1, 1-27-04; Ord. No. 2006-278, §§ 1, 2, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2011-459, § 2, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 2017-624, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 6-26. - Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is to be prohibited. 
The limits referred to in Section 5604 of the 2015 edition of the International Fire Code in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited are hereby established as follows: Any area within the city limits unless a permit there for has been issued by the bureau of fire prevention. 
(Code 1976, § 8-8.56; Ord. No. 76-441, § 6, 12-14-76; Ord. No. 2004-195, § 1, 1-27-04; Ord. No. 2006-278, §§ 1, 2, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2011-459, § 2, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 2017-624, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 6-27. - Appeals. 
Whenever the fire marshal shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code adopted by this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire marshal to the office of the fire chief within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1976, § 8-8.57; Ord. No. 76-441, § 8, 12-14-76; Ord. No. 2005-227, § 1, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 2017-624, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 6-28. - New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits. 
The fire chief and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code adopted by this article. The fire marshal of the division of fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Code 1976, § 8-8.58; Ord. No. 76-441, § 9, 12-14-76; Ord. No. 2005-227, § 1, 2-8-05; Ord. No. 2017-624, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 6-29. - Reserved.  
Sec. 6-30. - 2015 International Fire Code amendments, deletions and additions. 
Section 102.1 Construction and design provisions. The construction and design provisions of this code shall apply to: 
1.  Structures, facilities and conditions arising after the adoption of this code. 
2.  Existing structures, facilities and conditions not legally in existence at the time of adoption of this code. 
3.  Existing structures, facilities and conditions when required in Chapter 11 or in specific sections of this code. 
4.  Existing structures, facilities and conditions, which, in the opinion of the fire code official, constitute a distinct hazard to life or property. 
(1)  Section 105.7.19 is added to read as follows: 
Section 105.7.19 Electronic access control systems. Construction permits are required for the installation or modification of an electronic access control system, as specified in Chapter 10. A separate construction permit is required for the installation or modification of a fire alarm system that may be connected to the access control system. Maintenance performed in accordance with this code is not considered a modification and does not require a permit. 
(2)  Section 108 Board of Appeals is amended to read as follows: 
Section 108 Board of Appeals. All appeals any section or appendix of this ordinance and or the adopted International Fire Code of City of Cedar Hill shall be made in writing and presented to the fire chief. The fire chief will render a decision regarding the appeal within 30 days of receiving the written notice of appeal. 
(3)  Section 109.3.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 109.3.1 Service. A notice of violation issued pursuant to this code shall be served upon the owner, the owner's authorized agent, operator, occupant, or other person responsible for the condition or violation, either by personal service, electronic mail, mail or by delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested or a certificate of mailing, to the last known address of the owner, the owner's authorized agent, or occupant. 
(4)  Section 202 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 202 Definitions. Ambulatory Care Facility. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to persons who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided. This group shall include but not be limited to the following: 
- Dialysis center 
- Procedures involving Sedation 
- Sedation dentistry 
- Surgery centers 
- Colonic centers 
- Psychiatric centers 
Section 202 Definitions. Atrium. An opening connecting three or more stories other than enclosed stairways, elevators, hoist ways, escalators, plumbing, electrical, air-conditioning or other equipment, which is closed at the top and not defined as a mall. Stories, as used in this definition, do not include balconies within assembly groups or mezzanines that comply with Section 505 of the International Building Code. 
Section 202 Definitions. Defend in Place. A method of emergency response that engages building components and trained staff to provide occupant safety during an emergency. Emergency response involves remaining in place, relocating within the building, or both, without evacuating the building. 
Section 202 Definitions. Fire Watch. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building or portion thereof by one or more qualified individuals or standby personnel when required by the fire code official, for the purposes of identifying and controlling fire hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire and notifying the fire department. 
Section 202 Definitions. Fireworks. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect for entertainment purposes by combustion, deflagration, detonation, and/or activated by ignition with a match or other heat producing device that meets the definition of 1.4G fireworks or 1.3G fireworks. 
Fireworks, 1.4G. Small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion. Such 1.4G fireworks which comply with the construction, chemical composition and labeling regulations of the DOTn for Fireworks, UN 0336, and the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission as set forth in CPSC 16 CFR Parts 1500 and 1507, are not explosive materials for the purpose of this code. 
Fireworks, 1.3G. Large fireworks devices, which are explosive materials, intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce audible or visible effects by combustion, deflagration or detonation. Such 1.3G fireworks include, but are not limited to, firecrackers containing more than 130 milligrams (2 grains) of explosive composition, aerial shells containing more than 40 grams of pyrotechnic composition and other display pieces which exceed the limits for classification as 1.4G fireworks. Such 1.3G fireworks are also described as Fireworks, UN 0335 by the DOTn. 
Section 202 Definitions. High-Piled Combustible Storage. Storage of combustible materials in closely packed piles or combustible materials on pallets, in racks or on shelves where the top of storage is greater than 12 feet in height. When required by the fire code official, high-piled combustible storage also includes certain high-hazard commodities, such as rubber tires, Group A plastics, flammable liquids, idle pallets and similar commodities, where the top of storage is greater than 6 feet in height. 
Any building classified as a group S Occupancy or Speculative Building exceeding 9,000 sq. ft. that has a clear height in excess of 14 feet, making it possible to be used for storage in excess of 12 feet, shall be considered to be high-piled storage. When a specific product cannot be identified, a fire protection system and life safety features shall be installed as for Class IV commodities, to the maximum pile height. 
Section 202 Definitions. High-Rise Building. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. 
Section 202 Definitions. Repair Garage. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicles. This occupancy shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement and other such minor repairs. 
Section 202 Definitions. Self-Service Storage Facility. Real property designed and used for the purpose of renting or leasing individual storage spaces to customers for the purpose of storing and removing personal property on a self-service basis. 
Section 202 Definitions. Standby Personnel. Qualified fire service personnel, approved by the Fire Chief. When utilized, the number required shall be as directed by the Fire Chief. Charges for utilization shall be normally calculated by the jurisdiction. 
Section 202 Definitions. [Upgraded or Replaced Fire Alarm System. A fire alarm system that is upgraded or replaced includes, but is not limited to the following: 
• Replacing a single board or fire alarm control unit component with a newer model. 
• Installing a new fire alarm control unit in addition to or in place of an existing one. 
• Conversion from a horn/strobe system to an emergency voice/alarm communication system. 
• Conversion from a conventional system to one that utilizes addressable or analog devices. 
The following are not considered an upgrade or replacement: 
• Firmware updates. 
• Software updates. 
• Replacing boards of the same model with chips utilizing the same or newer firmware. 
(5)  Section 307.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.1.1 Prohibited open burning. Open burning that is offensive or objectionable because of smoke emissions, or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited. 
Exception: Prescribed burning for the purpose of reducing the impact of wildland fire when authorized by the fire code official. 
(6)  Section 307.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or open burning. Application for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be kindled. 
Examples of state or local law, or regulations referenced elsewhere in this section may include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Texas Commission on Environmental Quality guidelines and/or restrictions. 
2.  State, County or local temporary or permanent bans on open burning. 
3.  Local written policies as established by the fire code official. 
(7)  Section 307.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.3 Extinguishment authority. The fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible or the fire department of open burning that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation. 
(8)  Section 307.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.4 Location. The location for specially permitted open burning shall not be less than 300 feet (91,440 mm) from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 300 feet (91,440 mm) of any structure. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Fires in approved containers that are not less than 15 feet (4572 mm) from a structure. 
2.  The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25 feet (7620 mm) where the pile size is 3 feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and 2 feet (610 mm) or less in height. 
(9)  Section 307.4.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.4.3 Portable outdoor fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be operated within 15 feet (4572 mm) of a structure or combustible material. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Portable outdoor fire places used at one- and two-family dwellings. 
2.  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
(10)  Section 307.4.4 is added to read as follows: 
Section 307.4.4 Permanent outdoor fire pit. Permanently installed outdoor fire pits for recreational fire purposes shall not be installed within 10 feet of a structure or combustible material. 
Exception: Permanently installed outdoor fireplaces constructed in accordance with the International Building Code. 
(11)  Section 307.4.5 is added to read as follows: 
Section 307.4.5 Trench Burns. Trench burns when approved and permitted by the fire code official shall be conducted in air curtain trenches and in accordance with Section 307.2. 
(12)  Section 307.5 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 307.5 Attendance. Open burning, trench burns, and use of portable outdoor fire places shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
(13)  Section 308.1.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Open-flame cooking devices, charcoal grills, and other similar devices used for cooking, shall not be located or used on combustible balconies, decks, or within 10 feet (3048 mm) of combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  One- and two-family dwelling, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity] with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 100 lbs. (5 containers). 
2.  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system, except that LP-gas containers are limited to a water capacity not greater than 50 pounds (22.68 kg) [nominal 20 pound (9.08 kg) LP-gas capacity], with an aggregate LP-gas capacity not to exceed 40 lbs. (2 containers). 
3.  {LP-gas cooking devices having LP-gas container with a water capacity not greater than 21/2 pounds nominal 1 pound (0.454 kg) LP-gas capacity. 
(14)  Section 308.1.6.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 308.1.6.2 Portable fueled open-flame devices. Portable open-flame devices fueled by flammable or combustible gases or liquids shall be enclosed or installed in such a manner as to prevent the flame from contacting combustible material. 
Exceptions: 
1.  LP-gas-fueled devices used for seating pipe joints or removing paint in accordance with Chapter 61. 
2.  Cutting and welding operations in accordance with Chapter 35. 
3.  Torches or flame-producing devices in accordance with Section 308.1.3. 
4.  Candles and open-flame decorative devices in accordance with Section 308.3. 
(15)  Section 308.1.6.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 308.1.6.3 Sky Lanterns. A person shall not release or cause to be released an unmanned free-floating devices containing an open flame or other heat source, such as but not limited to a sky lantern. 
(16)  Section 311.5 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 311.5 Placards. The fire code official is authorized to require marking of any vacant or abandoned buildings or structures determined to be unsafe pursuant to Section 110 of this code relating to structural or interior hazards, as required by Section 311.5.1 through 311.5.5. 
(17)  Section 403.5 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 403.5 Group E occupancies. An approved fire safety and evacuation plan in accordance with Section 404 shall be prepared and maintained for Group E occupancies and for buildings containing both a Group E occupancy and an atrium. A diagram depicting two evacuation routes shall be posted in a conspicuous location in each classroom. Group E occupancies shall also comply with sections 403.5.1 through 403.5.3. 
(18)  Section 404.2.2 is amended to read as follows: 
404.2.2 Fire safety plans. Fire safety plans shall include the following: 
1.  The procedure for reporting a fire or other emergency. 
2.  The life safety strategy including the following: 
2.1.  Procedures for notifying occupants, including areas with a private mode alarm system. 
2.2.  Procedures for occupants under a defend-in-place response. 
2.3.  Procedures for evacuating occupants, including those who need evacuation assistance. 
3.  Site plans indicating the following: 
3.1.  The occupancy assembly point. 
3.2.  The locations of fire hydrants. 
3.3.  The normal routes of fire department vehicle access. 
4.  Floor plans identifying the locations of the following: 
4.1.  Exits. 
4.2.  Primary evacuation routes. 
4.3.  Secondary evacuation routes. 
4.4.  Accessible egress routes. 
4.4.1.  Areas of refuge. 
4.4.2.  Exterior areas for assisted rescue. 
4.5.  Refuge areas associated with smoke barriers and horizontal exits. 
4.6.  Manual fire alarm boxes. 
4.7.  Portable fire extinguishers. 
4.8.  Occupant-use hose stations. 
4.9.  Fire alarm annunciators and controls. 
4.10  Fire extinguishing system controls. 
5.  A list of major fire hazards associated with the normal use and occupancy of the premises, including maintenance and housekeeping procedures. 
6.  Identification and assignment of personnel responsible for maintenance of systems and equipment installed to prevent or control fires. 
7.  Identification and assignment of personnel responsible for maintenance, housekeeping and controlling fuel hazard sources. 
(19)  Section 405.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 405.4 Time. The fire code official may require an evacuation drill at any time. Drills shall be held at unexpected times and under varying conditions to simulate the unusual conditions that occur in case of fire. 
(20)  Section 501.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 501.4 Timing of installation. When fire apparatus access roads or a water supply for fire protection is required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be installed, tested, and approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure. 
(21)  Section 503.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 503.1.1 Buildings and facilities. Approved fire apparatus access roads shall be provided for every facility, building or portion of a building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access road shall comply with the requirements of this section and shall extend to within 150 feet (45,720 mm) of all portions of the facility and all portions of the exterior walls of the first story of the building as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the building or facility. Except for one-or two-family dwellings, the path of measurement shall be along a minimum of a ten feet (10') wide unobstructed pathway around the external walls of the structure. 
(22)  Section 503.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24 feet (7315 mm), exclusive of shoulders, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet (4267 mm). 
Exception: Vertical clearance may be reduced; provided such reduction does not impair access by fire apparatus and approved signs are installed and maintained indicating the established vertical clearance when approved. 
(23)  Section 503.2.2 is amended to read as follows: 
503.2.2 Authority. The fire code official shall have the authority to require an increase in the minimum access widths and vertical clearances where they are inadequate for fire or rescue operations. 
(24)  Section 503.2.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 503.2.3 Surface. Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of 80,000 lbs. for fire apparatus and shall be surfaced so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities. 
(25)  Section 503.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 503.3 Marking. Striping, signs, or other markings, when approved by the fire code official, shall be provided for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping, signs and other markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. 
(1)  Striping - Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six inches (6") in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" shall appear in four inch (4") white letters at 15 feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. A 12-inch spacing is required between "FIRE LANE" and "NO PARKING." Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb. 
(2)  Signs - Signs shall read "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" and shall be 12" wide and 18" high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than 2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6' 6") above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart along both sides of the fire lane. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the fire code official. 
(26)  Section 503.4 is amended to read as follows: 
503.4 Obstruction of Fire Apparatus Access Roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances established in Section 503.2.1 and any area marked as a fire lane as described in Section 503.3 shall be maintained at all times. 
(27)  Section 505.1 is amended to read as follows: 
505.1 Address Identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not less than 12 inches high (304.8 mm) with a minimum stroke width of ½ inch (12.7 mm). Where required by the fire code official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road, buildings do not immediately front a street, and/or with approved 12 inch (304.8 mm) high building numerals or addresses and 4 inch (101.6 mm) height suite/apartment numerals of a color contrasting with the background of the building or other approved numerals or addresses shall be posted on a minimum 20 inch (508 mm) by 30 inch (762 mm) background on border, shall be maintained. High with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 the building cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign means shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained. 
Exception: R-3 Single Family occupancies shall have approved numerals of a minimum 3 ½ inches (88.9 mm) in height and a color contrasting with the background clearly visible and legible from the street fronting the property and rear alleyway where such alleyway exists. 
(28)  Section 507.4 is amended to read as follows: 
507.4 Water Supply Test Date and Information. The water supply test used for hydraulic calculation of fire protection systems shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA 291 "Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants" and within one year of sprinkler plan submittal. The fire code official shall be notified prior to the water supply test. Water supply tests shall be witnessed by the fire code official, as required. The exact location of the static/residual hydrant and the flow hydrant shall be indicated on the design drawings. All fire protection plan submittals shall be accompanied by a hard copy of the waterflow test report, or as approved by the fire code official. The report must indicate the dominant water tank level at the time of the test and the maximum and minimum operating levels of the tank, as well, or identify applicable water supply fluctuation. The licensed contractor must then design the fire protection system based on this fluctuation information, as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard. Reference Section 903.3.5 for additional design requirements. 
(29)  Section 507.5.1 is added to read as follows: 
Section 507.5.1 Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 300 feet (91 m) from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official. 
(30)  Section 507.5.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 507.5.1.1 Hydrant for sprinkler and standpipe systems. Buildings equipped with an automatic fire sprinkler or standpipe system shall have a fire hydrant within 100 feet (30 480 mm) of the fire department connection. 
Exception: The distance shall be permitted to exceed 100 feet (30 480 mm) where approved by the fire code official. 
(31)  Section 507.5.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 507.5.4 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. Posts, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire department inlet connections or fire protection system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from being immediately discernible. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrants. 
(32)  Section 509.1.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 509.1.2 Sign Requirements. Unless more stringent requirements apply, lettering for signs required by this section shall have a minimum height of two (2) inches (50.8 mm) when located inside a building and four (4) inches (101.6 mm) when located outside, or as approved by the fire code official. The letters shall be of a color that contrasts with the background. 
(33)  Section 603.3.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 603.3.2.1 Quantity limits. One or more fuel oil storage tanks containing Class II or III combustible liquid shall be permitted in a building. The aggregate capacity of all such tanks shall not exceed 660 gallons (2498 L). 
Exception: The aggregate capacity limit shall be permitted to be increased to 3,000 gallons (11,356 L) in accordance with all requirements of Chapter 57. 
(34)  Section 603.3.2.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 603.3.2.2 Restricted use and connection. Tanks installed in accordance with Section 603.3.2 shall be used only to supply fuel oil to fuel-burning equipment installed in accordance with Section 603.3.2.4. Connections between tanks and equipment supplied by such tanks shall be made using closed piping systems. 
(35)  Section 604.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
604.1.1 Stationary Generators. Stationary emergency and standby power generators required by this code shall be listed in accordance with UL 2200. 
(36)  Section 604.1.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.1.2 Installation. Emergency power systems and standby power systems shall be installed in accordance with the International Building Code, NFPA 70, NFPA 110 and NFPA 111. Existing installations shall be maintained in accordance with the original approval, except as specified in Chapter 11. 
(37)  Section 604.1.9 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.1.9 Critical Operations Power Systems (COPS). For Critical Operations Power Systems necessary to maintain continuous power supply to facilities or parts of facilities that require continuous operation for the reasons of public safety, emergency management, national security, or business continuity, see NFPA 70. 
(38)  Section 604.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.2 Where Required. Emergency and standby power systems shall be provided where required by Sections 604.2.1 through 604.2.24 or elsewhere identified in this code or any other referenced code. 
(39)  Section 604.2.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.2.4 Emergency Voice/alarm Communications Systems. Emergency power shall be provided for emergency voice/alarm communications systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 907.5.2.2.5. The system shall be capable of powering the required load for a duration of not less than 24 hours, as required in NFPA 72. 
a)  Covered and Open Malls, Section 907.2.20 and 914.2.3 
b)  Group A Occupancies, Sections 907.2.1 and 907.5.2.2.4. 
c)  Special Amusement Buildings, Section 907.2.12.3 
d)  High-rise Buildings, Section 907.2.13 
e)  Atriums, Section 907.2.14 
f)  Deep Underground Buildings, Section 907.2.19 
(40)  Section 604.2.12 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.2.12 Means of Egress Illumination. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Sections 1008.3 and 1104.5.1. (90 minutes) 
(41)  Section 604.2.13 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.2.13 Membrane Structures. Emergency power shall be provided for exit signs in temporary tents and membrane structures in accordance with Section 3103.12.6.1. (90 minutes) Standby power shall be provided for auxiliary inflation systems in permanent membrane structures in accordance with Section 2702 of the International Building Code. (4 hours) Auxiliary inflation systems shall be provided in temporary air-supported and air-inflated membrane structures in accordance with section 3103.10.4. 
(42)  Section 604.2.15 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.2.15 Smoke Control Systems. Standby power shall be provided for smoke control systems in the following occupancies, or as specified elsewhere in this code, as required in Section 909.11: 
a)  Covered Mall Building, International Building Code, Section 402.7 
b)  Atriums, International Building Code, Section 404.7 
c)  Underground Buildings, International Building Code, Section 405.8 
d)  Group I-3, International Building Code, Section 408.4.2 
e)  Stages, International Building Code, Section 410.3.7.2 
f)  Special Amusement Buildings (as applicable to Group A's), International Building Code, Section 411.1 
g)  Smoke Protected Seating, Section 1029.6.2.1 
(43)  Section 604.2.17 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.2.17 Covered and Open Mall Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.2.20 and 914.2.3. 
(44)  Section 604.2.19 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.2.19 Smoke proof Enclosures and Stair Pressurization Alternative. Standby power shall be provided for smoke proof enclosures, stair pressurization alternative and associated automatic fire detection systems as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.20.6.2. 
(45)  Section 604.2.20 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.2.20 Elevator Pressurization. Standby power shall be provided for elevator pressurization system as required by the International Building Code, Section 909.21.5. 
(46)  Section 604.2.21 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.2.21 Elimination of Smoke Dampers in Shaft Penetrations. Standby power shall be provided when eliminating the smoke dampers in ducts penetrating shafts in accordance with the International Building Code, Section 717.5.3, exception 2.3. 
(47)  Section 604.2.22 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.2.22 Common Exhaust Systems for Clothes Dryers. Standby power shall be provided for common exhaust systems for clothes dryers located in multistory structures in accordance with the International Mechanical Code, Section 504.10, Item 7. 
(48)  Section 604.2.23 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.2.23 Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms. Standby power shall be provided for mechanical ventilation and gas detection systems of Hydrogen Cutoff Rooms in accordance with the International Building Code, Section 421.8. 
(49)  Section 604.2245 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.2.24 Means of Egress Illumination in Existing Buildings. Emergency power shall be provided for means of egress illumination in accordance with Section 1104.5 when required by the fire code official. (90 minutes in I-2, 60 minutes elsewhere.) 
(50)  Section 604.8 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 604.8 Energy Time Duration. Unless a time limit is specified by the fire code official, in this chapter or elsewhere in this code, or in any other referenced code or standard, the emergency and standby power system shall be supplied with enough fuel or energy storage capacity for not less than 2-hour full-demand operation of the system. 
Exception: Where the system is supplied with natural gas from a utility provider and is approved. 
(51)  Section 609.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 609.2 Where Required. A Type I hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking appliances and domestic cooking appliances used for commercial purposes that produce grease vapors, including but not limited to cooking equipment used in fixed, mobile, or temporary concessions, such as trucks, buses, trailers, pavilions, or any form of roofed enclosure, as required by the fire code official. 
Exceptions: 
1)  Tents, as provided for in Chapter 31. 
2)  A Type I hood shall not be required for an electric cooking appliance where an approved testing agency provides documentation that the appliance effluent contains 5 mg/m3 or less of grease when tested at an exhaust flow rate of 500 cfm (0.236 m3/s) in accordance with UL 710B. 
Additionally, fuel gas and power provided for such cooking appliances shall be interlocked with the extinguishing system, as required by Section 904.12.2. Fuel gas containers and piping/hose shall be properly maintained in good working order and in accordance with all applicable regulations. 
(52)  Section 704.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 704.1 Enclosure. Interior vertical shafts including, but not limited to, stairways, elevator hoist ways, service and utility shafts, that connect two or more stories of a building shall be enclosed or protected in accordance with the codes in effect at the time of construction but, regardless of when constructed, not less than as required in Chapter 11. New floor openings in existing buildings shall comply with the International Building Code. 
(53)  Section 807.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 807.3 Combustible Decorative Materials. In occupancies in Groups A, E, I, and R-1, and dormitories in Group R-2, curtains, draperies, fabric hangings and other similar combustible decorative materials suspended from walls or ceilings shall comply with Section 807.4 and shall not exceed 10 percent of the specific wall or ceiling area to which they are attached. 
(54)  Section 807.5.2.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 807.5.2.2 Artwork in Corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area. 
(55)  Section 807.5.2.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 807.5.2.3 Artwork in Classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
(56)  Section 807.5.5.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 807.5.5.2 Artwork in Corridors. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on the walls of corridors to not more than 20 percent of the wall area. Such materials shall not be continuous from floor to ceiling or wall to wall. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
Exception: Corridors protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 shall be limited to 50 percent of the wall area. 
(57)  Section 807.5.5.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 807.5.5.3 Artwork in Classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of classrooms to not more than 50 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. Curtains, draperies, wall hangings and other decorative material suspended from the walls or ceilings shall meet the flame propagation performance criteria of NFPA 701 in accordance with Section 807 or be noncombustible. 
(58)  901.6.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
901.6.1.1 Standpipe Testing. Building owners/managers must maintain and test standpipe systems as per NFPA 25 requirements. The following additional requirements shall be applied to the testing that is required every 5 years: 
1.  The piping between the Fire Department Connection (FDC) and the standpipe shall be back flushed when foreign material is present and also hydrostatically tested for all FDC's on any type of standpipe system. Hydrostatic testing shall also be conducted in accordance with NFPA 25 requirements for the different types of standpipe systems. 
2.  For any manual (dry or wet) standpipe system not having an automatic water supply capable of flowing water through the standpipe, the tester shall connect hose from a fire hydrant or portable pumping system (as approved by the fire code official) to each FDC, and flow water through the standpipe system to the roof outlet to verify that each inlet connection functions properly. Confirm that there are no open hose valves prior to introducing water into a dry standpipe. There is no required pressure criteria at the outlet. Verify that check valves function properly and that there are no closed control valves on the system. 
3.  Any pressure relief, reducing, or control valves shall be tested in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 25. All hose valves shall be exercised. 
4.  If the FDC is not already provided with approved caps, the contractor shall install such caps for all FDC's as required by the fire code official. 
5.  Upon successful completion of standpipe test, place a blue tag (as per Texas Administrative Code, Fire Sprinkler Rules for Inspection, Test and Maintenance Service (ITM) Tag) at the bottom of each standpipe riser in the building. The tag shall be check-marked as "Fifth Year" for Type of ITM, and the note on the back of the tag shall read "5 Year Standpipe Test" at a minimum. 
6.  The procedures required by Texas Administrative Code Fire Sprinkler Rules with regard to Yellow Tags and Red Tags or any deficiencies noted during the testing, including the required notification of the local Authority Having Jurisdiction (fire code official) shall be followed. 
7.  Additionally, records of the testing shall be maintained by the owner and contractor, if applicable, as required by the State Rules mentioned above and NFPA 25. 
8.  Standpipe system tests where water will be flowed external to the building shall not be conducted during freezing conditions or during the day prior to expected night time freezing conditions. 
9.  Contact the fire code official for requests to remove existing fire hose from Class II and III standpipe systems where employees are not trained in the utilization of this firefighting equipment. All standpipe hose valves must remain in place and be provided with an approved cap and chain when approval is given to remove hose by the fire code official. 
(59)  Section 901.6.3 is amended to read as follows: 
901.6.3 False Alarms and Nuisance Alarms. False alarms and nuisance alarms shall not be given, signaled or transmitted or caused or permitted to be given, signaled or transmitted in any manner. 
(60)  Section 901.6.4 is added to read as follows: 
Section 901.6.4 Systems in high-rise buildings. The owner of a high-rise building shall be responsible for assuring that the fire and life-safety systems required by the Building Code are maintained in an operable condition at all times. Unless otherwise required by the chief, quarterly tests of such systems shall be conducted by approved persons. A written record shall be maintained and shall be made available to the inspection authority. 
(61)  Section 901.6.5 is added to read as follows: 
901.6.5 Smoke-control systems. Mechanical smoke-control systems, such as those in high-rise buildings, buildings containing atria, covered mall buildings and mechanical ventilation systems utilized in smoke proof enclosures and for smoke-removal systems utilized in high-piled combustible storage occupancies, shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times. Unless otherwise required by the chief, quarterly tests of such systems shall be conducted by approved persons. A written record shall be maintained and shall be made available to the inspection authority. 
(62)  Section 901.7 is amended to read as follows: 
901.7 Systems Out of Service. Where a required fire protection system is out of service or in the event of an excessive number of activations, the fire department and the fire code official shall be notified immediately and, where required by the fire code official, the building shall either be evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided for all occupants left unprotected by the shut down until the fire protection system has been returned to service. Where utilized, fire watches shall be provided with not less than one approved means for notification of the fire department and their only duty shall be to perform constant patrols of the protected premises and keep watch for fires. 
(63)  Section 901.8.2 is amended to read as follows: 
901.8.2 Removal of Occupant-use Hose Lines. The fire code official is authorized to permit the removal of existing occupant-use hose lines and hose valves where all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The hose line(s) would not be utilized by trained personnel or the fire department. 
2.  If the occupant-use hose lines are removed, but the hose valves are required to remain as per the fire code official, such shall be compatible with local fire department fittings. 
3.  If the occupant-use hose lines are removed, but the hose valves are required to remain as per the fire code official, such shall be compatible with local fire department fittings. 
(64)  Section 903.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.1.1 Alternative protection. Alternative automatic fire-extinguishing systems complying with Section 904 shall be permitted in addition to automatic sprinkler protection where recognized by the applicable standard or as approved by the fire code official. 
(65)  Section 903.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new or remodeled buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12. 
Automatic Sprinklers shall not be installed in elevator machine rooms, elevator machine spaces, and elevator hoist ways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. Storage shall not be allowed within the elevator machine room. Signage shall be provided at the entry doors to the elevator machine room indicating "ELEVATOR MACHINERY - NO STORAGE ALLOWED." 
In addition to other sections of the 2015 International Fire Code, an approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in the occupancies and locations, excluding detached Group U (private garages, carports and sheds), as follows: 
(66)  Section 903.2.1.1 is amended by amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1.1 Group A-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-1 Occupancies where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 9,000 square feet (836 m 2 ). 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. 
4.  The fire area contains a multi-theater complex. 
(67)  Section 903.2.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1.3 Group A-3. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-3 Occupancies where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 9000 square feet (836 m 2 ). 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. 
Exception: Areas used exclusively as participant sports areas where the main floor area is located at the same level as the level of exit discharge of the main entrance and exit. 
(68)  Section 903.2.1.4 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.1.4 Group A-4. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group A-4 Occupancies where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  The fire area exceeds 9,000 square feet (836 m 2 ). 
2.  The fire area has an occupant load of 300 or more. 
3.  The fire area is located on a floor other than the level of exit discharge. 
(69)  Section 903.2.4 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.4 Group F-1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for Group F-1 where the following conditions exist: 
1.  F-1 moderate hazard occupancies 9,000 square feet and greater containing the following: 
Air craft (Manufacturing, not to include repair) 
Beverages; over 16 percent alcohol content 
Boats 
Canvas or similar fabric 
Clothing 
Electric generation plants 
Engines (including rebuilding) 
Food processing and commercial kitchens not associated with restaurants, cafeterias and similar dining facilities are more than 2,500 square feet (232m2) in area 
Furniture (Sprinkle at 2,500 square feet) 
Metals 
Millwork 
Paper Mills or products 
Plastic products 
Refuse Incineration 
Photo engravings 
Resilient flooring 
Silks 
Tobacco, cigars, cigarettes and snuff 
Upholstery and mattresses 
Wax candles 
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all other Group F-1 occupancies not listed here at 12,000 square feet or greater. 
2.  A Group F-1 fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane. 
3.  The combined area of all Group F fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 18,000 square feet (1672 m2). 
4.  A Group F-1 occupancy used for the manufacture of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m2). 
(70)  Section 903.2.7 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.7 Group M. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing Group M occupancy where one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  A Group M fire area exceeds 9,000 square feet (836 m2). 
2.  A Group M fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane. 
3.  The combined area of all Group M fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 24,000 square feet (2230 m2). 
4.  A Group M occupancy used for the display and sale of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 m2). 
5.  An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing Group M occupancy when the storage fire area exceeds 2,500 square feet. 
(71)  Section 903.2.9 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.9 S-1 An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings containing a Group S-1 occupancy where one of the following conditions exist: 
1.  S-1 moderate hazard occupancies 9,000 square feet and greater containing the following: 
Aerosols, Levels 2 and 3 
Aircraft hangar (storage and repair) 
Bags: cloth, burlap and paper 
Bamboos and rattan 
Baskets 
Belting: canvas and leather 
Books and paper in rolls or packs 
Boots and shoes 
Buttons, including cloth covered, pearl or bone 
Cardboard and cardboard boxes 
Clothing, woolen wearing apparel 
Cordage 
Dry boat storage (indoor) 
Furniture 
Furs 
Glues, mucilage, pastes and size 
Grains 
Horns and combs, other than celluloid 
Leather 
Linoleum 
Lumber 
Tobacco, cigars, cigarettes and snuff 
Wax candles 
An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all other Group S-1 moderate hazard occupancies not listed here at 12,000 square feet or greater. 
2.  A Group S-1 fire area is located more than three stories above grade plane. 
3.  The combined area of all S-1 fire areas on all floors, including any mezzanines, exceeds 18,000 square feet (1672 m2). 
4.  A Group S-1 fire area used for the storage of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 m2). 
5.  A Group S-1 occupancy used for the storage of upholstered furniture or mattresses exceeds 2,500 square feet (232 m2). 
(72)  Section 903.2.9.1 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.9.1 Repair Garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all buildings used as repair garages in accordance with amended Section 406.8 in the Building Code as shown: 
1.  Buildings having two or more stories above grade plane, including basements, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 10,000 square feet (929 m2). 
2.  Buildings not more than one story above grade plane, with a fire area containing a repair garage exceeding 10,000 square feet (1115 m2). 
3.  Buildings with repair garages servicing vehicles parked in basements. 
4.  A Group S-1 fire area used for the repair of commercial motor vehicles where the fire area exceeds 5,000 square feet (464 m2).1. 
(73)  Section 903.2.9.3 is added to read as follows: 
903.2.9.3 Self Service Storage facility. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all self-service storage facilities. 
(74)  Section 903.2.10 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.10 All Group S-2 Enclosed parking garages. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout buildings classified as enclosed parking garages in accordance with Section 406.6 of the International Building Code where either of the following conditions exists: 
1.  Where the fire area of the enclosed parking garage exceeds 12,000 square feet (1115 m2). 
2.  Where the enclosed parking garage is located beneath other groups. 
Exception: Enclosed parking garages located beneath Group R-3 occupancies. 
(75)  Section 903.2.11.3 is amended to read as follows: 
903.2.11.3 Buildings 55 feet or more in height. An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout buildings that have one or more stories, other than penthouses in compliance with Section 1510 of the International Building Code, located 55 feet (16 764 mm) or more above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, measured to the finished floor. 
Exceptions: Open parking structures in compliance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code, having no other occupancies above the subject garage. 
Section 903.2.11.7 is amended to read as follows: 
(76)  903.2.11.7 High-Piled Combustible Storage. For any building with a clear height exceeding 12 feet (4572 mm), see Chapter 32 to determine if those provisions apply. 
(77)  Section 903.2.11.8 is added to read as follows: 
903.2.11.8 Spray Booths and Rooms. New and existing spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system. 
(78)  Section 903.3.1.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
903.3.1.1.1 Exempt locations. When approved by the fire code official, automatic sprinklers shall not be required in the following rooms or areas where such rooms or areas are protected with an approved automatic fire detection system in accordance with Section 907.2 that will respond to visible or invisible particles of combustion and/or rate of rise heat detectors. Sprinklers shall not be omitted from any room merely because it is damp, of fire-resistance rated construction or contains electrical equipment. 
1.  Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, constitutes a serious life or fire hazard as determined by the building official or fire code official. 
2.  Any room or space where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents, when approved by the building official and fire code official. 
3.  Generator and transformer rooms, under the direct control of a public utility, separated from the remainder of the building by walls and floor/ceiling or roof/ceiling assemblies having a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
4.  Elevator machine rooms, machinery spaces, and hoist ways, other than pits where such sprinklers would not necessitate shunt trip requirements under any circumstances. 
(79)  Section 903.3.1.2.3 is added to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.2.3 Attics, Open Breezeways, and Attached Garages. Sprinkler protection is required in attic spaces of such buildings two or more stories in height, open breezeways, and attached garages in accordance with NFPA 13 and or NFPA 13R requirements. 
(80)  Section 903.3.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.3 NFPA 13D sprinkler systems. Automatic sprinkler systems installed in one- and two-family dwellings, Group R-3 and R-4 Condition 1 and townhouses shall be permitted to be installed throughout in accordance with NFPA 13D or in accordance with state law. 
(81)  Section 903.3.1.4 is added to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.4 Freeze protection. Freeze protection systems for automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with the requirements of the applicable referenced NFPA standard and this section. 
(82)  Section 903.3.1.4.1 is added to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.4.1 Attics. Only dry-pipe, pre-action, or listed antifreeze automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect attic spaces. 
Exception: Wet-pipe fire sprinkler systems shall be allowed to protect non-ventilated attic spaces where: 
1.  The attic sprinklers are supplied by a separate floor control valve assembly to allow ease of draining the attic system without impairing sprinklers throughout the rest of the building, and 
2.  Adequate heat shall be provided for freeze protection as per the applicable referenced NFPA standard, and 
3.  The attic space is a part of the building's thermal, or heat, envelope, such that insulation is provided at the roof deck, rather than at the ceiling level. 
(83)  Section 903.3.1.4.2 is added to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.1.4.2 Heat trace/insulation. Heat trace/insulation shall only be allowed where approved by the fire code official. 
(84)  Section 903.3.5 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.3.5 Water supplies. Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in Section 903.3.1. The potable water supply shall be protected against backflow in accordance with the requirements of this section and the International Plumbing Code. For connections to public waterworks systems, the water supply test used for design of fire protection systems shall be adjusted to account for seasonal and daily pressure fluctuations based on information from the water supply authority and as approved by the fire code official. 
Water supply as required for such systems shall be provided in conformance with the supply requirements of the respective standards; however, every fire protection system shall be designed with a 10 psi safety factor. Reference Section 507.4 for additional design requirements. 
(85)  Section 903.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.4 Sprinkler system monitoring and alarms. Valves controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems, pumps, tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures, and water-flow switches on all sprinkler systems shall be electrically supervised by a listed fire alarm control unit. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Automatic sprinkler systems protecting one- and two-family dwellings. 
2.  Limited area sprinkler systems in accordance with Section 903.3.8. 
3.  Automatic sprinkler systems installed in accordance with NFPA 13R where a common supply main is used to supply both domestic water and the automatic sprinkler system, and a separate shutoff valve for the automatic sprinkler system is not provided. 
4.  Jockey pump control valves that are sealed or locked in the open position. 
5.  Control valves to commercial kitchen hoods, paint spray booths or dip tanks that are sealed or locked in the open position. 
6.  Valves controlling the fuel supply to fire pump engines that are sealed or locked in the open position. 
7.  Trim valves to pressure switches in dry, pre-action and deluge sprinkler systems that are sealed or locked in the open position. 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
(86)  Section 903.4.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 903.4.2 Alarms. An approved audible device, located on the exterior of the building in an approved location, shall be connected to every automatic sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system. 
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practicable to the fire department connection. 
(87)  Section 905.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 905.2 Installation standards. Standpipe systems shall be installed in accordance with this section and NFPA 14. Manual Dry Standpipes shall be supervised with a minimum of 10 psig and a maximum 40-psig-air pressure with a high/low alarm. 
(88)  Section 905.3.9 is added to read as follows: 
Section 905.3.9 Buildings exceeding 10,000 sq. ft. In buildings exceeding 10,000 square feet in area per story and where any portion of the building's interior area is more than 200 feet (600960 mm) of travel, vertically and horizontally, from the nearest point of fire department vehicle access, Class I automatic wet or manual wet standpipes shall be provided. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Automatic dry and semi-automatic dry, or manual dry standpipes are allowed as provided for in NFPA 14. 
2.  R-2 occupancies of four stories or less in height having no interior corridors. 
(89)  Section 905.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 905.4 Location of Class I standpipe hose connections. 
Class I standpipe hose connections shall be provided in all of the following locations: 
1.  In every required exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at an intermediate landing between stories, unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
2.  On each side of the wall adjacent to the exit opening of a horizontal exit. 
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to a horizontal exit are reachable from an interior exit stairway hose connection by a 30-foot (9144 mm) hose stream from a nozzle attached to 100 feet (30480 mm) of hose, a hose connection shall not be required at the horizontal exit. 
3.  In every exit passageway, at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of a building. 
Exception: Where floor areas adjacent to an exit passageway are reachable from an exit stairway hose connection by a 30- foot (9144 mm) hose stream from a nozzle attached to 100 feet (30480 mm) of hose, a hose connection shall not be required at the entrance from the exit passageway to other areas of the building. 
4.  In covered mall buildings, adjacent to each exterior public entrance from an exit passageway or exit corridor to the mall. In open mall buildings, adjacent to each public entrance to the mall at the perimeter line and adjacent to each entrance from an exit passageway or exit corridor to the mall. 
5.  Where the roof has a slope less than four units vertical in 12 units horizontal (33.3-percent slope), each standpipe shall be provided with a two-way hose connection located to serve the roof or at the highest landing of an exit stairway with stair access to the roof provided in accordance with Section 1011.12. 
6.  Where the most remote portion of a nonsprinklered floor or story is more than 150 feet (45720 mm) from a hose connection or the most remote portion of a sprinklered floor or story is more than 200 feet (60960 mm) from a hose connection, the fire code official is authorized to require that additional hose connections be provided in approved locations. 
7.  When required by this Chapter, standpipe connections shall be placed adjacent to all required exits to the structure and at two hundred feet (200') intervals along major corridors thereafter, or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
(90)  Section 905.9 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 905.9 Valve supervision. Valves controlling water supplies shall be supervised in the open position so that a change in the normal position of the valve will generate a supervisory signal at the supervising station required by Section 903.4. Where a fire alarm system is provided, a signal shall also be transmitted to the control unit. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Valves to underground key or hub valves in roadway boxes provided by the municipality or public utility do not require supervision. 
2.  Valves locked in the normal position and inspected as provided in this code in buildings not equipped with a fire alarm system. 
Sprinkler and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the central station upon tampering. 
(91)  Section 907.1.4 is added to read as follows: 
Section 907.1.4 Design Standards. Where a new fire alarm system is installed, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke detectors shall have analog initiating devices. 
(92)  Section 907.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 907.2.1 Group A. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 300 or more persons or more than 100 persons above or below the lowest level of exit discharge. Group A occupancies not separated from one another in accordance with Section 707.3.10 of the International Building Code shall be considered as a single occupancy for the purposes of applying this section. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm system as required for the Group E occupancy. 
Activation of fire alarm notification appliances shall: 
1.  Cause illumination of the means of egress with light of not less than 1 foot-candle (11 lux) at the walking surface level, and 
2.  Stop any conflicting or confusing sounds and visual distractions. 
(93)  Section 907.2.13 is amended to read as follows: 
907.2.13 High-rise buildings. High-rise buildings shall be provided with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section 907.2.13.1, a fire department communication system in accordance with Section 907.2.13.2 and an emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Airport traffic control towers in accordance with Section 907.2.22 of this code and Section 412 of the International Building Code. 
2.  Open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code. 
3.  Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1 of the International Building Code; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited to sky boxes, restaurants, and similarly enclosed areas. 
4.  Low-hazard special occupancies in accordance with Section 503.1.1 of the International Building Code. 
5.  Buildings with an occupancy in Group H-1, H-2 or H-3 in accordance with Section 415 of the International Building Code. 
6.  In Group I-1 and I-2 occupancies, the alarm shall sound at a constantly attended location and occupant notification shall be broadcast by the emergency voice/alarm communication system. 
(94)  Section 907.2.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarms system. An approved smoke detection system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 100' open space, all buildings, whether portable buildings or the main building, will be considered one building for alarm occupant load consideration and interconnection of alarm systems. 
Exceptions: 
1.  A manual fire alarm system is not required in Group E occupancies with an occupant load of 50 or less when provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
1.1  Residential In-Home day care with not more than 12 children may use interconnected single station detectors in all habitable rooms. (For care of more than five children 2 1/2 or less years of age, see Section 907.2.6.) 
2.  Emergency voice/alarm communication systems meeting the requirements of section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with section 907.6 shall not be required in group E occupancies with occupant loads of 100 or less, provided that activation of the manual fire alarm system initiates an approved occupant notification signal in accordance with Section 907.5. 
3.  Manual fire alarm boxes are not required in Group E occupancies where all of the following apply: 
3.1.  Interior corridors are protected by smoke detectors. 
4.  Manual fire alarm boxes shall not be required in Group E occupancies where all of the following apply: 
4.1.  The building is equipped throughout with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
4.2.  The emergency voice/alarm communication system will activate on sprinkler water flow. 
4.3.  Manual activation is provided from a normally occupied location. 
(95)  Section 907.2.11.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 907.2.11.2 Groups R-2, R-3 R-4 and I-1. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1 regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations: 
1.  On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms. 
2.  In each room used for sleeping purposes. 
3.  In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. 
All smoke alarms shall be UL listed and installed in accordance with the provisions of this code and the household fire warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72. 
(96)  Section 907.2.13 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 907.2.13 High-rise buildings. High-rise buildings shall be provided with an automatic smoke detection system in accordance with Section 907.2.13.1, a fire department communication system in accordance with Section 907.2.13.2 and an emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Airport traffic control towers in accordance with Section 907.2.22 and Section 412 of the International Building Code. 
2.  Open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5 of the International Building Code. 
3.  Open air portions of buildings with an occupancy in Group A-5 in accordance with Section 303.1 of the International Building Code; however, this exception does not apply to accessory uses including but not limited to skyboxes, restaurants and similarly enclosed areas. 
4.  Low-hazard special occupancies in accordance with Section 503.1.1 of the International Building Code. 
5.  Buildings with an occupancy in Group H-1, H-2 or H-3 in accordance with Section 415 of the International Building Code. 
6.  In Group I-1 and I-2 occupancies, the alarm shall sound at a constantly attended location and occupant notification shall be broadcast by the emergency voice/alarm communication system. 
(97)  Section 907.2.13.1.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 907.2.13.1.1 Area smoke detection. Area smoke detectors shall be provided in accordance with this section. Smoke detectors shall be connected to an automatic fire alarm system. The activation of any detector required by this section shall activate the emergency voice/alarm communication system in accordance with Section 907.5.2.2. In addition to smoke detectors required by Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.10, smoke detectors shall be located as follows: 
1.  In each mechanical equipment, electrical, transformer, telephone equipment or similar room, and Central Control Station. 
2.  In each elevator machine room, machinery space, control room and control space and in elevator lobbies. 
3.  For Group R, Division 1 Occupancies, in all interior corridors serving as a means of egress for an occupant load of 10 or more. 
(98)  Section 907.4.2.7 is added to read as follows: 
Section 907.4.2.7 Type. Manual alarm actuating devices shall be an approved double action type. 
(99)  Section 907.6.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
Section 907.6.1.1 Wiring Installation. All fire alarm systems shall be installed in such a manner that a failure of any single initiating device or single open in an initiating circuit conductor will not interfere with the normal operation of other such devices. All signaling line circuits (SLC) shall be installed in such a way that a single open will not interfere with the operation of any addressable devices (Class A). Outgoing and return SLC conductors shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 72 requirements for Class A circuits and shall have a minimum of four feet separation horizontal and one foot vertical between supply and return circuit conductors. The initiating device circuit (IDC) from an addressable input (monitor) module may be wired Class B, provided the distance from the addressable module to the initiating device is ten feet or less. 
(100)  Section 907.6.3 is amended [to read] as follows: 
907.6.3 Initiating device identification. The fire alarm system shall identify the specific initiating device address, location, device type, floor level where applicable and status including indication of normal, alarm, trouble and supervisory status, as appropriate. 
(101)  Section 907.6.6 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 907.6.6 Monitoring. Fire alarm systems required by this chapter or by the International Building Code shall be monitored by an approved supervising station in accordance with NFPA 72. 
Exception: Monitoring by a supervising station is not required for: 
1.  Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms required by Section 907.2.11. 
2.  Smoke detectors in Group I-3 occupancies. 
3.  Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings. 
See 907.6.3 for the required information transmitted to the supervising station. 
(102)  Section 907.6.6.3 is added to read as follows: 
Section: 907.6.6.3 Communication requirements. All alarm systems, new or replacement, shall transmit alarm, supervisory and trouble signals descriptively to the approved central station, remote supervisory station or proprietary supervising station as defined in NFPA 72, with the correct device designation and location of addressable device identification. Alarms shall not be permitted to be transmitted as a general alarm or zone condition. 
(103)  Section 909.2.1 is added to read as follows: 
Section 909.2.1 Smoke-control system for high-rises. A smoke control system meeting the requirements of Section 909 in the International Fire Code- 2015 edition and International Building Code - 2015 edition shall be provided for high-rise buildings. 
(104)  Section 909.22 is added to read as follows: 
Section 909.22 Stairway or Ramp Pressurization Alternative. Where the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 and the stair pressurization alternative is chosen for compliance with Building Code requirements for a smoke proof enclosure, interior exit stairways or ramps shall be pressurized to a minimum of 0.10 inches of water (25 Pa) and a maximum of 0.35 inches of water (87 Pa) in the shaft relative to the building measured with all interior exit stairway and ramp doors closed under maximum anticipated conditions of stack effect and wind effect. Such systems shall comply with Section 909, including the installation of a separate fire-fighter's smoke control panel as per Section 909.16, and a Smoke Control Permit shall be required from the fire department as per Section 105.7. 
(105)  Section 909.22.1 is added to read as follows: 
Section 909.22.1 Ventilating equipment. The activation of ventilating equipment for the stair or ramp pressurization system shall be by smoke detectors installed at each floor level at an approved location at the entrance to the smoke proof enclosure. When the closing device for the stairway or ramp shaft and vestibule doors is activated by smoke detection or power failure, the mechanical equipment shall activate and operate at the required performance levels. Smoke detectors shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.3. 
(106)  Section 909.22.1.1 is added to read as follows: 
Section 909.22.1.1 Ventilation Systems. Smoke proof enclosure ventilation systems shall be independent of other building ventilation systems. The equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall comply with one of the following: 
1.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located exterior to the building and directly connected to the smoke proof enclosure or connected to the smoke proof enclosure by ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
2.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the smoke proof enclosure with intake or exhaust directly from and to the outside or through ductwork enclosed by not less than 2-hour barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
3.  Equipment, control wiring, power wiring and ductwork shall be located within the building if separated from the remainder of the building, including other mechanical equipment, by not less than 2-hour fire barriers constructed in accordance with Section 707 of the Building Code or horizontal assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 711 of the Building Code, or both. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Control wiring and power wiring utilizing a 2-hour rated cable or cable system. 
2.  Where encased with not less than 2 inches (51 mm) of concrete. 
3.  Control wiring and power wiring protected by a listed electrical circuit protective systems with a fire-resistance rating of not less than 2 hours. 
(107)  Section 909.22.1.2 is added to read as follows: 
Section 909.22.1.2 Standby Power. Mechanical vestibule and stairway and ramp shaft ventilation systems and automatic fire detection systems shall be provided with standby power in accordance with Section 2702 of the Building Code. 
(108)  Section 909.22.1.3 is added to read as follows: 
Section 909.22.1.3 Acceptance and Testing. Before the mechanical equipment is approved, the system shall be tested in the presence of the fire code official to confirm that the system is operating in compliance with these requirements. 
(109)  Section 910.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 910.2 Where Required. Smoke and heat vents or a mechanical smoke removal system shall be installed as required by Sections 910.2.1 and 910.2.2 
Exceptions: 
1.  Frozen food warehouses used solely for storage of Class I and II commodities where protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
2.  Only manual smoke and heat removal shall not be required in areas of buildings equipped with early suppression fast-response (ESFR) sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited. 
3.  Only manual smoke and heat removal shall be required in areas of buildings equipped with control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50(m*S)1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers. Automatic smoke and heat removal is prohibited. 
(110)  Section 910.2.3 is added to read as follows: 
910.2.3 Group H. Buildings and portions thereof used as Group H occupancy as Section follows: 
1.  In occupancies classified as Group H-2 or H-3, any of which are more than 15,000 square feet in single floor area. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
2.  In areas of buildings in Group H used for storing Class 2, 3, and 4 liquid and solid oxidizers, Class 1 and unclassified detonable organic peroxides, Class 3 and 4 unstable (reactive) materials, or Class 2 or 3 water-reactive materials as required for a high-hazard commodity classification. 
Exception: Buildings of noncombustible construction containing only noncombustible materials. 
(111)  Section 910.3.4 is added to read as follows: 
Section 910.3.4 Vent Operation. Smoke and heat vents shall be capable of being operated by approved automatic and manual means. Automatic operation of smoke and heat vents shall conform to the provisions of Sections 910.3.2.1 through 910.3.2.3. 
(112)  Section 910.3.4.1 is added to read as follows: 
Section 910.3.4.1 Sprinkled buildings. Where installed in buildings equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall be designed to operate automatically. The automatic operating mechanism of the smoke and heat vents shall operate at a temperature rating at least 100 degrees F (approximately 38 degrees Celsius) greater than the temperature rating of the sprinklers installed. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2. 
(113)  Section 910.3.4.2 is added to read as follows: 
Section 910.3.4.2 Non sprinkled buildings. Where installed in buildings not equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system, smoke and heat vents shall operate automatically by actuation of a heat-responsive device rated at between 100°F (56°C) and 220°F (122°C) above ambient. 
Exception: Listed gravity-operated drop out vents. 
(114)  Section 910.3.4.3 is added to read as follows: 
Section 910.3.4.3 Gravity-operated drop out vents. Automatic smoke and heat vents containing heat sensitive glazing designed to shrink and drop out of the vent opening when exposed to fire shall fully open within 5 minutes after the vent cavity is exposed to a simulated fire represented by a time-temperature gradient that reaches an air temperature of 500 degrees F (260 degrees C) within 5 minutes. 
(115)  Section 910.4.3.1 is amended to read as follows 
Section 910.4.3.1 Makeup Air. Makeup air openings shall be provided within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the floor level. Operation of makeup air openings shall be automatic. The minimum gross area of makeup air inlets shall be 8 square feet per 1,000 cubic feet per minute (0.74 m2 per 0.4719 m3/s) of smoke exhaust. 
(116)  Section 910.4.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 910.4.4 Activation. The mechanical smoke removal system shall be activated automatically by the automatic sprinkler system or by an approved fire detection system. Individual manual controls shall also be provided. 
Exception: Manual only systems per Section 910.2. 
(117)  Section 912.2.3 is added to read as follows: 
Section 912.2.3 Hydrant distance. An approved fire hydrant shall be located within 100 feet of the fire department connection as the fire hose lays along an unobstructed path. 
(118)  Section 913.2.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 913.2.1 Protection of fire pump rooms. Rooms where fire pumps are located shall be separated from all other areas of the building in accordance with Section 913.2.1 of the International Building Code. 
When located on the ground level at an exterior wall, the fire pump room shall be provided with an exterior fire department access door that is not less than 3 ft. in width and 6 ft. - 8 in. in height, regardless of any interior doors that are provided. A key box shall be provided at this door, as required by Section 506.1. 
Exception: When it is necessary to locate the fire pump room on other levels or not at an exterior wall, the corridor leading to the fire pump room access from the exterior of the building shall be provided with equivalent fire resistance as that required for the pump room, or as approved by the fire code official. Access keys shall be provided in the key box as required by Section 506.1. 
(119)  Section 914.3.1.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 914.3.1.2 Water Supply to required Fire Pumps. In buildings that are more than 120 feet (128 m) in building height, required fire pumps shall be supplied by connections to no fewer than two water mains located in different streets. Separate supply piping shall be provided between each connection to the water main and the pumps. Each connection and the supply piping between the connection and the pumps shall be sized to supply the flow and pressure required for the pumps to operate. 
Exception: Two connections to the same main shall be permitted provided the main is valved such that an interruption can be isolated so that the water supply will continue without interruption through no fewer than one of the connections. 
(120)  Section 1006.2.2.6 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 1006.2.2.6 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the Electrical Code as adopted. 
(121)  Section 1009.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 1009.1 Accessible means of egress required. Accessible means of egress shall comply with this section. Accessible spaces shall be provided with not less than one accessible means of egress. Where more than one means of egress is required by Section 1006.2 or 1006.3 from any accessible space, each accessible portion of the space shall be served by not less than two accessible means of egress. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Accessible means of egress are not required in alternations to existing buildings. 
2.  One accessible means of egress is required from an accessible mezzanine level in accordance with Section 1009.3, 1009.4, or 1009.5. 
3.  In assembly areas with sloped or stepped aisles, one accessible means of egress is permitted where the common path of travel is accessible and meets the requirements in Section 1029.8. 
4.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1009. 
(122)  Section 1010.1.9.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Section: 1010.1.9.4 Bolt locks. Manually operated flush bolts or surface bolts are not permitted. 
Exceptions: 
1.  On doors not required for egress in individual dwelling units or sleeping units. 
2.  Where a pair of doors serves a storage or equipment room, manually operated edge- or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf. 
3.  Where a pair of doors serves an occupant load of less than 50 persons in a Group B, F, M, or S occupancy, manually operated edge-or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf. The inactive leaf shall contain no doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating hardware. 
4.  Where a pair of doors serves a Group A, B, F, M or S occupancy, manually operated edge- or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf provided such inactive leaf is not needed to meet egress width requirements and the building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. The inactive leaf shall contain no doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating hardware. 
5.  Where a pair of doors serves patient care rooms in Group I-2 occupancies, self-latching edge- or surface-mounted bolts are permitted on the inactive leaf provided that the inactive leaf is not needed to meet egress width requirements and the inactive leaf contains no doorknobs, panic bars or similar operating hardware. 
(123)  Section 1010.1.9.8 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 1010.1.9.8 Sensor release of electrically locked egress doors. The electric locks on sensor-released doors located in a means of egress in buildings with an occupancy in Groups A, B, E, I-1, I-2, I-4, M, R-1 or R-2 and entrance doors to tenant spaces in occupancies in Groups A, B, E, I-1, I-2, I-4, M, R-1 or R-2 are permitted where installed and operated in accordance with all of the following criteria: 
1.  The sensor shall be installed on the egress side, arranged to detect an occupant approaching the doors. The doors shall be arranged to unlock by a signal from or loss of power to the sensor. 
2.  Loss of power to the lock or locking system shall automatically unlock the doors. 
3.  The doors shall be arranged to unlock from a manual unlocking device located 40 inches to 48 inches (1016 mm to 1219 mm) vertically above the floor and within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the secured doors. Ready access shall be provided to the manual unlocking device and the device shall be clearly identified by a sign that reads "PUSH TO EXIT." When operated, the manual unlocking device shall result in direct interruption of power to the lock-independent of other electronics-and the doors shall remain unlocked for not less than 30 seconds. 
4.  Activation of the building fire alarm system, where provided, shall automatically unlock the doors, and the doors shall remain unlocked until the fire alarm system has been reset. 
5.  Activation of the building automatic sprinkler system or fire detection system shall automatically unlock the doors. The doors shall remain unlocked until the fire alarm system has been reset. 
6.  The door locking system units shall be listed in accordance with UL 294. 
7.  The building must be protected throughout by an approved and monitored automatic fire sprinkler system OR an approved automatic fire/smoke detection system. Activation of the approved system shall automatically unlock the doors. The doors shall remain unlocked until the system is reset. 
(124)  Section 1015.8 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 1015.8 Window Openings: 
1015.8 Window openings. Windows in Group R-2 and R-3 buildings including dwelling units, where the top of the sill of an operable window opening is located less than 36 inches above the finished floor and more than 72 inches (1829 mm) above the finished grade or other surface below on the exterior of the building, shall comply with one of the following: 
1.  Operable windows where the top of the sill of the opening is located more than 55-ft (16 764 mm) above the finished grade or other surface below and that are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F 2006. 
2.  Operable windows where the openings will not allow a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere to pass through the opening when the window is in its largest opened position. 
3.  Operable windows where the openings are provided with window fall prevention devices that comply with ASTM F2090. 
4.  Operable windows that are provided with window opening control devices that comply with Section 1015.8.1. 
(125)  Section 1031.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 1031.2 Reliability. Required exit accesses, exits and exit discharges shall be continuously maintained free from obstructions or impediments to full instant use in the case of fire or other emergency. An exit or exit passageway shall not be used for any purpose that interferes with a means of egress. 
(126)  Section 1103.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 1103.3 Existing elevators. Existing elevators, escalators and moving walks shall comply with the requirements of Sections 1103.3.1 and 1103.3.2 [and] provide emergency signage as required by Section 607.3. 
(127)  Section 1103.5.1 is added to read as follows: 
1103.5.1 Spray Booths and Rooms. Existing spray booths and spray rooms shall be protected by an approved automatic fire-extinguishing system in accordance with Section 2404. 
(128)  Section 1103.7.5.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 1103.7.5.1 Group R-1 hotel and motel manual fire alarm system. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in existing Group R-1 hotels and motels more than three stories or with more than 20 sleeping units. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Buildings less than two stories in height where all sleeping units, attics and crawl spaces are separated by 1-hour fire-resistance-rated construction and each sleeping unit has direct access to a public way, egress court or yard. 
(129)  Section 1103.7.8 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 1103.7.8 Fire Alarm System Design Standards. Where an existing fire alarm system is upgraded or replaced, the devices shall be addressable. Fire alarm systems utilizing more than 20 smoke and/or heat detectors shall have analog initiating devices. 
Exception: Existing systems need not comply unless the total building, or fire alarm system, remodel or expansion exceeds 30% of the building. When cumulative building, or fire alarm system, remodel or expansion initiated after the date of original fire alarm panel installation exceeds 50% of the building, or fire alarm system, the fire alarm system must comply within 18 months of permit application. 
(130)  Section 1103.7.8.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 1103.7.8.1 Communication requirements. Refer to Section 907.6.6 for applicable requirements. 
(131)  Section 2304.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 2304.1 Supervision of dispensing. The dispensing of fuel at motor fuel-dispensing facilities shall be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Conducted by a qualified attendant; and/or 
2.  Shall be under the supervision of a qualified attendant; and/or 
3.  Shall be an unattended self-service facility in accordance with Section 2304.3 
At any time the qualified attendant of item Number 1 or 2 above is not present, such operations shall be considered as an unattended self-service facility and shall also comply with Section 2304.3. 
(132)  Table 3206.2. j. is amended to read as follows: 
Table 3206.2. j. Where storage areas are protected by either early suppression fast response (ESFR) sprinkler systems or control mode special application sprinklers with a response time index of 50 (m • s) 1/2 or less that are listed to control a fire in the stored commodities with 12 or fewer sprinklers, installed in accordance with NFPA 13, manual smoke and heat vents or manually activated engineered mechanical smoke exhaust systems shall be required within these areas. 
(133)  Section 3310.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 3310.1 Required access. Approved vehicle access for firefighting shall be provided to all construction or demolition sites. Vehicle access shall be provided to within 100 feet of temporary or permanent fire department connections. Vehicle access shall be provided by either temporary or permanent roads, capable of supporting an 80,000 lb. vehicle loading under all weather conditions. Vehicle access shall be maintained until permanent fire apparatus access roads are available. When fire apparatus access roads are required to be installed for any structure or development, they shall be approved prior to the time of which construction has progressed beyond completion of the foundation of any structure. 
(134)  Section 5601.1.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 5601.1.3 Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Only when approved for fireworks displays, storage and handling of fireworks as allowed in Section 5604 and 5608. 
2.  The use of fireworks for approved fireworks displays as allowed in Section 5608. 
(135)  Section 5703.6 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 5703.6 Piping Systems. Piping systems, and their component parts, for flammable and combustible liquids shall be in accordance with Section 5703.6.1 through 5703.6.11. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
(136)  Section 5704.2.9.5 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 5704.2.9.5 Above-ground tanks inside of buildings. Above-ground tanks inside of buildings shall comply with Sections 5704.2.9.5.1 through 5704.2.9.5.3. Storage of flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials in above-ground tanks inside of buildings is prohibited within limits established by law in the adopting ordinance as the limits of districts in which such storage is prohibited. The storage of flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials in aboveground tanks is prohibited in residential areas. 
(137)  Section 5704.2.9.5.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 5704.2.9.5.3 Combustible liquid storage tanks inside of buildings. The maximum aggregate allowable quantity limit shall be 3,000 gallons of Class II or III combustible liquid for storage in protected aboveground tanks complying with Section 5704.2.9.7 when all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The entire 3,000 gallon quantity shall be stored in protected above-ground tanks; 
2.  The 3,000 gallon capacity shall be permitted to be stored in a single tank or multiple smaller tanks; 
3.  The tanks shall be located in a room protected by an automatic sprinkler system complying with Section 903.3.1.1; and 
4.  Tanks shall be connected to fuel-burning equipment, including generators, utilizing an approved closed piping system. 
The quantity of combustible liquid stored in tanks complying with this section shall not be counted towards the maximum allowable quantity set forth in Table 5003.1.1(1), and such tanks shall not be required to be located in a control area. Such tanks shall not be located more than two stories below grade. 
(138)  Section 5704.2.9.6 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 5704.2.9.6 Above-ground tanks outside of buildings. Above-ground tanks outside of buildings shall comply with Sections 5704.2.9.6.1 through 5704.2.9.6.3. The storage of flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials in aboveground tanks is prohibited in residential areas. 
Exception: Propane tanks will be allowed where there are no natural gas utilities available in specified residential areas. 
(139)  Section 5704.2.11.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 5704.2.11.1 Location. Flammable and combustible liquid storage tanks located underground, either outside or under buildings, shall be in accordance with all of the following: 
1.  Tanks shall be located with respect to existing foundations and supports such that the loads carried by the latter cannot be transmitted to the tank. 
2.  The distance from any part of a tank storing liquids to the nearest wall of a basement, pit, cellar, or lot line shall not be less than 3 feet (914 mm). 
3.  A minimum distance of 1 foot (305 mm), shell to shell, shall be maintained between underground tanks. 
4.  The storage of flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials in underground tanks is prohibited in residential areas. 
(140)  Section 5704.2.11.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 5704.2.11.4 Leak Prevention. Leak prevention for underground tanks shall comply with Sections 5704.2.11.4.1 through 5704.2.11.4.3. An approved method of secondary containment shall be provided for underground tank and piping systems. 
(141)  Section 5704.2.11.4.2 is amended to read as follows: 
5704.2.11.4.2 Leak Detection. Underground storage tank systems shall be provided with an approved method of leak detection from any component of the system that is designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 30 and as specified in Section 5704.2.11.4.3. 
(142)  Section 5704; 2.11.4.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 5704.2.11.4.3 Observation wells. Approved sampling tubes of a minimum 4 inches in diameter shall be installed in the backfill material of each underground flammable or combustible liquid storage tank. The tubes shall extend from a point 12 inches below the average grade of the excavation to ground level and shall be provided with suitable surface access caps. Each tank site shall provide a sampling tube at the corners of the excavation with a minimum of 4 tubes. Sampling tubes shall be placed in the product line excavation within 10 feet of the tank excavation and one every 50 feet routed along product lines towards the dispensers, a minimum of two are required. 
(143)  Section 5704.3.8 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 5704.3.8 Liquid storage warehouses. The storage of flammable liquids as specified in Chapter 57 as "Liquid Storage Warehouses" is prohibited. 
(144)  Section 5706.5.4.5 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 5706.5.4.5 Commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing. Dispensing of Class I, II, and III motor vehicle fuel from tank vehicles into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles located in open areas at commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing establishments is allowed where permitted, provided such dispensing operations are conducted in accordance with the following: 
1.  Dispensing shall occur only at approved locations at sites that have been issued a mobile fueling site permit that allows mobile fueling by permitted mobile fueling operators in accordance with Section 105.6.17. 
2.  Mobile fuel delivery to vehicles located inside or on the roof level of parking structures or other buildings is prohibited. 
Exception: When approved by the fire code official, mobile fuel delivery to vehicles located on the roof level of parking structures or other buildings may be allowed where there is exterior vehicular access from grade level. 
3.  The owner of a mobile fueling operation shall develop a written safety and emergency response plan that: 
3.1.  establishes policies and procedures for fire safety, spill prevention and control, personnel training and compliance with other applicable requirements of this code, 
3.2.  demonstrates readiness to respond to a fuel spill and carry out appropriate mitigation measures, and 
3.3.  describes the process to dispose properly of contaminated materials. 
The plan shall be submitted to the fire code official prior to approval of the permit application to conduct mobile fueling operations. It shall be maintained and updated by the permittee as needed and made available to the fire code official upon request. 
4.  A detailed site plan shall be submitted with each application for a mobile fueling site permit. The site plan shall indicate: all buildings, structures and appurtenances on site and their use or function; all uses adjacent to the lot lines of the site; the locations of all storm drain openings, adjacent waterways or wetlands; information regarding slope, natural drainage, curbing, impounding and how a spill will be retained upon the site property; and the scale of the site plan. 
5.  Provisions shall be made at mobile fueling sites to prevent liquids spilled during dispensing operations from flowing into buildings or off-site. Acceptable methods include, but shall not be limited to, grading driveways, raising doorsills or other approved means. 
6.  The fire code official is allowed to impose limits on the times and days during which mobile fueling operations are allowed to take place and specific locations on a site where fueling is permitted. 
7.  Mobile fueling operations shall be conducted in areas not accessible to the public or shall be limited to times when the public is not present within 15 feet (4572 mm) of dispensing operations. 
8.  Mobile fueling of Class I liquids shall not take place within 25 feet (7620 mm) of buildings, lot lines including those on a public way, combustible storage or storm drains measured from the dispensing nozzle. Mobile fueling of Class II and Class III liquids shall not take place within 15 feet (4572 mm) of buildings, lot lines including those on a public way, combustible storage or storm drains measured from the dispensing nozzle. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The distance to storm drains shall not apply where an approved storm drain cover or an approved equivalent that will prevent any fuel from reaching the drain is in place prior to fueling or a fueling hose being placed within the applicable setback distance from the drain. Where placement of a storm drain cover will cause the accumulation of excessive water or difficulty in conducting the fueling, such cover shall not be used and the fueling shall not take place within the applicable setback distance from the drain. 
2.  The distance to storm drains shall not apply for drains that direct influent to approved oil interceptors. 
3.  Where approved by the fire code official and where an approved means of vapor recovery is utilized during fueling operations, mobile fueling of Class I liquids shall not take place within 15 feet (7620 mm) of buildings, lot lines including those on a public way, combustible storage or storm drains measured from the dispensing nozzle. 
9.  The tank vehicle shall comply with the requirements of Section 5706.6, NFPA 385 and local, state and federal requirements. The tank vehicle's specific functions shall include that of supplying fuel to motor vehicle fuel tanks. The vehicle and all its equipment shall be maintained in good repair. 
10.  Tank vehicles used to dispense Class I fuels into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles shall have a maximum aggregate cargo capacity of 1,200 gallons. 
11.  Signs prohibiting smoking or open flames within 25 feet (7620 mm) of the tank vehicle or the point of fueling shall be prominently posted on not less than three sides of the vehicle including the back and both sides. 
12.  A portable fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 40:BC shall be provided on the tank vehicle with signage clearly indicating its location. 
13.  Mobile fueling equipment and appurtenances shall be of an approved or listed type. 
14.  The dispensing hose of Class II and III liquids shall not be extended from the reel more than 100 feet (30 480 mm) in length. The dispensing hose of Class I liquids shall not be extended from the reel more than 50 feet (15 240 mm) in length. 
15.  Absorbent materials, non-water-absorbent pads, a 10-foot-long (3048 mm) containment boom, an approved container with lid and a nonmetallic shovel shall be provided to mitigate a minimum 5-gallon (19 L) fuel spill. 
16.  Tank vehicles shall be equipped with a "fuel limit" switch, such as a count-back switch, to limit the amount of a single fueling operation to not more than 500 gallons (1893 L) of Class II or III liquids or 30 gallons (13.6 L) of Class I liquids before resetting the limit switch. 
Exception: Tank vehicles where the operator carries and can utilize a remote emergency shutoff device which, when activated, immediately causes flow of fuel from the tank vehicle to cease. 
17.  Persons responsible for dispensing operations shall be trained in the appropriate mitigating actions in the event of a fire, leak or spill. Training records shall be maintained by the dispensing company. 
18.  Operators of tank vehicles used for mobile fueling operations shall have in their possession at all times an emergency communication device to notify the proper authorities in the event of an emergency. 
19.  The tank vehicle dispensing equipment shall be constantly attended and operated only by designated personnel who are trained to handle and dispense motor fuels. 
20.  Fuel dispensing shall be prohibited within 25 feet (7620 mm) of any source of ignition. Fixed or portable electrical equipment located within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the point of connection, extending in all directions, and up to 18 inches (450 mm) above grade level within a horizontal radius of 10 feet (3048 mm) from Class I liquid dispensing operations shall be rated for use in Class I, Division 2 hazardous locations in accordance with NFPA 70. 
21.  The engines of vehicles being fueled shall be shut off during dispensing operations. 
22.  Nighttime fueling operations shall take place only in adequately-lighted areas. 
23.  The tank vehicle shall be positioned with respect to vehicles being fueled to prevent traffic from driving over the delivery hose. 
24.  Tank vehicles and fuel delivery equipment shall not be positioned in a manner that obstructs emergency vehicle access roads. 
25.  The parking or staging and garaging of tank vehicles shall comply with Section 5706.6.2. Tank vehicles shall not be used as storage tanks. 
26.  During fueling operations, tank vehicle brakes shall be set, chock blocks shall be in place and warning lights shall be in operation. 
27.  Motor vehicle fuel tanks shall not be topped off. 
28.  The dispensing hose shall be properly placed on an approved reel or in an approved compartment prior to moving the tank vehicle. 
29.  The fire code official and other appropriate authorities shall be immediately notified when a reportable spill or unauthorized discharge occurs. 
30.  Operators shall place a drip pan or an absorbent pillow under each fuel fill opening prior to and during dispensing operations. Drip pans shall be liquid-tight. The pan or absorbent pillows shall have a capacity of not less than 3 gallons (11.36 L). Spills retained in the drip pan or absorbent pillow need not be reported. Operators, when fueling, shall have on their person an absorbent pad capable of capturing fuel overfills. Except during fueling, the nozzle shall face upward and an absorbent pad shall be kept under the nozzle to catch drips. Contaminated absorbent pads or pillows shall be disposed of regularly in accordance with local, state and federal regulations. 
Exception: The pan or absorbent pillows shall have a capacity of not less than 1 gallon (3.79 L) when single fueling operations are limited to not more than 30 gallons. 
(145)  Section 5706.5.4.6 is added to read as follows: 
Section 5706.5.4.6 Commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing or other approved locations from other than tank vehicles. Dispensing of Class I, II and III motor vehicle fuel from mobile fueling vehicles not classified as tank vehicles into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles located in open areas at commercial, industrial, governmental or manufacturing establishments, or other approved locations is allowed where permitted, provided such dispensing operations are conducted in accordance with this section. 
Individual fuel supply tanks for mobile fueling installed on mobile fueling vehicles used to dispense fuels into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles shall have a maximum individual fuel capacity of 110 gallons. The maximum aggregate amount of all mobile fueling fuel supply tanks shall not exceed that allowed by local, state, and federal regulations not to exceed 1,100 gallons. 
1.  Dispensing shall occur only at approved locations that have been issued a mobile fueling site permit that allows mobile fueling by permitted mobile fueling operators in accordance with Section 105.6.17. 
2.  Mobile fuel delivery to vehicles located inside or on the roof level of parking structures or other buildings is prohibited. 
Exception: When approved by the fire code official, mobile fuel delivery to vehicles located on the roof level of parking structures or other buildings may be allowed where there is exterior vehicular access from grade level. 
3.  The owner of a mobile fueling operation shall develop and provide a written safety and emergency response plan that: 
3.1.  establishes policies and procedures for fire safety, spill prevention and control, personnel training and compliance with other applicable requirements of this code; 
3.2.  demonstrates readiness to respond to a fuel spill and carry out appropriate mitigation measures; and 
3.3.  describes the process to dispose properly of contaminated materials. 
The plan shall be submitted to the fire code official prior to approval of the permit application to conduct mobile fueling operations. It shall be maintained and updated when necessary by the permittee. Any modifications to an approved plan shall be submitted as needed and made available to the fire code official for review and approval. 
4.  The times and days during which mobile fueling operations are permitted to take place shall be approved by the fire code official. Nighttime fueling operations shall only take place only in adequately-lighted areas. 
5.  Where required by the fire code official, a detailed site plan shall be submitted with each application for a mobile fueling site permit. The site plan shall indicate: all buildings, structures and appurtenances on site and their use or function; all uses adjacent to the lot lines of the site; the locations of all storm drain openings, adjacent waterways or wetlands; information regarding slope, natural drainage, curbing, impounding and how a spill will be retained upon the site property; and the scale of the site plan. 
6.  Provisions shall be made at mobile fueling locations to prevent liquids spilled during dispensing operations from flowing into buildings or off-site. Acceptable methods include, but shall not be limited to, grading driveways, raising doorsills, placement of absorbent socks, booms or pads or other approved means. 
7.  Mobile fueling of Class II or III liquids shall not take place within 15 feet (4572 mm) of buildings, property lines, combustible storage or storm drains. Mobile fueling of Class I liquids shall not take place within 25 feet (7620 mm) of buildings, lot lines, public streets, public alleys, public ways, combustible storage or storm drains measured from the dispensing nozzle. 
Exception: The distance to storm drains shall not apply where an approved storm drain cover or an approved equivalent that will prevent any fuel from reaching the drain is in place prior to fueling. 
8.  Fuel dispensing shall be prohibited within 25 feet (7620 mm) of sources of ignition, including electrical, in accordance with 5003.7. Signs prohibiting smoking or open flames within 25 feet (7620 mm) of the mobile fueling vehicle or the point of fueling shall be prominently posted on not less than three sides of the vehicle including the back and both sides. The engines of vehicles being fueled shall be shut off during dispensing operations. 
9.  The dispensing hose used for dispensing of Class II and III liquids shall not be extended from the reel more than 100 feet (30 480 mm) in length. The dispensing hose used for dispensing of Class I liquids shall not be extended from the reel more than 50 feet (15 240 mm) in length. The nozzle, when the hose is fully extended, shall not reach within 5 feet (1524 mm) of building openings. 
10.  Mobile fueling vehicles and fuel delivery equipment shall not be positioned in a manner that obstructs emergency vehicle access roads. The mobile fueling vehicle shall be positioned with respect to vehicles being fueled to prevent traffic from driving over the delivery hose. 
11.  Mobile fueling vehicles shall be equipped with a "fuel limit" switch, such as a count-back switch, to limit the amount of a single fueling operation to not more than 30 gallons before resetting the limit switch. 
Exception: Mobile fueling vehicles where the operator carries and can utilize a remote emergency shut off device which, when activated, immediately causes flow of fuel from the tank vehicle to cease. 
12.  Absorbent materials, non-water-absorbent pads, containment booms, an approved container with lid and a nonmetallic shovel shall be provided to mitigate potential spills. 
13.  The mobile fueling vehicle dispensing equipment shall be constantly attended and operated only by designated personnel who are trained to handle and dispense motor fuels. 
14.  Persons responsible for dispensing operations shall be trained in the appropriate mitigating actions in the event of a fire, leak or spill. Training records shall be maintained by the dispensing company and made available to the fire code official. 
15.  A portable fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 40:BC shall be provided on the mobile fueling vehicle with signage clearly indicating its location. 
16.  Operators of mobile fueling vehicles used for mobile fueling operations shall have in their possession at all times an emergency communication device to notify the proper authorities in the event of an emergency. 
17.  During fueling operations, mobile fueling vehicles brakes shall be set, chock blocks shall be in place and warning lights shall be in operation. 
18.  Operators shall place an absorbent pillow under each fuel fill opening prior to and during dispensing operations. The absorbent pillows shall have a capacity of not less than 1 gallon. Spills retained in absorbent pillow need not be reported. 
19.  The engines of vehicles being fueled shall be shut off during dispensing operations. 
20.  Any unauthorized discharge of motor fuel shall comply with Section 5003.3.1. 
21.  The dispensing hose shall be properly secured on an approved reel or in an approved compartment prior to moving the tank vehicles. 
22.  The parking or staging and garaging of mobile fueling vehicles shall comply with Section 5706.6.2. Mobile fueling vehicles shall not be used as storage tanks. 
23.  The tank vehicle's specific function shall include that of supplying fuel to motor vehicle fuel tanks. The vehicle and all its equipment shall be maintained in good repair. 
24.  Mobile fueling vehicles shall comply with applicable local, state and federal requirements. Documentation shall be provided upon request. 
25.  Individual fuel supply tanks for mobile fueling installed on mobile fueling vehicles used to dispense fuels into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles shall have a maximum individual fuel capacity of 110 gallons. The maximum aggregate amount of all mobile fueling fuel supply tanks shall not exceed that allowed by local, state, and federal regulations not to exceed 1,100 gallons. 
26.  Individual fuel supply tanks for mobile fueling shall not be manifold together through the same dispensing pump. 
27.  Mobile fuel dispensing equipment and appurtenances shall be listed or approved. 
28.  Mobile fueling operations shall be limited to times when the public is not present within 15 feet (4572 mm) of dispensing operations. 
(146)  Section 5706.5.4.7 is added to read as follows: 
Section 5706.5.4.7 Dispensing motor vehicle fuel from portable containers. Dispensing of Class I, II and III motor vehicle fuel from portable containers into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles where the aggregate container capacity does not exceed 60 gallons is allowed where permitted within jurisdictions, provided such dispensing operations are conducted in accordance with the following: 
Exception: Fueling from approved portable containers in cases of an emergency or for personal use. 
1.  Where required, the mobile fueling operator shall be required to obtain a permit with the fire code official. 
2.  The operator of a mobile fueling operation shall develop a written safety and emergency response plan that 
2.1.  establishes policies and procedures for fire safety, spill prevention and control, personnel training and compliance with other applicable requirements of this code, 
2.2.  demonstrates readiness to respond to a fuel spill and carry out appropriate mitigation measures, and 
2.3.  describes the process to dispose properly of contaminated materials. 
The plan shall be made available to the fire code official at the time of the vehicle registration with the fire code official. The plan shall be maintained and updated by the operator as needed and made available to the fire code official upon request. 
3.  Persons responsible for dispensing operations shall be trained in the appropriate mitigating actions in the event of a fire, leak or spill. Training records shall be maintained by the fuel dispensing company. 
4.  Dispensing shall be conducted using Safety cans, shall be listed in accordance with UL 30 and a maximum capacity of 5 gallons are used in dispensing operations. 
5.  Fuel dispensing shall not take place within 15 feet (4572 mm) of buildings or storm drains. 
Exceptions: 
1.  The distance to storm drains shall not apply where an approved storm drain cover or an approved equivalent that will prevent any fuel from reaching the drain is in place prior to fueling. Where placement of a storm drain cover will cause the accumulation of excessive water or difficulty in conducting the fueling, such cover shall not be used and the fueling shall not take place within 15 feet (4572 mm) of a drain. 
2.  The distance to storm drains shall not apply for drains that direct influent to approved oil receptors. 
6.  Mobile fuel delivery to vehicles located inside or on the roof level of parking structures or other buildings is prohibited. 
Exception: When approved by the fire code official, mobile fuel delivery to vehicles located on the roof level of parking structures or other buildings may be allowed where there is exterior vehicular access from grade level. 
7.  Fuel deliver vehicle brakes shall be set and hazard lights shall be activated during dispensing operations. 
8.  The engines of the vehicles being fueled shall be shut off during dispensing operations. 
9.  Fuel dispensing shall be prohibited within 25 feet (7620 mm) of sources of ignition, including electrical, in accordance with 5003.7. Signs prohibiting smoking or open flames within 25 feet (7620 mm) of the service vehicle or the point of fueling shall be prominently posted on not less than three sides of the vehicle including the back and both sides. The engines of vehicles being fueled shall be shut off during dispensing operations. 
10.  Nighttime fueling operations shall only take place in adequately lighted areas. 
11.  Operators of fuel delivery vehicles shall have in their possession at all times an emergency communication device to notify the proper authorities in the event of an emergency. 
12.  At least one portable fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 40:BC shall be provided on the fuel delivery vehicle with signage clearly indicating its location. 
13.  Absorbent materials, non-water-absorbent pads, an approved container with lid and a nonmetallic shovel shall be provided on the fuel delivery vehicle to mitigate a minimum 5-gallon (19 L) fuel spill. 
14.  A means shall be provided to prevent liquids spilled during dispensing operations from flowing into buildings or off-site. Acceptable methods include, but shall not be limited to, drop pans, absorbent pads and other approved means. 
15.  Any unauthorized discharge of motor fuel shall comply with Section 5003.3.1. 
16.  Mobile fueling operations shall be limited to times when the public is not present within 15 feet (4572 mm) of dispensing operations. 
(147)  Section 6103.2.1.8 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 6103.2.1.8 Jewelry Repair, Dental Labs and Similar Occupancies. Where natural gas service is not available, portable LP-Gas containers are allowed to be used to supply approved torch assemblies or similar appliances. Such containers shall not exceed 20- pound (9.0 kg) water capacity. Aggregate capacity shall not exceed 60-pound (27.2 kg) water capacity. Each device shall be separated from other containers by a distance of not less than 20 feet. 
(148)  Section 6104.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. Within the limits established by law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons (7570L) 
Exceptions: In particular installations, this capacity limit shall be determined by the fire code official, after consideration of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy, and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed LP-gas containers, degree of fire protection to be provided and capabilities of the local fire department. 
(149)  Section 6104.3.2 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 6104.3.2 Spas, Pool Heaters, and Other Listed Devices. Where natural gas service is not available, an LP-gas container is allowed to be used to supply spa and pool heaters or other listed devices. Such container shall not exceed 250-gallon water capacity per lot. See Table 6104.3 for location of containers. 
Exception: Lots where LP-gas can be off-loaded wholly on the property where the tank is located may install up to 500 gallons above ground or 1,000 gallons underground approved containers. 
(150)  Section 6107.4 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 6107.4 Protecting Containers from Vehicles. Where exposed to vehicular damage due to proximity to alleys, driveways or parking areas, LP-gas containers, regulators and piping shall be protected in accordance with Section 312. 
(151)  Section 6109.13 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 6109.13 Protection of Containers. LP-gas containers shall be stored within a suitable enclosure or otherwise protected against tampering. Vehicle impact protection shall be provided as required by Section 6107.4. 
(152)  Appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H and I of the 2015 International Fire Code are hereby included in the adoption of this ordinance. 
(153)  Reserved. 
(154)  Section 113.2 is hereby amended as follows: 
113.2 Schedule of fees. A fee for each permit or inspection shall be required as set forth in Section 113.2.1. 
113.2.1 Permit and Inspection fees: 
1.  Fire Protection Equipment and Installation Permit: 1.5% of Cost of Equipment and Installation Costs 
2.  Special Locking Systems Permit: $75.00 
3.  Trench Burning Permit (when allowed): $300.00 
4.  Carnival Fire Protection Systems Permit: $250.00 
5.  Hot Works/Cutting and Welding Permit: $75.00 
6.  High Pile Storage Permit: $75.00 
7.  Fireworks Permit (does not include personnel or apparatus): $400.00 
8.  Pyrotechnics (Other) Permit (does not include personnel or apparatus): $200.00 
9.  Hazardous Materials Permit: $200.00 
10.  Spray Booth Installation Permit: $75.00 
11.  Tent Permit: $50.00 
12.  Propane Tank Installation Permit (as per NFPA 58 guidelines): $75.00 
13.  Open Flame Cooking Permit: $50.00 
14.  Underground Storage Tank Installation/Removal Permit (per tank): $100.00 
15.  Food Truck Inspection Permit: $75.00 
16.  Fire Inspection Before/After Hours Testing (2 hour minimum) $75.00 per hour 
17.  Standby personnel for fireworks and other pyrotechnics displays and special events if deemed necessary in the interest public safety: $ 50.00 per hour (minimum two hours). The minimum number of personnel shall be set by the fire chief or fire marshal. 
18.  Standby equipment for fireworks and other pyrotechnics displays and special events: Based on the most current edition of FEMA's Schedule of Equipment Rates. 
113.2.2. Plan review fees: 
1.  Plan review required by changes, additions or revisions to plans: $75.00 per hour (one-hour minimum). 
2.  For use of outside consultants for plan review: actual costs. 
3.  For use of outside consultants for plan review, inspections, or both: actual costs. 
(155)  Section 113.3 is hereby amended as follows: 
113.3 Work, activity or operation in absence of required permit or inspection. 
Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or other entity who commences any work, activity or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits and/or inspections, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in the sum of not more than $2,000.00 each day work, activity or operation continues shall constitute a separate, punishable offense. The fire chief or fire marshal will have the authority to impose a double fee permit on violators who perform installations or maintenance on fire protection equipment without required permits in addition to or lieu of the above stated $2,000.00 fine. 
(Ord. No. 2000-10, § 1, 1-25-00; Ord. No. 2002-127, § 1, 11-12-02; Ord. No. 2004-195, § 2, 1-27-04; Ord. No. 2006-278, §§ 1, 2, 2-14-06; Ord. No. 2011-459, § 2, 9-13-11; Ord. No. 2017-624, § 2, 8-29-17; Ord. No. 2019-664, § 1, 2-12-19)  
Sec. 6-31. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, such violation shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000). Each and every instance of the violation of this Ordinance constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(b)  Nothing is this article shall preclude the city's pursuit of any and all other remedies allowed under the civil and criminal statutes of the State of Texas, and in equity, including, but not necessarily limited to, Chapter 54, Subchapter B, of the Texas Local Government Code, to prosecute civil suits for enforcement, injunctive relief, and civil penalties. Neither shall the city be required, nor prohibited, to issue criminal citations before, after, or during any proceeding prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-624, § 3, 8-29-17)  
Secs. 6-32—6-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE MARSHAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— City officers and employees generally, § 2-31 et seq.; permits for fire alarms, § 2.5-5. 
 
Sec. 6-46. - Office created. 
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be a division of the Cedar Hill Fire Department and shall report directly to the fire chief. Such office shall be filled by appointment by the fire chief. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11; Ord. No. 76-434, § 1, 10-12-76; Ord. No. 76-435, § 2, 10-26-76; Ord. No. 2005-227, § 1, 2-8-05)  
Sec. 6-47. - To investigate fires, etc. 
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed or damaged and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics, and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8-12)  
Sec. 6-48. - To take testimony; may arrest; etc. 
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1976, § 8-13)  
Sec. 6-49. - May summon witnesses. 
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation and may require the production of any book, paper, or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(Code 1976, § 8-14)  
Sec. 6-50. - Refusal to testify. 
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper, or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such misdemeanor shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances; provided, however, that, any person so convicted shall have the right of appeal. 
(Code 1976, § 8-15)  
Sec. 6-51. - Investigations may be private. 
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private; and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held; and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1976, § 8-16)  
Sec. 6-52. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall have the authority in the performance of the duties imposed upon him/her by the provisions of this article to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred pursuant to Section 2.107 of the city's Fire Prevention Code, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(b)  The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent and without any complaint, shall have a right to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city pursuant to Section 2.107 of the city's Fire Prevention Code, and it shall be his duty, monthly or more often, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing, and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he/she shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he/she shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces, or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes, with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable, and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, he/she shall order the same to be removed or remedied; and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of such building or premises; provided, however, that, if the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5) days, appeal to the fire chief, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint; and unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1976, § 8-18; Ord. No. 2005-227, § 1, 2-8-05)  
Sec. 6-53. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire, and which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or health, or safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure, or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the person's health, or property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting, or causing fires; or which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen, or occupants of such building, structure, or premises other than the maintainor thereof, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  No prosecution shall be brought under paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section until the order provided for in section 6-52(b) is given and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. 
(d)  The penalties provided for herein shall be recovered by the city in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures, and punishments for offenses against the city. 
(e)  All misdemeanors herein provided for shall be prosecuted, and all fines and forfeitures herein provided for shall be recovered and enforced, in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures, penalties and punishments for offenses generally against the city. 
(Code 1976, § 8-24)  
Secs. 6-54—6-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AMBULANCE SERVICE CHARGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-470, §§ 1, 2, adopted February 28, 2012, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 6-71—6-77, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 89-1039, §§ 1—5, 9-18-89; Ord. No. 91-089, § 1, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 92-129, § 1, 9-22-92; Ord. No. 95-231, §§ 1, 2, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 96-296, §§ 1, 2, 9-24-96. 
 
Sec. 6-71. - Ambulance service. 
Any person who utilizes the ambulance service of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, whether such person requested the same or not, by reason of emergencies then existing, shall pay for said services the following amounts as specified below, except as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. No. 2012-470, § 2, 2-28-12)  
Sec. 6-72. - Definitions. 
For purposes of such ambulance service charges, the following definitions shall apply: 
BLS (basic life support). Where medically necessary, the use of supplies and basic treatment not requiring advanced skills or interventions. 
ALS 1 (advanced life support). Paramedic interventions are medically necessary that include an ALS assessment and/or at least one ALS intervention; oxygen, cardiac monitor, IV, Administration of approved medications by IV, Sub Q, sublingual, nebulizer inhalation, or IM. 
ALS 2 (advanced life support). Paramedic interventions are medically necessary and used to include any of the following procedures: cardioversion, advanced airways such as ET tube, central line, cardiac pacing, chest decompression, surgical airway, intraosseous line or three or more IV medications (must be three (3) separate full doses of a single drug or three (3) different drugs). 
Mileage. From the scene to final destination of delivery. 
Nonresident. Not a resident of Cedar Hill, DeSoto or Duncanville. 
Resident. A resident of Cedar Hill, DeSoto or Duncanville. 
(Ord. No. 2012-470, § 2, 2-28-12)  
Sec. 6-73. - Rates. 
(a)  Non transport fee. A fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) on all calls where the patient is not transported. Except for the following: 
(i)  Persons that have been involved in a motor vehicle accident; 
(ii)  Walk-in patients at the fire station that are not transported; 
(iii)  Calls made by a third party caller. 
(b)  BLS. A fee of eight hundred twenty-five dollars ($825.00) for residents or nine hundred dollars ($900.00) for nonresidents; 
(c)  ALS1. A fee of one thousand fifty dollars ($1,050.00) for residents or one thousand one hundred twenty-five dollars ($1,125.00) for nonresidents; 
(d)  ALS2. A fee of one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) for residents or one thousand two hundred seventy-five dollars ($1,275.00) for nonresidents; 
(e)  Mileage charge of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per mile from the scene to the final destination of delivery for residents and nonresidents; 
(f)  Any person transported by helicopter shall be charged the appropriate rate as outlined above if the necessity of the transport requires that the patient be moved any distance by ground ambulance; 
(g)  The ambulance service charges set forth herein may be adjusted by the city manager or designee to the rate(s) as established for reimbursement by the Medicare program or its equivalent administered by the United States Government. 
(Ord. No. 2012-470, § 2, 2-28-12)  
Chapter 7 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION CHAPTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-505, § 1, adopted May 28, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 7, and enacted a new Ch. 7 as set out herein. The former Ch. 7 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6; planning, Ch. 16; public utilities, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19; subdivision regulations, Ch. 20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND METHODS 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, V.T.C.A. Water Code, § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city council of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. I, § A), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-2. - Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas are subject to periodic inundation, which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. I, § B), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. I, § C), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-4. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. I, § D), 5-28-13)  
Secs. 7-5—7-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 7-21. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one (1) percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, AI—3D, AE, A99, AR, ArjA1—30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, VI—3D, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1—A30, AR, V1—V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from, any source. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS). See "flood elevation study" 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning chapters, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose chapters (such as a floodplain chapter, grading chapter and erosion control chapter) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway. See "regulatory floodway" 
Functionally dependent use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or; 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, The North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area. See "area of special flood hazard". 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [National Flood Insurance Program] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. II), 5-28-13; Ord. No. 2014-541, § 1, 7-8-14)  
Secs. 7-22—7-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 7-36. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
The chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the jurisdiction of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. III, § A), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-37. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The area of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Dallas County, Texas and Unincorporated Areas, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS) effective date March 21, 2019, and the Flood Insurance Study for Ellis County, Texas and Unincorporated Areas with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS) effective date June 3, 2013, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. III, § B), 5-28-13; Ord. No. 2014-541, § 2, 7-8-14; Ord. No. 2019-662, § 1, 1-22-19)  
Sec. 7-38. - Establishment of development permit. 
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. III, § C), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-39. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. III, § D), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-40. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. III, § E), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-41. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be; (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. III, § F), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-42. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. III, § G), 5-28-13)  
Secs. 7-43—7-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 7-56. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The city manager shall appoint the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. IV, § A), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-57. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify in riverine situations, adjacent communities on the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission (TNRCC), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with article III, section 7-37, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article V. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1—30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1—30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. IV, § B), 5-28-13; Ord. No. 2014-541, § 3, 7-8-14)  
Sec. 7-58. - Permit procedures. 
(1)  Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(a)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(c)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of article V, section 7-77(2); 
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(e)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with article IV, section 7-57(1); 
(2)  Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and the following relevant factors: 
(a)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(b)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(c)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(d)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(e)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(f)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(g)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(h)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(i)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. IV, § C), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-59. - Variance procedures. 
(1)  An appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(6)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (½) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 7-58(2) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (½) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(7)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter (article I, section 7-3). 
(8)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(9)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(10)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(a)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(b)  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or chapters. 
(c)  Any applicant to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(11)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in article IV, section 7-59(1)—(9) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. IV, § D), 5-28-13)  
Secs. 7-60—7-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 7-76. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and, 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. V, § A), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-77. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) article III, section 7-37, (ii) article IV, section 7-57(8), or (iii) article V, section 7-78(3), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to one (1) foot above fully developed base flood elevation or two (2) feet above existing base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in article IV, section 7-58(1)a., is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  All manufactured homes to be placed within zone a on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1—30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1—30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section must be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is two (2) feet above the base flood elevation, or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1—30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, or (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of article IV, section 7-58(1), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subsection (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. V, § B), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-78. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with article I, sections 7-2—7-4 of this chapter. 
(2)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of article III, section 7-38; article IV, section 7-58; and the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(3)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to article III, section 7-37 or article IV, section 7-57(8) of this chapter. 
(4)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. V, § C), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-79. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in article III, section 7-37, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures must have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures; 
(a)  Must have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified); or 
(b)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in article IV, section 7-58 are satisfied. 
(4)  Within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. V, § D), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-80. - Floodways. 
Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in article III, section 7-37, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If article V, section 7-80(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article V. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 2(Art. V, § E), 5-28-13)  
Sec. 7-81. - Enforcement of penalties. 
Any person, firm partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas such violation shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each and every instance of the violation of this chapter constitutes a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 2013-505, § 4, 5-28-13)  
Secs. 7-82—7-95. - Reserved.  
Chapter 8 - FOOD AND FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alarm systems, Ch. 2.5; animals, Ch. 3; health and sanitation, Ch. 9; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Establishment of food service inspection fees. 
All food service establishments shall pay the health permit fee each year as listed below: 
Mobile vending unit 	$200.00 per year 
Food establishments/schools/churches 	$300.00 per year 
Store/retail/hotel 	$250.00 per year 
 
(Ord. No. 90-047, § 1, 12-11-90; Ord. No. 2011-437, § 1, 4-26-11)  
Secs. 8-2—8-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 8-16. - State rules adopted. 
The definitions; the inspection of food service establishments; the issuance, suspension and revocation of permits to operate food service establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink; and the enforcement of this article shall be regulated in accordance with the current edition of the Texas Department of Health's "Texas Food Establishment Rules." 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-1; Ord. No. 82-631, § 1, 6-22-82; Ord. No. 99-420, § 1, 3-23-99)  
Sec. 8-17. - Definition. 
The "regulatory authority" in this article means the food inspector of the city or his assignee. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-4; Ord. No. 82-631, § 4, 6-22-82) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 8-18. - Inspection frequency; fees. 
(a)  An inspection of each food service establishment shall be performed at least once every four (4) months by the regulatory authority. Additional inspections of each food service establishment shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Each food service establishment holding any permit, license, or certificate issued by the regulatory authority shall pay a fee in such amount as established by the city council from time to time each year to the city to defray the costs of inspections. Such fee shall be paid on or before January 1st of each year, or at the time a food service establishment is first issued a permit, license or certificate by the regulatory authority. Such fee shall be made payable to the city secretary. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-18; Ord. No. 82-631, § 12, 6-22-82; Ord. No. 84-741, § 1, 10-23-84)  
Sec. 8-19. - Access. 
Representatives of the regulatory authority, including any sanitarian employed by the health department of Dallas County, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food service establishment at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this article. The representatives shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or used. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-19; Ord. No. 82-631, § 13, 6-22-82; Ord. No. 84-741, § 2, 10-23-84)  
Sec. 8-20. - Report of inspections. 
Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment or commissary is made, the findings shall be recorded on the inspection report form set out in section 301.73(f) of the state rules adopted by section 8-16. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this article and shall set forth a weighted point value for each requirement. Inspectional remarks shall be written to reference, by section number, the section violated and shall state the correction to be made. The rating score of the establishment shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from one hundred (100). A copy of the completed inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection report form is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-20; Ord. No. 82-631, § 14, 6-22-82)  
Sec. 8-21. - Correction of violations. 
(a)  The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the corrections of the violations found; and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the regulatory authority. 
(2)  All violations of four-or five-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten (10) days following inspection. Within fifteen (15) days after the inspection, the holder of the permit, license, or certificate shall submit a written report to the regulatory authority stating that the four-or five-point weighted violations have been corrected. A follow-up inspection shall be conducted to confirm correction. 
(3)  All one-or two-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection. 
(4)  When the rating score of the establishment is less than sixty (60), the establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations within forty-eight (48) hours. One (1) or more reinspections will be conducted at reasonable time intervals to ensure correction. 
(5)  In the case of temporary food service establishments all violations shall be corrected within twenty-four (24) hours. If violations are not corrected within twenty-four (24) hours, the establishment shall immediately cease food service operations until authorized to resume by the regulatory authority. 
(b)  The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may result in cessation of food service operations. An opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time limitations or both will be provided if a written request is filed with the regulatory authority with ten (10) days following cessation of operations. If a request for hearing is received, a hearing shall be held within twenty (20) days of receipt of the request. 
(c)  Whenever a food service establishment is required under the provisions of this section to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until it is shown on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-21; Ord. No. 82-631, § 15, 6-22-82)  
Section 8-22. - Requirements for food manager certification and food handler cards. 
(1)  Food manager certification requirements. 
(a)  No person or company shall operate a food establishment unless the establishment has a person on duty who has completed an approved Texas Department of Health Food Protection Management class. 
(b)  A food establishment with multiple shifts shall ensure that a person in charge of each shift has completed an approved food protection management class. 
(c)  The person on duty and in charge shall make available to the regulatory authority personnel their food manager certificate when inspections are conducted or when proof of class completion is required. 
(d)  The food manager certificate shall be valid for not less than three years at which time an approved food protection recertification class must be completed within forty-five (45) days after the expiration of the original certification, and every three (3) years thereafter. 
e)  Temporary food vendors, mobile food vendors who sell only prepackaged foods, and small retail vendors who sell only prepackaged foods shall be exempt from the requirements of section of this Code. 
(2)  Food employee requirements. 
(a)  All food employees shall complete an approved food handler class as determined by the city within thirty (30) days of employment at a local food establishment. A food employee is any person employed in a food premise, who at any time may be involved in the manufacturing, preparation, serving or packing of food for sale. 
(b)  Food handler cards shall be made available to regulatory authority personnel when inspections are conducted or when proof of course completion is requested. 
(c)  Food handler cards shall be valid for not less than two (2) years, at which time the card must be renewed. Employees must renew the card within forty-five (45) days of the expiration of the original card and every two (2) years thereafter. 
(d)  Any person not completing a food protection management class must complete an approved food handler class. 
(e)  A food handler class may not be taken in place of a required food protection management class. 
(f)  Temporary food vendors and mobile food vendors who sell only prepackaged foods shall be exempt from this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-455, § 1, 9-13-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-455, § 1, adopted September 13, 2011, amended § 8-22 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8-22, pertained to U.S. Public Health Service Manual adopted, and derived from § 8.5-22 of the 1976 Code; Ord. No. 82-631, § 16, 6-22-82.  
Sec. 8-23. - Examination and condemnation of food. 
Food may be examined or sampled by the regulatory authority as often as necessary for enforcement of this article. The regulatory authority may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, specifying with particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food which it believes is in violation of sections 301.73 003(a)(1) and 301.73 002(a)(2), of the state rules adopted by section 8-16 or any other section of this article. The regulatory authority shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or moved from the establishment. The regulatory authority shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within ten (10) days and that if no hearing is requested, the food shall be destroyed. If a request for hearing is received, the hearing shall be held within twenty (20) days after receipt of this request. On the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-31; Ord. No. 82-631, § 17, 6-22-82)  
Sec. 8-24. - Review of plans. 
(a)  Submission. Whenever a food service establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food service establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review and approval before construction, remodeling or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The regulatory authority shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of this article. No food service establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the regulatory authority. 
(b)  Preoperational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are required by paragraph (a) of this section to be submitted to the regulatory authority, the regulatory authority shall inspect the food service establishment prior to the start of operations, to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8.5-41, 8.5-42; Ord. No. 82-631, §§ 18, 19, 6-22-82)  
Sec. 8-25. - Procedure when infection is suspected. 
(a)  Generally. When the regulatory authority has reasonable cause to suspect possible disease transmission by an employee of a food service establishment, it may secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee or make any other investigation as indicated and shall take appropriate action. The regulatory authority may require any or all of the following measures: 
(1)  The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in food establishments. 
(2)  The immediate closing of the food service establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the regulatory authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists. 
(3)  Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease. 
(4)  Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and of other employees and of his and their body discharges. 
(b)  Fees for inspection services. Fees for inspection services shall be determined from time to time by the city council, and rates authorized by the council shall be on file with the city secretary. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8.5-51, 8.5-52; Ord. No. 82-631, §§ 20, 21, 6-22-82)  
Sec. 8-26. - Service of notices. 
A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, license, or certificate, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit, license, or certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-15; Ord. No. 82-631, § 9, 6-22-82)  
Sec. 8-27. - Hearings. 
The hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Any oral testimony given at a hearing shall be reported verbatim, and the presiding officer shall make provision for sufficient copies of the transcript. The regulatory authority shall make a final finding based upon the complete hearing record and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit, license, or certificate by the regulatory authority. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-16; Ord. No. 82-631, § 10, 6-22-82)  
Sec. 8-28. - Injunctive relief. 
The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-61; Ord. No. 82-631, § 22, 6-22-82)  
Secs. 8-29—8-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10. 
 
Sec. 8-41. - Required; persons eligible for issuance; transferability; posting required. 
No person shall operate a food service establishment who does not have a valid permit, license, or certificate issued to him by the regulatory authority. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit, license, or certificate. Permits, licenses, or certificates are not transferable. A valid permit, license or certificate shall be posted in every food service establishment. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-11; Ord. No. 82-631, § 5, 6-22-82)  
Sec. 8-42. - Issuance. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment, food sales, mobile vending of food shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the city. Such application shall include the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food being served or sold and the signature of the applicant. 
(b)  Prior to approval of an application for a permit, license, or certificate, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food service establishment to determine compliance with the requirements of this article. If the applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, the application shall be considered in accordance with article 6252-13c of the Revised Civil Statutes. 
(c)  The regulatory authority shall issue a permit, license, or certificate to the applicant if its inspection reveals that the proposed food service establishment complies with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-12; Ord. No. 82-631, § 6, 6-22-82; Ord. No. 2011-437, § 2, 4-26-11)  
Sec. 8-43. - Suspension. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit, license, or certificate to operate a food service establishment if the holder of the permit, license, or certificate does not comply with the requirements of this article, or if the operation of the establishment does not comply with the requirements of this article, or if the operation of the food service establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to public health, or if the holder has been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony, as provided in article 6252-13c of the Revised Civil Statutes. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by paragraph (b) of this section. When a permit, license, or certificate is suspended, food service operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit, license, or certificate is suspended the holder of the permit, license, or certificate shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt of a request for hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit, license, or certificate is suspended, the holder of the permit, license, or certificate, or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit, license, or certificate is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for hearing will be provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit, license or certificate within ten (10) days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-13; Ord. No. 82-631, § 7, 6-22-82)  
Sec. 8-44. - Revocation of permit, license, or certificate. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for hearing, revoke a permit, license, or certificate for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of duty, or upon conviction of a felony or misdemeanor, as provided in article 6252-13c of the Revised Civil Statutes. 
(b)  Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify, in writing, the holder of the permit, license, or certificate, or the person in charge, of the specific reason(s) for which the permit, license, or certificate is to be revoked and that the permit, license, or certificate shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written request for hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit, license, or certificate within such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit, license, or certificate becomes final. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-14; Ord. No. 82-631, § 8, 6-22-82)  
Sec. 8-45. - Application after revocation. 
Whenever a revocation of a permit, license, or certificate has become final, the holder of the revoked permit, license, or certificate may make written application for a new permit, license, or certificate. 
(Code 1976, § 8.5-17; Ord. No. 82-631, § 11, 6-22-82)  
Sec. 8-46. - Requirements for mobile vending units. 
(1)  A health permit is required for all mobile vending units. 
(2)  All mobile vending units will be inspected before permit is issued and one (1) time each six (6) months. 
(3)  Provide proof of automobile insurance with permit application. 
(4)  Hours of operation shall be 7:00 a.m. until sunset. 
(5)  The operation of a mobile vending unit in the following locations is prohibited: 
(a)  All city parks. 
(b)  Within one block of a school, one (1) hour before or after school hours. 
(c)  No vending allowed within one hundred (100) feet of an intersection. 
(d)  Vendor being stationary at one location for more than fifteen (15) minutes. 
(6)  Ice cream trucks shall have the following equipment: 
(a)  Sign on front and back of truck that states in three-inch lettering "Watch for Children". 
(b)  Company's name and phone number on the vehicle. 
(c)  Serving window shall be located on curb side only. 
(d)  Mirrors shall be provided on the truck with capability to see around the entire truck. 
(e)  Operable yellow/amber flashing lights on front and rear of truck. 
(f)  A truck rear bumper cover required to prevent children from jumping on the rear of the vehicle. 
(g)  Sound equipment must comply with the following: 
1.  Sound equipment shall be limited to music or human speech. 
2.  Sound shall not be audible more than one hundred (100) yards from the truck. Sound shall be no louder than 80 dBA. 
3.  Sound shall be turned off while the vehicle is stopped for vending. 
(h)  All drivers of ice cream trucks and vehicles vending products to children shall submit a copy of their driver's license to the city and obtain the permit described in this article before operating such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2011-437, § 3, 4-26-11)  
Chapter 9 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 3; swimming pool code, § 4-301 et seq.; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7; food and food service establishments, Ch. 8; park regulations, § 15-71 et seq.; sewers and sewage disposal, § 18-76 et seq.; water service, § 18-121 et seq.; water and sewer main extensions, § 18-161 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Imposition of fine for illegal dumping. 
For illegal dumping, which shall be defined as the disposal of trash, refuse, water, litter or any other material in violation of a law or ordinance of the state or of the city if a motor vehicle is used in illegal dumping, an offense under the law of the State of Texas or for violation of an ordinance of the city violated by the illegal dumping shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 87-924, § 4, 9-22-87) 
Editor's note— 87-924, § 4, adopted Sept. 22, 1987, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as § 9-1 at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— General penalty, § 1-7; municipal court, Ch. 12.  
Secs. 9-2—9-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-264, §§ 1—15, 16, adopted October 11, 2005, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 9-16—9-31, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to public nuisances generally and derived from § 11-11—11-13, 11-15; Ord. No. 95-202, § 1, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 2003-184, § 1, 12-16-03. 
 
Sec. 9-16. - Adoption of the Property Maintenance Code. 
The Property Maintenance Code is hereby adopted and incorporated in its entirety as though fully set out at length herein, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended and the provisions of such code shall be controlling in matters of property maintenance and the inspections thereof within the corporate limits of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 2, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 9-17. - Title, purpose, scope. 
(a)  Title. That this article shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code" of the City of Cedar Hill and shall be referred to herein as "this Code." 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this Code is to provide minimum standards and regulations to help safeguard and preserve life or limb, property and public welfare by regulating the use, occupancy, and maintenance of all structures, buildings and properties within the city. 
(c)  Scope. This Code shall apply to all zoning districts, land, properties, structures and buildings within the city, including all vacant, occupied, residential, non-residential, improved or unimproved land, properties, structures and buildings unless otherwise noted. 
(d)  Other ordinances. If any other ordinances of the city conflict with this code and the standards and regulations established herein, the higher or stricter standard or regulation shall prevail. 
(e)  Purpose and intent. It is hereby declared to be the purpose and intent of this Code to regulate and control public nuisances and other conditions and circumstances, as herein set forth, that adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of the general public. It is not intended that this Code be interpreted or enforced to require the city to intervene in matters which are primarily personal or private in nature and which may appropriately be resolved between or among private interests without material danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 3, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 9-18. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms when used in this article shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Enforcement authority means the person or department to whom the city manager from time to time may delegate the enforcement responsibility. 
Graffiti means words, phrases, designs, symbols, letters or drawings written, painted or scratched on sidewalks, fences, walls, windows, walls of buildings, trees or other structures or items. 
Lateral clearance means the dimension measured horizontally and perpendicular to a sidewalk, street, paved alley or easement within which no encroachment is allowed; or the dimension measured horizontally and perpendicular to an alley or easement line beyond which no encroachment is allowed. 
Minimum Housing Code means Ordinance No. 2005-263. 
Nuisance means as follows: 
(1)  A public nuisance known and established at common law or in equity jurisprudence; 
(2)  Any attractive nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence, including without limitation, any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations, inoperable motor vehicles, or any structurally unsound fences or structures, or any lumber, trash, fence, debris or vegetation which are or may be hazardous to children; 
(3)  Whatever is dangerous to human life or is detrimental to health, and is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city; 
(4)  Overcrowding a room with occupants, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city; 
(5)  Insufficient ventilation or illumination, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city; 
(6)  Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city; 
(7)  Uncleanliness, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the codes and ordinances of the city; 
(8)  Whatever renders air, food, or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the health of human beings, and is contrary to the public health, safety or welfare in violation of the codes and ordinance of the city; 
(9)  A live tree, shrub or other similar plant of any description which creates a hazard or risk of damage or destruction to persons or property, contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or in violation of the code and ordinances of the city; and 
(10)  Any other nuisance or public nuisance as defined by the codes and ordinances of the city. 
Owner means any person claiming, or in whom is vested, the ownership, dominion or title of real or personal property, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Holder of fee simple title. 
(2)  Holder of a life estate. 
(3)  Holder of leasehold estate for an initial term of five (5) years or more. 
(4)  A buyer in possession, or having right of possession under a contract for deed. 
(5)  A mortgagee, receiver, executor or trustee in possession or control of, or having right of possession or control of, real property. 
(6)  Any agent who is responsible for managing, leasing or operation of property. 
Premises means any parcel, lot or tract of land, including any structure, building, landscaping or trees thereon or any other structure or improvement located thereon. 
Structure means any residential building, non-residential building, dwelling, condominium, townhouse, apartment unit, detached garage, shed, awning, fence, screening wall, sign, swimming pool, excavation, or any other edifice, erection or material placed or located on any property within the City of Cedar Hill and any other improvement of any kind or nature. 
Tenant means any person or their agent who occupies a structure or property. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 4, 10-11-05; Ord. No. 2010-407, § 1, 3-23-10)  
Sec. 9-19. - Enforcement and inspection. 
(a)  The enforcement authority for this article shall be the person or department to whom the city manager delegates the enforcement responsibility. 
(b)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce this article, or whenever the enforcement authority has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or upon any property a condition or violation which is unsafe, dangerous or hazardous or detrimental to the public interest, the enforcement authority may enter such structure or property at all reasonable times to inspect such structure or property; provided, however, that if such structure or property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and if such entry is refused, the enforcement authority shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 5, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 9-20. - Responsibilities of owner and tenant. 
(a)  Every owner of the premises shall maintain such premises in compliance with this article. An owner shall not let, rent or lease a premises for occupancy or use, which does not comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Every owner and every tenant of the premises shall maintain the premises in a clean, sanitary and safe condition, including the disposal of rubbish, garbage, organic or inorganic waste, junk or other waste in a lawful manner. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 6, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 9-21. - Substandard property. 
(a)  Declaration of substandard status. Failure of the owner to maintain any structure or property or portion of structure or property to an extent that it endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the occupants thereof or the public shall be grounds for the enforcement authority to declare the structure or property substandard. 
(b)  Order to vacate. When an occupied structure or property is declared substandard and is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the occupants or the public, there shall be grounds for the enforcement authority to order the structure or property vacated. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 7, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 9-22. - Enforcement procedures; notice, appeal and recovery of costs. 
(a)  Whenever the enforcement authority has found and determined that a building or structure is substandard and should be vacated, the enforcement authority shall give notice in accordance with the provisions of the city's minimum housing code Ordinance No. 2005-263 and shall have, exercise and perform the rights, duties and functions of the enforcement authority therein set forth. 
(b)  Appeals of any determination of the enforcement authority shall be to the city's building appeals and advisory board in accordance with the procedures for appeal. 
(c)  Enforcement of orders issued by the enforcement authority or the building appeals and advisory board shall be in accordance with the provisions of the minimum housing code, and the enforcement authority and the building appeals and advisory board shall have, exercise and perform the powers, duties and functions of the building official enforcement authority therein set forth. 
(d)  Except for vacation orders, enforcement of any notice and order of the enforcement authority under this article shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed. The decision of the building appeals and advisory board is final. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 8, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 9-23. - Enforcement of order and cost recovery. 
(a)  Failure of an owner to comply with any notice or order that has become final shall be grounds for the enforcement authority to take whatever action is necessary to bring the structure or property into compliance. 
(b)  All costs for the taking down and removal, and/or restoration, of buildings declared substandard pursuant to this article shall be levied, assessed and collected in accordance with the provisions of the minimum housing code. 
(c)  A detailed report of expenses shall be prepared by the enforcement authority. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 9, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 9-24. - Authority of the building appeals and advisory board. 
The building appeals and advisory board shall have, by majority vote, jurisdiction to: 
(1)  Uphold the determination and order of the enforcement authority. 
(2)  Allow a reasonable length of time in which to comply with the determination or order of the enforcement authority and the requirements of this article. 
(3)  Accept an alternate method for compliance with the provisions of this article or order of the enforcement authority when it can be demonstrated that such alternate method meets the intent of this article. 
(4)  When it is determined that, due to peculiarities of the property, a literal enforcement of this article would result in an unnecessary hardship, allow the minimal variations necessary to relieve the hardship when such minimal variations will not result in danger to persons or property or will not result in a lack of maintenance so as to effect the appearance and/or values of the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 10, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 9-25. - Notice of nuisance or violation; service; failure to comply; abatement; costs; lien; administrative fees. 
(a)  If a nuisance is found to exist upon any property within the city, or if any person owning, claiming, occupying or having supervision or control of any property within the city limits, fails to comply with this article's provisions, it shall be the duty of the enforcement authority or his duly appointed representative to give a minimum of seven (7) days' official notice in writing to such person who is creating and/or allowing the continuance of such nuisance, or is violating the terms of this article. If such person fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article within the specified period following notification, they shall be considered to be in violation and subject to fine and penalties as provided by this article. 
(b)  The notice shall be in writing and may be served on the property owner, or agent of the owner, by handing it to him in person, or by delivery through the United States mail, addressed to such owner, or agent of the owner, at his post office address, or if the address is unknown, then by posting such notices on the front door of the dwelling or establishment or where no building exists, by posting them on a sign in the front yard. 
(c)  Except as provided for multifamily dwelling complexes in subsection (a) of this section, the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall apply to all real properties occupied or unoccupied, except that the requirement of a seven-day official notification is met and fulfilled when the enforcement authority has given a seven-day notice in writing at least one time in any calendar year to such person who is creating such nuisance or is otherwise in violation of this article. 
(d)  The city shall be further entitled to go upon such nuisance properties and do or cause to be done the work necessary to abate any public nuisance existing in violation of this article if such person fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this article within the specified period following official notification. 
(e)  All costs for abatement of any such public nuisance, or any part of a nuisance, including one hundred fifty dollar ($150.00) administrative fee. If any owner of such property shall fail to pay the costs so assessed within thirty (30) days after being notified of such costs, the city shall file with the county clerk a statement of such costs. The city shall have a privileged lien on the premises and the personal obligation of the owner of such property, second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, to receive the costs so made. For any such costs, suit may be instituted in the name of the city, and the statement of costs, as provided previously in this article, shall be prima facie proof of the costs expended for such work. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 11, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 9-26. - Exterior grounds. 
(a)  Sanitation. All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, free from accumulations of rubbish, garbage, junk or waste which constitute a public nuisance, or which are contrary to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Grading and drainage. Grading and drainage maintenance standards are as follows: 
(1)  All property shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water in which mosquito larvae breed thereon, or within or under any structure located thereon. 
(2)  No filling, excavation or other improvement shall be performed or constructed on any property which will have an adverse effect on an existing drainage pattern on an adjacent property. 
(c)  Sidewalks. All sidewalks, walkways, steps and areas located on all private property, other than single-family properties, and intended for public use, such as a sidewalk from a street to the front door of a dwelling or business, a sidewalk from a parking area to the primary public entry door of a business, a sidewalk in front of retail businesses such as a shopping center and other similar conditions shall be maintained by the owner and tenant of such property in a proper state of repair, free of mud, debris or other obstructions that would impair or prevent their use. The owner and tenant of private property adjacent to all sidewalks, walkways, steps and public areas located on public property shall keep such sidewalks, walkways, steps and public areas free of mud, debris or other obstructions that would impair or prevent their use. 
(d)  Rodent and insect control. Every owner and every tenant of a structure or property shall keep such property or structure free of insects, rats, fire ants, vermin or other pests which create a hazard or a nuisance to adjacent property or are otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(e)  Glare. Exterior lights placed or erected on private property shall be shielded, placed or erected so as not to create a traffic hazard or a public nuisance. 
(f)  Trees, shrubs and plants. Standards for trees, shrubs and plants are as follows: 
(1)  Trees, shrubs and plants shall not obstruct the access to or from any door or window of any structure which is used, or is required by city codes and ordinances to be used, for ingress and egress. 
(2)  Trees, shrubs or plants shall not create a hazard or an obstruction and shall be maintained within the following minimum clearances: 
a.  Overhead clearance or public sidewalks and other public pathways—Eight (8) feet vertical clearance. 
b.  Lateral clearance of public sidewalks and other public pathways—Six (6) inches from each edge of sidewalk or pathway. 
c.  Overhead clearance of streets—Thirteen and one-half (13½) feet vertical clearance. 
d.  Lateral clearance of streets, no encroachment over or above the back of the curb or the edge of paving. 
e.  Overhead clearance of public alleys and easements which have been dedicated and improved for vehicular use—Thirteen and one-half (13½) feet vertical clearance. 
f.  Lateral clearance of alleys and easements which have been dedicated and improved for vehicular use, no encroachment over the edge of paving nor shall any tree, shrub or similar plant extend into the alley or easement more than eighteen (18) inches, or in any way obstruct or interfere with vehicular traffic. 
(3)  Trees, shrubs or plants that are dead or pose a safety hazard to persons or property shall be removed. 
(g)  Nuisances. All properties shall be maintained free of nuisances. 
(h)  Weeds and grass. Standards for weeds and grass are as follows: 
(1)  Weeds, grass or brush shall be maintained at a height not exceeding twelve (12) inches. 
(2)  All cut weeds, grass, shrubs or brush shall not be kept or allowed to accumulate on any public street, sidewalk or other public way. 
(3)  Weeds, grass, shrubs or brush shall not be deposited in any inlet, manhole or storm sewer or sanitary sewer system. 
(4)  The unpaved areas of the front yard shall be maintained with grass, ground cover, or other type of landscaping to such an extent that the soil, when wet, will not be picked up and spread to sidewalks or adjacent private or public property and shall not be subject to erosion during rains. 
(i)  Animals and pen. Maintenance standards for animals and pens are as follows: 
(1)  All animal pens, runs, exercise areas, cages, fenced areas, houses, structures and enclosures shall be kept clean, sanitary, free of odor and excrement and any other unsightly or objectionable matter which constitutes a public nuisance or is otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(2)  The cleaning, skinning and processing of game shall be screened from view from public streets and all resulting waste shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner. 
(3)  The keeping of any hogs or pigs within the city are prohibited except as permitted under article III of chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(j)  Accumulations of firewood, lumber, boxes and other materials. Any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones or any other character of materials which may be used as a harborage by rats, rodents or other vermin, or in which evidence of rats, rodents or other vermin is found, shall be placed on open racks and elevated not less than eighteen (18) inches above the ground, with a clear intervening space underneath. 
(k)  Antennas, towers, stacks and similar structures. Antennas, towers, stacks and similar structures must be maintained structurally sound, free of deterioration and firmly secured. 
(l)  Fences. Standards for fences are as follows: 
(1)  All fences shall be maintained so as to comply with the requirements of article XIV and in good condition, which condition shall not deviate from the maintenance standard as follows: 
a.  The fence shall not be out of vertical alignment more than twenty-five (25) degrees. 
b.  Any and all broken, damaged, removed or missing parts of said fence shall be replaced within seven (7) days of the event causing noncompliance herewith, with the same material, size, shape and quality of the original fence to which the repair is being made. 
c.  Fences shall not be externally braced in lieu of replacing or repairing posts, columns or other structural members. 
(m)  Accessory structures. Carports, awnings, patio covers, garages, sheds, storage buildings and other accessory structures shall be maintained structurally sound, and free of deterioration. All accessory structures shall be protected from the elements by periodic painting, staining or other weatherproofing or surface protection. 
(n)  Swimming pools and spas. Swimming pools, spas and similar structures shall be maintained safe, clean, sanitary, secure and structurally and mechanically sound in accordance with applicable codes and ordinances of the city. 
(o)  Parking lots, fire lanes, private drives and streets, driveways and improved parking surfaces. All parking lots, fire lanes, private drives and streets, driveways and improved parking surfaces shall be maintained in accordance with applicable codes and ordinances of the city. 
(p)  Outside storage. In RR, SF-E, SF-22, SF-15, SF-10, SF-8.5, SF-7, OT-RES, PD-RES and MF zoning districts, it shall be unlawful for any person to allow, permit, conduct or maintain any outside storage on any portion of a lot or tract, outside of an enclosed structure, or under a carport or covered patio or other projecting overhang, for a continuous period in excess of seven days during a calendar year within the city. Each day during which outside storage occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1)  Prohibited outside storage for this section shall include, but not limited to, the following items stored in a manner other than in an enclosed building: 
a.  Building material; 
b.  Supplies, materials or other matter associated with a home occupation; 
c.  Supplies, materials or other matter associated with a nonresidential activity; 
d.  Chemicals; 
e.  Furniture; 
f.  Appliances not designed for outdoor use; 
g.  Appliances designed for outdoor use but not currently installed; 
h.  Tools, mobile and/or mechanical equipment not connected with a residential use; 
i.  Lawn maintenance equipment; 
j.  Motor vehicle parts and/or accessories including but not limited to engines, transmissions, electrical parts, suspension parts, vehicle body parts, batteries, tires, wheels, hubcaps and other motor vehicle parts; 
k.  Other items or personal property which are not customarily used or stored outside and which are not made of a material that is resistant to damage or deterioration from exposure to the outside environment; or 
l.  Trash, garbage or other refuse. 
(2)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution: 
a.  In the case of all outside storage which is not deemed a nuisance, that such storage: 
1.  Does not occupy more than one percent of the lot area (measured by a single rectangle that would encompass all such outside storage); and 
2.  Is screened from view from private or public property by a solid fence, wall, landscaping or a combination of fence and landscaping. 
b.  In the case of building material, that such material is stored in a workmanlike manner as part of, and in conjunction with, an active building permit. 
c.  In the case of furniture, that such furniture is designed and constructed for outside use, and further, that such furniture is in good condition and is not deteriorated. 
d.  In the case of outside storage of a type not specifically mentioned in this section, that such outside storage is: 
1.  Of a type that is minor in nature; 
2.  Of a type and quantity which is traditionally or commonly associated with the residential use of the property. 
3.  In combination with all other outside storage, the total does not occupy more than one percent of the lot area measured by a single rectangle that would encompass all such outside storage; and 
4.  Screened from view from private or public property by a solid fence, wall, landscaping or a combination of fence and landscaping. 
e.  In the case of firewood that is stored in view from private or public property, provided the firewood is stored in conformance with subsection (j) of this section and in combination with all other outside storage does not occupy more than one (1) percent of the lot area. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 12, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 9-27. - Exterior of structure. 
(a)  Generally. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained structurally sound. 
(b)  Structural members. All supporting structural members of all structures shall be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration and maintained capable of safely bearing the dead and live loads upon them. 
(c)  Exterior surfaces. The foundation, exterior wall, floor, roof and all exterior surfaces of every structure shall be maintained in a state of repair sufficient to exclude rats, rodents, birds, vermin and other animals. Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster, broken glass, decayed wood and other detective surface conditions shall be repaired, replaced or restored. 
(d)  Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to safely carry applicable dead and live loads that are imposed upon the foundation walls. 
(e)  Exterior walls. The exterior wall of every structure shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or the interior of the structure. The exterior wall surface materials of every structure shall be maintained weatherproof or be surface coated or protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(f)  Roofs. The roof of every habitable structure shall be structurally sound, tight and free of leaks, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the structure. 
(g)  Decorative features. The cornices, entablatures, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features of every structure shall be maintained in good repair with property anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(h)  Exterior attachments. All exterior canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, rain gutters, exhaust ducts and similar overhang extensions attached to a structure shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound condition, and their exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be surface coated or protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(i)  Chimneys. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe, sound properly mortared and in good repair, and their exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be surface coated or protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(j)  Stairs and porches. Every stair, porch, balcony and all appurtenances attached thereto shall be constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair, and their exterior surface materials shall be maintained weatherproof and shall be surface coated or protected as required to prevent deterioration. 
(k)  Window and door frames. The windows, doors, and frames of every habitable structure shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as possible from entering the dwelling or structure. 
(l)  Weathertight. The windows and exterior doors of every habitable structure shall be fitted in their frames so as to be reasonably weathertight and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(m)  Glazing. Every window and/or window sash shall be fully supplied with approved glazing materials which are without open cracks and holes. A window and/or window sash may be temporarily secured and/or closed with alternate materials approved by the enforcement authority for periods during actual construction, remodeling or repairs, provided the period of time does not exceed thirty (30) days. The enforcement authority may grant extensions of time due to extenuating circumstances. 
(n)  Insect screens. Every window of every habitable structure which may be opened and used for ventilation shall be supplied with approved screening, except that such screens shall not be required for areas on a floor above the fifth floor and shall not be required for windows in habitable structures which have an approved and operable mechanical ventilating system as allowed by other city codes and ordinances. 
(o)  Door hardware. The exterior doors, door hinges and door latches of every habitable structure shall be maintained in good condition. Door locks in exterior doors of dwelling units shall be maintained in good repair and capable of tightly securing the door. 
(p)  Burglar bars. Burglar bars shall comply with requirements of the building code and other codes or ordinances of the city. Burglar bars on windows of bedrooms of residential structures shall be constructed and mounted in such a way so as to be operable and operable from the interior of the residence. 
(q)  Garage doors. Garage doors shall be capable of being closed reasonably plumb, properly attached and the exterior surface maintained weatherproof as required to prevent deterioration. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 13, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 9-28. - Interior of structure. 
(a)  Generally. The interior of a structure and its equipment shall be maintained structurally sound and in a sanitary condition so as not to pose a threat to the health and safety of the occupants, and to protect the occupants from the environment. 
(b)  Structural members. The supporting structural members of every building shall be maintained structurally sound, not showing any evidence of deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads. 
(c)  Interior surfaces. Floors, including carpets; walls, including windows and doors; ceilings; and other interior surfaces of every structure shall be maintained in a good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling paint, cracked or loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be repaired or replaced. 
(d)  Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor surface shall be maintained so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(e)  Free from dampness. Cellars, basements and crawl spaces of every structure shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure. 
(f)  Sanitation. The interior of every structure shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free from excessive or unnecessary accumulation of rubbish, refuse or garbage. 
(g)  Storage. Garbage or refuse shall not be allowed to accumulate on any property or be stored in public halls or stairways of any building. 
(h)  Insect and rat harborage. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rat infestation, and where insects or rats are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by processes permitted by the codes and ordinances of the city which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation. 
(i)  Exit facilities. All stairs and railings and other exit facilities of every structure shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. Treads and risers that evidence excessive wear or are broken, warped or loose shall be repair or replaced. Every stair shall be so constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the anticipated loads. 
(j)  Handrails, guardrails and grab bars. Every handrail, guardrail and grab bar shall be firmly fastened and capable of bearing normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition. 
(k)  Plumbing fixtures. Every residential dwelling structure and unit shall be provided with a water closet, a lavatory and a bathtub or shower. 
(l)  Sewer. Every residential unit shall be provided with plumbing fixtures connected to the sanitary sewer, or to a private sewage system permitted by the codes and ordinances of the city. 
(m)  Water. All plumbing fixtures in residential units shall be connected to an approved water supply and each sink, lavatory and either a bathtub or shower shall be provided with hot and cold running water, except where deemed by the enforcement authority as not necessary for safety and sanitation. 
(n)  Heating and cooling. Every residential unit shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of at least sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit at a point three (3) feet above the floor at all times in all habitable rooms. All heating and cooling facilities shall be operable, and shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition in accordance with the codes and ordinances of the city. All heating and cooling devices or appliances shall be of an approved type. 
(o)  Electrical equipment. All electrical equipment, wiring, and appliances shall be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with the codes and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 14, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 9-29. - Enforcement and penalty clause. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be subject a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each and every day such violation continues, it shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2005-264, § 16, 10-11-05)  
Sec. 9-30. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Removal or cover by city. The city may offer to remove or cover graffiti from a property owner's property without cost or expense to the property owner. 
(b)  Rejection of offer. If a property owner does not accept the city's offer to remove or cover the graffiti under subsection (a) above, the city may provide written notice to a property owner within the jurisdiction of the city requiring the owner to remove or cover graffiti from the owner's property on or before the 15th day after the date of receipt of the notice. The removal or covering of graffiti by the property owner after receipt of the notice shall be at the sole expense of the property owner. Notice to the property owner will be made in writing and shall be served upon the property owner in person or by certified mail addressed to the property owner at the address contained in the records of the appraisal district in which the property is located. If service of the notice cannot be made personally or by certified mail, the city may serve notice by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the notice relates, or by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the notice relates. 
(c)  Failure to remove or cover graffiti. If a property owner fails to remove or cover the graffiti on or before the 15th day after the date of receipt of the notice made pursuant to subsection (b) above, the city may remove or cover the graffiti and charge all expenses of removal to the property owner. 
(d)  Lien. The city may obtain a lien against an owner's property for the expenses incurred by the city under subsection (c) above by filing a statement of expenses with the county clerk. The statement of expenses must contain: 
(1)  The name of the property owner, if known; 
(2)  The legal description of the property; and 
(3)  The amount of expenses incurred under subsection (c). 
A lien under this subsection attaches to the property on the date on which the statement of expenses is filed in the real property records of the county in which the property is located and is subordinate to any previously recorded lien and to the rights of a purchaser or lender for value who acquires an interest in the property subject to the lien before the statement of expenses is filed. 
(e)  Exceptions. An owner of property is not required to remove or cover graffiti from the owner's property if: 
(1)  The graffiti is located on transportation infrastructure; and 
(2)  The removal or covering of the graffiti would create a hazard for the person performing the removal. 
(Ord. No. 2010-407, § 2, 3-23-10)  
Secs. 9-31—9-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GARBAGE, TRASH AND REFUSE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Parking prohibited in red painted zones around commercial trash containers or dumpsters, § 11-121. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 9-36—9-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Waste and sewage disposal, § 18-91 et seq. 
State Law reference— Garbage and refuse, V.A.C.S. art. 4477-1, § 4; dumping junk near highway, see V.A.C.S. art. 6674v-2. 
 
Sec. 9-51. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated in this section: 
Approved container, commercial and industrial: (1) Same as for "approved container, residential;" (2) mechanical commercial-type compatible to the city's mechanical disposal equipment. Such containers shall be constructed with doors or covers which can be kept secure and fastened so that flies and other insects may not have access to the contents thereof, and such doors or covers shall not be opened except while the containers are being filled or emptied. 
Approved container, residential: (1) A plastic refuse bag that is designed and sold for the purpose of placing garbage, trash, or refuse in it for disposal. Plastic refuse bags shall be of sufficient strength to be equal to a plastic refuse bag with a two-mil rating; refuse bags shall not be less than twenty (20) nor more than thirty (30) gallons in capacity; (2) also, metal or plastic containers of not less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) gallons in capacity, with a tight-fitting lid or cover, and with handles sufficiently strong for workmen to empty conveniently. The top of such containers shall be larger in diameter than the bottom to prevent garbage from sticking to the sides. 
Brush: Tree and shrub trimmings which are not susceptible to placement in regulation containers. 
Customer: Any owner, occupant, tenant, or person otherwise in control of any premises in the city on which garbage and trash are accumulated and from which the same is removed or required to be removed pursuant to the terms of this division. 
Debris: Dirt, concrete, rocks, bricks, or other waste building material. 
Garbage: Refuse animal or vegetable matter, as from a kitchen or food processing facility. 
Residential: Pertaining to any structure or premises used for permanent living quarters of whatever type, including conventional one-family residences, duplexes, multifamily residences, apartments, or mobile homes. 
Trash: All refuse other than garbage, debris, and brush as herein defined, including any household trash and yard trash (grass clippings, leaves, etc.). 
Weight limitations: The total weight of any refuse bag, metal, or plastic container and contents shall be fifty (50) pounds or less, if collected by manual labor. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 9-52. - Duties of customer. 
(a)  To provide container. Every customer shall provide and use approved containers sufficient in number to hold the garbage and trash normally accumulating on the premises of the customer. 
(b)  To secure containers. Every customer shall keep all garbage and trash containers used by him securely closed in such a manner as to prevent the scattering of the contents thereof and to render the contents inaccessible to insects, rodents, and other animals. 
(Code 1976, § 9-2)  
Sec. 9-53. - Residential collection—Placement of containers. 
(a)  Place of collection. It shall be the duty of each customer of residential premises in the city to place all garbage and trash containers for collection at curbside, except residences abutting paved alleys, in which case garbage collection will be made from the alley only. 
(b)  Designation of collection point. If it is not practical to place containers for collection at the location hereinabove provided, the city shall designate the point most easily accessible for collection in such instances. 
(c)  Time of placement. All containers shall be placed at the hereinabove prescribed locations not later than 8:00 a.m. on the day of scheduled collection. It shall be unlawful for any customer to place any containers of garbage or trash at such location prior to twelve (12) hours before the day of scheduled collection. 
(Code 1976, § 9-3)  
Sec. 9-54. - Same—Bundled trash and brush. 
If trash is of such a nature that it cannot be placed in approved containers, it shall be placed in bundles or disposal containers having no outside dimensions of more than four (4) feet, and shall be placed for collection as provided herein. Brush, trunks, and limbs shall not exceed six (6) inches in diameter, and shall be cut in lengths not to exceed four (4) feet, and shall be trimmed and stacked at curbside to a height of not more than three (3) feet, with the larger ends placed toward the curb or street. All vines and thorny bushes shall be placed in disposal containers. No bundle, container, or other item shall weigh more than fifty (50) pounds. 
(Code 1976, § 9-4)  
Sec. 9-55. - Residential collection and rates. 
The collection of household trash and recyclable items disposed of in contractor-provided 96-gallon carts from residential premises shall be one (1) time per week. The collection of loose brush and green waste from residential premises shall be one (1) time per month. The collection of bulky items shall be one (1) time per month and additionally available as a call and schedule service. All garbage and household trash and recyclable items shall be placed within three (3) feet of the curb in contractor provided 96-gallon carts. All loose brush and green waste from residential premises and from city facilities shall be recycled. A "residential premises" means any and all single family residential units, duplex units and trailer park units. The fair and reasonable fee, including administrative fees and environmental taxes, for the collection of garbage and household trash and recyclable items for residential customers under the age of sixty-five (65) is hereby determined to be the sum of sixteen dollars and forty-six cents ($16.46) for each calendar month. The fair and reasonable fee for residential customers age sixty-five (65) and older is twelve dollars and seventy-seven cents ($12.77). Said charges shall accrue for each and every month such service is available and provided to the customer. When a customer has an active water account with the city, said charges shall be due and payable simultaneously with charges for water services. A person who shall fail or refuse to pay the charge herein specified with fifteen (15) days of the due date may have garbage and/or water service suspended until all payments are made. 
(Code 1976, § 9-5; Ord. No. 76-436, § 1, 10-26-76; Ord. No. 80-563, § 1, 5-27-80; Ord. No. 81-594, § 1, 5-26-81; Ord. No. 82-634, § 1, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 89-1013, § 1, 2-14-89; Ord. No. 90-018, § 1, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 91-101, § 1, 10-22-91; Ord. No. 92-118, § 1, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 94-189, § 2, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 2002-94, § 1, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 2003-180, § 1, 11-11-03; Ord. No. 2006-298, § 1, 8-29-06; Ord. No. 2007-330, § 1, 9-11-07; Ord. No. 2008-367, § 1, 10-28-08; Ord. No. 2011-446, § 1, 8-16-11, eff. 1-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-528, § 1, 12-10-13, eff. 1-1-14; Ord. No. 2014-552, § 1, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15; Ord. No. 2016-607, § 1, 12-13-16, eff. 5-1-17; Ord. No. 2018-646, § 1, 8-14-18; Ord. No. 2019-679, § 1, 8-13-19) 
Editor's note— Section 6 of Ord. No. 2019-679, adopted Aug. 13, 2019, provides an effective date of Oct. 1, 2019.  
Sec. 9-56. - Duties of commercial, institutional, and industrial customers; location of containers. 
It shall be the duty of the owner or person otherwise in control of a commercial, institutional or industrial premises within the city to cause all garbage and trash accumulated on such premises to be placed in approved containers; and such containers shall be placed at a location on the premises which is readily accessible for collection and shall be approved by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 9-6)  
Sec. 9-57. - Commercial, institutional, and industrial collection service rates. 
(a)  Charges, commercial-type containers. The fair and reasonable monthly charge, including administrative charges and environmental taxes, for commercial type containers will be provided by the city's disposal contract, for use by commercial, institutional, or industrial customers, and also for use of multi-family residential complexes such as apartment buildings shall be as provided as follows: 
Commercial Rates 	Frequency 
Container Size/Type 	1×WK 	2×WK 	3×WK 	4×WK 	5×WK 	6×WK 	Extra P/U 
Commercial Hand-PU 96 Gal Cart 	n/a 	$24.06 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 
Commercial Hand-Extra Cart (each) 	n/a 	$24.06 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 
Commercial Replacement if Lost/Stolan 	n/a 	$75.81 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 	n/a 
2 CY FEL Container 	$66.71 	$97.54 	$178.01 	$237.10 	$309.66 	$355.40 	$49.92 
3 CY FEL Container 	$78.72 	$124.92 	$201.91 	$265.24 	$325.15 	$400.11 	$57.02 
4 CY FEL Container 	$92.41 	$148.88 	$243.00 	$313.14 	$376.47 	$435.04 	$64.18 
6 CY FEL Container 	$116.37 	$210.47 	$304.58 	$412.41 	$497.96 	$586.94 	$71.30 
8 CY FEL Container 	$135.19 	$241.29 	$378.17 	$489.40 	$593.80 	$689.62 	$78.44 
 
(b)  Commercial front load recycle, roll-off and compactor rates. 
Commercial Front Load Compactors 						
4 CY FEL Compactor 	$151.40 	$340.06 	$340.06 	$486.26 	$557.74 	$640.04 	$102.88 
6 CY FEL Compactor 	$183.02 	$392.04 	$540.41 	$661.70 	$777.58 	$894.54 	$99.71 
6 CY FEL RECYCLE Compactor 	$151.40 	$340.06 	$340.06 	$486.26 	$557.74 	$640.04 	$102.88 
8 CY FEL RECYCLE Compactor 	$146.73 	$340.06 	$340.06 	$486.26 	$557.74 	$640.04 	$102.88 
 
Roll-Off Rates 	Delivery 	Rental Rate/Day 	Haul Charge/Pull 
20 CY (open top) 	$106.95 	$5.70 	$292.37 
30 CY (open top) 	$106.95 	$5.70 	$356.74 
40 CY (open top) 	$106.95 	$5.70 	$397.90 
30 CY Sewage Plan 	n/a 	n/a 	$350.38 
30 CY Compactor 	Negotiated 	$498.67 	$365.85 
35 CY Compactor 	Negotiated 	$498.67 	$374.68 
40 CY Compactor 	Negotiated 	$498.67 	$450.82 
42 CY Compactor 	Negotiated 	$498.67 	$450.82 
 
(c)  Multiple-family recyclable item collection services. 
Waste management shall provide collection of recyclable materials for all multi-family apartment units within the city. Every unit shall receive a 19-gallon bin to dispose of recyclables along with the appropriate number of 8-yard rear load containers for disposal per complex. Residents may use the 19-gallon bin and/or clear plastic bags for disposal of recyclables into the 8-yard rear-load container. The fee charged to multi-family apartment complexes shall be three dollars and twenty-five cents ($3.25) per month per unit and will be billed by the city on monthly water bills. 
(d)  Miscellaneous rates. 
Miscellaneous Rates 	Rate 
Initial delivery of FEL 	$71.25 
Restart fee after service suspended 	$71.25 
Lock bar (monthly rate) 	$7.13 
Casters 	$7.13 
Snapshot 	Exempt 
Redelivery for non-payment 	$71.25 
 
(e)  Collection of charges for commercial, institutional, and industrial service. The charges fixed herein for the removal and disposal of all garbage and trash for commercial, institutional, and industrial service shall be assessed by the city's industrial disposal service, waste management, or other disposal service as may be retained and used by the city in the future, and such charges shall be due and payable simultaneously upon the customer's receipt of billing from waste management. Any person who shall fail or refuse to pay the charge herein specified within fifteen (15) days from the due date shall have the garbage service suspended until all payments are made. 
(Code 1976, § 9-7; Ord. No. 76-436, § 2, 10-26-76; Ord. No. 79-515, § 1, 2-13-79; Ord. No. 80-563, § 2, 5-27-80; Ord. No. 81-594, § 2, 5-26-81; Ord. No. 82-634, § 2, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 89-1013, § 2, 2-14-89; Ord. No. 90-018, § 2, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 91-101, § 2, 10-22-91; Ord. No. 92-141, § 1, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 94-189, § 3, 7-26-94; Ord. No. 2002-94, § 2, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 2003-180, § 2, 11-11-03; Ord. No. 2006-298, § 2, 8-29-06; Ord. No. 2007-330, § 2, 9-11-07; Ord. No. 2008-367, § 2, 10-28-08; Ord. No. 2011-446, § 2, 8-16-11, eff. 1-1-12; Ord. No. 2013-528, § 2, 12-10-13, eff. 1-1-14; Ord. No. 2014-552, § 2, 12-9-14, eff. 1-1-15; Ord. No. 2016-607, § 2, 12-13-16, eff. 2-1-17; Ord. No. 2018-646, § 2, 8-14-18; Ord. No. 2019-679, § 2, 8-13-19) 
Editor's note— Section 6 of Ord. No. 2019-679, adopted Aug. 13, 2019, provides an effective date of Oct. 1, 2019.  
Sec. 9-58. - Noncontract or nonfranchise garbage collection prohibited. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any individual to collect garbage or refuse within the city unless such individual has obtained a contractual agreement or franchise agreement from the city together with the payment by such individual of a street usage fee or franchise percentage fee as required by the home rule charter of the city. If any commercial, institutional or industrial customer is contractually obligated at the time of the passage of this article, to a third-party disposal service, such customer shall be entitled to complete the contractual agreement with said party disposal service, but upon termination of any present contractual agreement, all commercial, institutional or industrial services must be performed by a contractor approved by the city with a contractual agreement or franchise agreement with the city. 
(Code 1976, § 9-7.5; Ord. No. 81-594, § 3, 5-26-81; Ord. No. 82-634, § 3, 7-13-82)  
Sec. 9-59. - Duty of customer to see that containers are emptied. 
Every customer is hereby required to maintain constant supervision and surveillance over garbage containers on his premises. If, after having been timely placed for collection, the containers are not collected or emptied and the contents removed, as the case may be, by an agent or representative of the city or other duly authorized person within a period of twenty-four (24) hours of scheduled collection, the customer shall promptly notify the city of this fact. 
(Code 1976, § 9-8)  
Sec. 9-60. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  Unlawful to litter. It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw, place or deposit any garbage, trash, debris, furniture, grass cuttings, brush, stagnant water or a dead animal into, upon, or along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, utility pole, street, or vacant lot, or upon any public or private premises within the city. 
(b)  Maintaining littered premises. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or in control of any premises within the city to permit any of the conditions described in subsection (a) to exist upon property owned or controlled by him after having actual or constructive notice thereof. 
(c)  Open bins prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or maintain trash in open bins or other containers not designated as approved containers by the city. 
(d)  Burning materials. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any burning match, charcoal, embers, or other material into any container used for the disposal of garbage, trash, or any other flammable substance. 
(e)  Signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any type of advertising sign or throw any signs along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, utility pole, street or vacant lot or upon any public or private premises within the city. Any advertising sign or signs may be placed upon private property but only with consent of the property owner, and in accordance with chapter 4, article XII, division 1, of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 9-9; Ord. No. 80-571, § 1, 9-23-80)  
Sec. 9-61. - Wastes from building operations. 
Rock, waste, scrap building materials, or other trash resulting from construction or major remodeling, resulting from a general cleanup of vacant or improved property just prior to its occupancy, or resulting from sizable amounts of trees, brush, and debris cleared from property in preparation for construction will not be removed by the city. The owner must have such debris removed at his expense. 
(Code 1976, § 9-10)  
Sec. 9-62. - Wastes from tree-trimming operations. 
It shall be the duty of any person employing a contractor, tree trimmer or other person to trim or prune trees or shrubs to have such trimmings removed from the premises at his own expense. 
(Code 1976, § 9-11)  
Sec. 9-63. - Unlawful dumping in commercial containers prohibited. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and illegal for any person to dump or deposit trash, garbage, debris and/or brush into any commercial trash container or dumpster, public or private, within the corporate limits of the city, without the express consent of the owner and/or the customer upon whose premises such container or dumpster is located. 
(Code 1976, § 9-13; Ord. No. 79-522, § 1, 6-12-79)  
Sec. 9-64. - Special trash or brush pick-up charge assessment. 
(a)  Whenever a customer shall desire a special trash or brush pick-up service call, such customer shall notify the city hall of such fact. The customer shall describe the type and kind of service requested at the street address or location of the trash or brush which requires a special pick-up service call. 
(b)  The service charge for any special trash or brush service call shall be such as is established by the city council from time to time. 
(c)  A bill for any special trash or brush service call shall be transmitted by the city to the customer, at the time of the mailing of the city water bills. 
(d)  Payment of any bill for a special brush or trash pick-up service call shall be required on or before the due date of the customer's water bill in which the service charge was enclosed. 
(e)  In the event of default or nonpayment of any service charge assessment, in addition to the penalty provided in section 9-65 herein, the city shall also have the right to impose a lien upon the customer's property for nonpayment of the service charge. 
(Code 1976, § 9-14; Ord. No. 79-522, § 2, 6-12-79)  
Sec. 9-65. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or failing to comply with the requirements of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 9-15; Ord. No. 79-522, § 3, 6-12-79)  
Sec. 9-66. - Residential use of trash compactor. 
(a)  Definitions. [The following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them as follows:] 
Garbage means the byproduct of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction, or the generation of noxious or offensive odors, or which after decay may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
Hazardous refuse means materials such as poison, acids, caustic matter or solutions, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, explosives, sewage sludge, radioactive materials, highly flammable substances and dead animals. 
Household trash means a form of waste such as paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other materials of any kind, other than garbage, which is normally attendant to the occupancy of a building for residential dwelling purposes. 
Rubbish includes waste paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metal, cans, glass, packing material and similar material. 
(b)  Providing for residential use only; scavenging. 
(1)  The trash compactor is available for the disposal of household trash and rubbish in qualities normally generated by a single-family household. Use of the compactor for commercial purposes or by commercial users is prohibited. Disposal of hazardous materials or refuse is prohibited. Garbage of any kind shall not be allowed. 
(2)  Scavenging prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized employee of the city or a commercial trash hauler acting under franchise or license from the city to collect, tamper with, interfere with, scavenge from, or otherwise disturb garbage, trash or recyclable material which has been placed for collection on public property. 
(c)  Requiring that user provide proof of residency. A representative of the city shall require that a user provide proof of residency in the form of a valid driver's license and/or Cedar Hill water bill stub before use of the compactor is permitted. 
(d)  Posted hours of operation. The city shall establish and post regular hours of operation for the trash compactor and recycling area. Use of these facilities and/or dumping during non-operating hours is prohibited. 
(e)  Enforcement and penalties. Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the city, such violation shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and each and every instance of the violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 90-041, §§ 1—5, 10-9-90; Ord. No. 91-065, § 1, 2-26-91) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-041, §§ 1—5, adopted Oct. 9, 1990, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as § 9-66 at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 9-67—9-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HAZARDOUS INDUSTRIES 
 
Sec. 9-81. - Definition. 
As used in this article, the term "hazardous industry" shall mean any commercial or industrial enterprise in which: 
(1)  Dangerous, flammable and/or toxic chemicals are used or manufactured. 
(2)  Toxic emissions are released or generated from such business or enterprise. 
(3)  Large quantities of energy or energy forms are used, consumed and/or generated. 
(4)  Explosive or highly volatile substances are used and/or manufactured. 
(5)  Poisonous or lethal gases and/or substances are used or manufactured. 
(Code 1976, § 11-51; Ord. No. 79-525, § 1, 7-10-79) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 9-82. - Occupancy permit—Required. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate a hazardous industry within the corporate limits of the city unless and until a special hazardous industry occupancy permit has been obtained from the city council. 
(b)  It shall also be unlawful for any person to conduct any hazardous industry outside of the corporate limits of the city when such hazardous industry utilizes the water and/or sewer services of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 11-52; Ord. No. 79-525, § 2, 7-10-79) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10.  
Sec. 9-83. - Same—Application. 
(a)  The city does hereby require that an application be filed by any person desiring a hazardous industry occupancy permit. 
(b)  Applications for hazardous industry occupancy permits shall be made upon a form as prescribed by the city for such application. 
(c)  Such application shall be filed with the city secretary at least twenty (20) days prior to the regular city council meeting at which such application will be considered. 
(d)  Such application shall require the following listed information together with such other information as the city may from time to time require: 
(1)  Name of business or enterprise. 
(2)  Location or proposed location of such business or enterprise. 
(3)  Name and complete address of the owners and/or operators of such business or enterprise. 
(4)  Type and kind of building in which such business or enterprise is to be located. 
(5)  Electrical plan for such building or structure including ventilation designations. 
(6)  Plumbing plans and specifications for the structure in which the enterprise is to be located. 
(7)  Disposal system plans and specifications for the structure in which the enterprise is to be located. 
(8)  Plans showing the location and site of fire hoses and/or fire extinguishers. 
(9)  A complete list of any and all chemicals, flammables, toxins, explosives, poisons, and/or volatile substances which are to be used and/or manufactured by the enterprise at its facility. 
(10)  A list of any and all emissions which will be generated and/or released from such facility. 
(Code 1976, § 11-53; Ord. No. 79-525, § 3, 7-10-79)  
Sec. 9-84. - Same—Public hearing to be held on application. 
(a)  The city council shall conduct a public hearing on any application for a hazardous industry occupancy permit. The attendance of the applicant shall be required at such public hearing. 
(b)  Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least ten (10) days prior to such public hearing in the Cedar Hill Chronicle which the city council finds and determines to be the newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(c)  At the public hearing held for the purposes of the city council's consideration of the issuance of a hazardous industry occupancy permit, the city council shall be entitled to request and rely upon reports and opinions of its city manager, building inspector, plumbing inspector, and electrical inspector concerning the type and kind of operation expected from the applicant hazardous industry. 
(d)  The city shall also have the right to refer any technical matter upon which there is disagreement to the plumbing and/or electrical boards for interpretation and review. 
(e)  However, the city council shall have sole and exclusive right to grant or deny any application. Action must be taken on such application within thirty (30) days from the date of the public hearing. A denial by the city council upon such permit shall require the applicant to wait an additional six (6) months prior to the submission of a second application for permit, unless the city specifically orders otherwise. 
(Code 1976, § 11-54; Ord. No. 79-525, § 4, 7-10-79)  
Sec. 9-85. - Reasonable requirements. 
Upon hearing an application for a hazardous industry occupancy permit, the city may reasonably require additional safeguards to be used by the hazardous industry, including, but not limited to, special backflow prevention plumbing devices; special fire hoses and regulators; special chemical extinguishers; and special ventilation systems as well as any other equipment, device, or technique which would promote the safety and efficiency of the hazardous industry. 
(Code 1976, § 11-55; Ord. No. 79-525, § 5, 7-10-79)  
Sec. 9-86. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or failing to comply with the requirements of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction in the municipal court shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 11-56; Ord. No. 79-525, § 6, 7-10-79)  
Sec. 9-87. - Additional sanctions. 
In addition to the penalties provided in this article, the city shall also have the additional power and authority to institute legal action against any person to enjoin the violation of or noncompliance with any of the terms of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 11-57; Ord. No. 79-525, § 7, 7-10-79)  
Secs. 9-88—9-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - JUNKED VEHICLES AND JUNKED TRAILERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-469, §§ 1, 2, adopted February 28, 2012, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 9-106—9-112, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to junked vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 92-116, § 1, 4-28-92; Ord. No. 99-434, § 1, 6-22-99 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, V.A.C.S. art. 4477-9a, §§ 5.01—5.11. 
 
Sec. 9-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junked vehicle. In this article, the term "junked vehicle" shall mean a vehicle that is self-propelled and displays an expired license plate or invalid motor vehicle registration certificate, or does not display a license plate or motor vehicle registration certificate; and is 
(a)  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
(b)  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
(i)  Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
(ii)  Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
Junked trailer. In this article, the term "junked trailer" shall mean a vehicle that is not self-propelled and is designed to haul or move goods, vehicles, watercraft, or other objects via attachment to a self-propelled vehicle and that displays an expired license plate or invalid registration certificate, or does not display a license plate or registration certificate; and is 
(a)  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
(b)  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
(i)  Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
(ii)  Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-469, § 2, 2-28-12; Ord. No. 2017-615, § 1, 4-25-17)  
Sec. 9-107. - Declaration of junked vehicles and junked trailers as public nuisances and penalties. 
(a)  A junked vehicle or a junked trailer, including any part thereof, that is located in a place where it is visible from a public place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city, and is hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(b)  V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.072 declares a junked vehicle or part thereof visible from a public place or public right-of-way a public nuisance. 
(c)  A person commits an offense under the Texas Transportation Code when he or she maintains a junked vehicle or vehicle part in a manner declared a public nuisance, and it is the city council's intent that the Cedar Hill Code Enforcement Department enforce the Texas Transportation Code to discourage the creation and/or maintenance of such a public nuisance. V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.073 makes such an offense (misdemeanor) punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.073(c) also requires the court in which the case is tried to order abatement and removal of the nuisance upon conviction. 
(d)  Any person who maintains a junked trailer or any part thereof in a manner declared a nuisance under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the Cedar Hill Municipal Court, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). The Cedar Hill Municipal Court shall order the abatement and removal of the nuisance upon conviction. Each and every instance of a violation of this article constitutes a separate offence and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offence. 
(Ord. No. 2012-469, § 2, 2-28-12)  
Sec. 9-108. - Procedures for abating nuisance. 
(a)  Prior to the abatement and removal of the public nuisance, the Cedar Hill Municipal Court shall issue an order: 
(i)  Prohibiting a vehicle or trailer from being reconstructed or made operable after removal; 
(ii)  Requiring a public hearing on request of a person who receives notice as provided in this article; and 
(iii)  Requiring that notice identifying the junked vehicle or junked trailer, or part thereof, be given to the Texas Department of Transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. 
(b)  Procedures for the abatement and removal of a public nuisance must be administered by a regularly salaried, full-time employee of the City of Cedar Hill, expect that any authorized person may remove the nuisance. A person authorized to administer the abatement and removal may enter private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct removal of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-469, § 2, 2-28-12)  
Sec. 9-109. - Notice. 
(a)  Prior to the abatement and removal of the public nuisance under this article, the city manager or his designee shall provide not less than ten (10) days' written notice of the nature of the nuisance and shall be personally delivered, or mailed by certified mail with a five-day return requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature confirmation service to: 
(i)  The last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
(ii)  Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and 
(iii)  The owner or occupant of the property on which the nuisance is located or, if the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property owner adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(b)  The notice must state that: 
(i)  The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date the notice was personally delivered or mailed; and 
(ii)  Any request for a hearing must be made before the ten-day period expires. 
(c)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered. 
(d)  If the notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of the return. 
(Ord. No. 2012-469, § 2, 2-28-12)  
Sec. 9-110. - Hearing. 
(a)  If a hearing is requested by a person to whom notice is required to be sent in accordance with this article, the hearing shall be held not earlier than the eleventh day after the date of service of the notice. A request for a hearing shall be made in writing to the municipal court. The court administrator will transmit the request to the municipal judge. Upon receiving a request for hearing, the clerk of the municipal court or the municipal judge himself/herself shall set a date and time for the hearing, and shall notify the requestor, and all persons entitled to notice, of the date and time for such hearing, and the location of the hearing. The municipal judge shall hear the matter at the location, date and time noticed, unless changed by agreement or necessity with notice to the requestor, and shall, based on the information presented by the city representative(s) and the requestor (or any other person with a legal or equitable interest in the matter) at the hearing, make a determination of whether the vehicle, trailer, or parts thereof is a public nuisance under this article. 
(b)  It is presumed that the vehicle, trailer, or any part thereof, is inoperable unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner. If the municipal judge so finds, he/she shall enter an order making such finding and issue an order requiring the owner of the vehicle, trailer, or part thereof, or owner or occupant of the private premises where the vehicle or vehicle part is located, as the case may be, to abate the public nuisance by removing or causing the removal of the same, and directing that if such public nuisance is not abated within ten (10) days of the order that the Cedar Hill Code Enforcement Department, or someone acting under its direction, remove or cause to be removed the vehicle, trailer, or part thereof, from the public or private property. The order shall be in writing, and must include, if available at the location of the nuisance, the following: 
(i)  For a motor vehicle, the vehicle description, vehicle identification number; and license plate number. 
(ii)  For an aircraft, the aircraft's description and federal aircraft identification number as described by the Federal Aviation Administration aircraft regulations in 14 C.F.R. Part 47. 
(iii)  For a watercraft, the watercraft's description and identification number as set forth in the watercraft's certificate of number. 
(iv)  For a trailer, the trailer's description, license plate number, and identification number, if any. 
(c)  A copy of the order shall be mailed by certified mail to all known persons entitled to notice under this article. 
(d)  If a hearing is not requested by the person to whom notice is required to be sent in accordance with this article. The code enforcement officer shall make in writing a request to the municipal judge to make a determination of whether the vehicle, trailer or parts thereof is a public nuisance under this article. If the municipal judge determines that the vehicle, trailer, or part thereof, constitutes a public nuisance within the purview of this article, shall direct that if such public nuisance is not abated within ten (10) days of the order that the Cedar Hill Code Enforcement Department, or someone acting under its direction, remove or cause to be removed the vehicle, trailer, or part thereof, from the public or private property. The order shall be in writing, and must include if available at the location of the nuisance the following: 
(i)  For a motor vehicle, the vehicle description, vehicle identification number; and license plate number. 
(ii)  For an aircraft, the aircraft's description and federal aircraft identification number as described by the Federal Aviation Administration aircraft regulations in 14 C.F.R. Part 47. 
(iii)  For a watercraft, the watercraft's description and identification number as set forth in the watercraft's certificate of number. 
(iv)  For a trailer, the trailer's description, license plate number, and identification number, if any. 
(e)  A copy of the order shall be mailed by certified mail to all known persons entitled to notice under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-469, § 2, 2-28-12)  
Sec. 9-111. - Disposal. 
The code enforcement department, or its authorized agent(s), may dispose of or cause the disposal of the junked vehicle, junked trailer, or part thereof, by removal to a scrapyard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or a suitable site operated by a county or a municipality, or as otherwise provided by V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, Ch. 683, or amendments or recodifications thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2012-469, § 2, 2-28-12)  
Sec. 9-112. - Relocation. 
In accordance with the authority provided by V.T.C.A. Transportation Code, § 683.074, the relocation of a junked vehicle or vehicle part that is a public nuisance to another location in the city after a proceeding for abatement and removal of the public nuisance has commenced by notice has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle or vehicle part constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(Ord. No. 2012-469, § 2, 2-28-12)  
Sec. 9-113. - Exemptions. 
This article does not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part: 
(a)  That is completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(b)  That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
(i)  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
(ii)  Not a health hazard; and 
(iii)  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery, all of which shall be consistent with any applicable provisions of the Cedar Hill Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  In this section: 
(i)  "Antique vehicle" means a passenger car or truck that is at least twenty-five (25) years old; 
(ii)  "Motor vehicle collector" means a person who owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicles or vehicle parts for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
(iii)  "Special interest vehicle" means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(Ord. No. 2012-469, § 2, 2-28-12)  
Secs. 9-114—9-125. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NUISANCES RELATED TO AUTOMOBILES AND CERTAIN OTHER PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 9-126. - Definition of nuisances. 
The following businesses, activities, and uses of property are hereby declared to be public nuisances: 
(1)  Automobile wrecking yards. 
(2)  Automobile junkyards. 
(3)  The use of property for the storage or sale of junked or wrecked automobiles. 
(4)  The use of property for the storage or sale of furniture, appliances, or other household articles, wearing apparel, used or secondhand lumber, other building materials, or metal or wire of any kind; provided, however, that, if such items are stored in, or offered for sale from within a building conforming to the building code of the city, as it now is or may hereafter be amended, the proper use of property for purposes enumerated in this subsection shall not constitute a public nuisance. 
(5)  Any other use of property which the city council has heretofore or may hereafter declare to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1976, § 11-31) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 9-127. - Council may abate. 
The council is authorized to require any person violating the terms of this article to cease and desist from such violating, and upon failure of the person responsible for such violation to voluntarily cease and desist therefrom, the council may, through appropriate court proceedings, enjoin such violation. Such authority on the part of the city council to abate such nuisance by court action shall not, in any manner, affect the penalty provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 11-32)  
Sec. 9-128. - Unlawful to use property for nuisance. 
It is and shall be unlawful for any person to use any property within the city limits, as such limits are now or may hereafter be extended, or to cause or permit the use of any such property for any purpose constituting a public nuisance under the definition contained in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 11-33)  
Sec. 9-129. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be found guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 11-34)  
Secs. 9-130—9-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - WEEDS AND GRASS ON VACANT LOTS 
 
Sec. 9-146. - Declared a nuisance, etc. 
The growth of weeds and grass in excess of the height of twelve (12) inches constitutes a public menace and nuisance, and greatly increases the danger of fire; and it is imperative and urgent that proper and adequate regulations be adopted to require property owners to cut weeds and grass on land within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 11-41; Ord. No. 99-421, § 1, 3-23-99)  
Sec. 9-147. - Weeds and grass not to be allowed to grow higher than twelve inches. 
It is and shall be unlawful for any person to allow weeds and grass to grow in excess of twelve (12) inches; therefore the city reserves the right to prosecute this violation. 
(Code 1976, § 11-42.5; Ord. No. 78-506A, § 1, 10-10-78; Ord. No. 99-421, § 1, 3-23-99)  
Sec. 9-148. - Notice to property owner. 
As soon as it shall come to the attention of the city that a property owner has allowed weeds and grass to grow in excess of a height of twelve (12) inches the city shall follow the procedures set forth in Vernon's Texas Code Annotated, Health and Safety Code, Section 342.006 in notifying the property owner of violations of this section on their property. After notification has been given, the City may abate any violation of this section which continues for more than seven (7) days after the date that notification was received. 
(Code 1976, § 11-42; Ord. No. 99-421, § 1, 3-23-99; Ord. No. 2003-167, § 1, 9-9-03)  
Sec. 9-149. - Abatement by city at owner's expense. 
There shall be an automatic weed removal charge of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for city administrative processing expenses each time the violation occurs. In addition a contractor fee will be charged for each cutting and shall be levied, assessed and collected against such property each time such cutting of said weeds shall be performed. The charges provided for herein shall be levied, assessed, and collected by the city, and if any person shall fail to pay such charges assessed within thirty (30) days after proper notice the city will file with the county clerk of Dallas County, Texas, a statement setting out the expenses that the city incurred pursuant to the provisions of this section, and the city will file a lien on the property. 
(Code 1976, § 11-43; Ord. No. 78-483, § 2, 9-11-79; Ord. No. 79-535, § 2, 9-11-79; Ord. No. 81-592, § 2, 5-12-81; Ord. No. 99-421, § 1, 3-23-99)  
Sec. 9-150. - Failure of property owner to pay; penalty. 
If the property owner fails to pay the bill within the period of thirty (30) days, then the city secretary is directed to add the bill or charge to the tax bill of the property owner, and the bill shall be due and payable in the same manner as the taxes are due and payable. Failure of the property owner to pay the charge in connection with his tax bill shall render him liable for the same penalties as the property owner would be liable to the city for failure to pay his regular tax statement. 
(Code 1976, § 11-44; Ord. No. 79-535, § 3, 9-11-79)  
Sec. 9-151. - City to have lien on property. 
The city shall also be entitled to impose a lien upon property on which grass and weeds are cut by the city or its agent pursuant to this article to be filed with the appropriate city and county offices in order to enforce the charges rendered herein. 
(Code 1976, § 11-45; Ord. No. 79-535, § 4, 9-11-79)  
Sec. 9-152. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 11-42.6; Ord. No. 78-506A, § 2, 10-10-78)  
Chapter 10 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alarm systems, Ch. 2.5; permits for fire alarms, § 2.5-5; licensing and registration of dogs, cats and other small animals required, § 3-17 et seq.; building permit fees, § 4-1 et seq.; permit required for moving of buildings, § 4-165 et seq.; installation permit for satellite dish antennae, § 4-216 et seq.; permit required for signs generally, § 4-237 et seq.; permit required for trench excavations, § 4-311; development permit required for construction within areas of special flood hazard, § 7-41 et seq.; food service establishment permits, § 8-41 et seq.; occupancy permit for hazardous industries, § 9-82 et seq.; natural resource storage facility and extraction site permit required, § 13-20 et seq.; display of sexually explicit material to minors, § 14-6; loud noises in public places of business regulated, § 14-21 et seq.; rates, fees and charges for public utility services, § 18-32 et seq.; permit for excavation of street required, § 19-17 et seq.; permit required for special event use of streets, sidewalks, and other public places, § 19-49 et seq.; taxicab operating permit required, § 22-31 et seq.; taxicab driver's license requirements, § 22-51 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Garage, estate, and yard sale registration and regulations. 
(1)  All garage, estate and yard sales shall be registered with the City of Cedar Hill. 
(2)  Each residence may have three (3) garage sales per calendar year. 
(3)  Garage, estate, and yard sales shall not exceed three (3) consecutive days of operation. 
(4)  Each garage, estate, or yard sale is allowed to place three (3) signs per sign placement regulations. 
(5)  Sign placement regulations: 
(a)  Garage, estate, and yard sale signs shall not be placed on utility poles or in medians. 
(b)  Signs shall be no closer than forty (40) feet to an intersection. 
(c)  Sign shall be placed behind all sidewalks. 
(d)  Where there is no sidewalk, the sign shall be placed no closer than three (3) feet from the curb or pavement. 
(e)  Signs shall not be placed in any state right-of-way. 
(f)  Sign shall be placed in accordance with following: Noon Thursday until Monday 8:00 a.m. 
(6)  Garage, estate, and yard sale hours of operation shall be no earlier than 7:00 a.m. and no later than 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2011-439, § 1, 5-5-11) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2011-439, § 1, adopted May 5, 2011, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as § 10-1 at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 10-2—10-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS, AND SOLICITORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Effect of peddler refusing to leave premises after being notified to do so, V.T.C.A. Penal Code, § 30.05. 
 
Sec. 10-15. - Peddling, soliciting, etc. in streets; exceptions; penalty. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, solicit, sell, offer for sale or exhibit for sale any merchandise or services upon any public sidewalk, street, street right of way, parkway or other public right-of-way, except that it shall be lawful for a person to engage in a mobile vending operation involving food products upon any street, street right-of-way, parkway or other public right-of-way. 
(b)  Enforcement of penalty. Any person, firm partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, such violation shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each and every instance of the violation of this section constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 99-416, §§ 1, 3, 2-23-99)  
Sec. 10-16. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Canvasser or solicitor shall mean any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not; provided that, such definition shall include any person who, for himself or any other person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples or taking orders for future delivery. 
Peddler shall include any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products, provisions, milk or milk products, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchaser, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, other vehicle, or conveyance; and further provided that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this article. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster". 
(Code 1976, § 5-2) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 10-17. - Permit and license—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler, canvasser, or solicitor as defined in section 10-16 of this article within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a permit and license therefor as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1)  
Sec. 10-18. - Same—Application. 
(a)  Applicants for a permit and license under this article must file with the city secretary a sworn application in writing setting forth the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of applicant. 
(2)  Address, legal and local. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  A photograph of applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(7)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, the nature thereof, and the penalty assessed therefor. 
(b)  At the time of filing of the application, a fee in such amount as established by the city council from time to time shall be paid to the city secretary to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated herein. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3)  
Sec. 10-19. - Same—Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of such application, it shall be referred to the city manager or his deputy, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. If such person has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, the application shall be considered in accordance with article 6252-13c of the Revised Civil Statutes. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the city manager or his deputy shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the application to the city secretary, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit and license will be issued. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the city manager or his deputy shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a permit addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for, and return the permit along with the application to the city secretary, who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant his permit and issue a license. Such license shall contain the signature and seal of the issuing officer, and shall show the name, address, and photograph of the licensee, the class of license issued, and the type of merchandise covered, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance, and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number or other identifying description of any vehicle that may be used in the business. The city secretary shall keep a permanent record of all licenses issued. 
(Code 1976, § 5-4)  
Sec. 10-20. - Same—Appeal from denial of issuance. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the city secretary or the city manager or his deputy in the denial of an application for permit or license as provided in section 10-19 of this article, shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the council within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given in the manner as provided in section 10-24 of this article for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the council on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1976, § 5-10)  
Sec. 10-21. - Same—Fees. 
(a)  Peddlers: Peddlers' license fees shall be as established by the city council from time to time. No fee shall be required of one selling products of the farm or orchard actually produced by the seller. 
(b)  Canvassers or solicitors: The canvassers' or solicitors' license fees which shall be charged by the city secretary shall be as established by the city council from time to time. 
(c)  Basis: For the purpose of this article, any period of seven (7) calendar days or less shall be considered one (1) week; any period of more than seven (7) calendar days and not more than thirty (30) calendar days shall be considered one (1) month; any period of more than thirty (30) calendar days and not more than one (1) calendar year shall be treated as a year. Annual fees shall be assessed on a calendar year basis, and on and after July first the amount of the fee for such annual license shall be one-half the amount stipulated for the remainder of the year. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5)  
Sec. 10-22. - Same—Transfer prohibited. 
No license or permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be used by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1976, § 5-6)  
Sec. 10-23. - Same—Exhibition. 
All licensees under this article are required to exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 1976, § 5-7)  
Sec. 10-24. - Same—Revocation. 
(a)  Permits and licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the city council, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business of peddler, canvasser, or solicitor. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Conviction of any felony or misdemeanor, as provided for in article 6252-13c of the Revised Civil Statutes. 
(5)  Conducting the business of peddling, canvassing, or soliciting in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Code 1976, § 5-9)  
Sec. 10-25. - Same—Expiration. 
All annual licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on the thirty-first of December in the year when issued. Other than annual licenses shall expire on the date specified on the license. 
(Code 1976, § 5-11)  
Sec. 10-26. - Duty to enforce article. 
It shall be the duty of any policeman or any other officer of the city to require any person seen peddling, canvassing, or soliciting, and who is not known by such policeman or officer to be duly licensed, to produce the license, and to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Code 1976, § 5-8)  
Sec. 10-27. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 5-12)  
Secs. 10-28—10-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 10-41. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Health officer means the health officer of the County of Dallas. 
Massage means any process consisting of kneading, rubbing, pressing, stroking, tapping, pounding, or otherwise manipulating the skin of the body of a human being, either with the hands or feet, or by means of electrical instruments or apparatus, or other special apparatus; but shall not include massage by duly licensed physicians and chiropractors and registered physical therapists who treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician and who operate only under such physician's direction, nor massage of the face practiced by beauty parlors or barber shops duly licensed under the Penal Code of the state. 
Massage establishment means any building, room, place, or establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital, where massage is practiced upon the human body by anyone not a duly licensed physician or chiropractor whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic, or bathing devices. This term shall not include, however, duly licensed beauty parlors, barber shops, or places where registered physical therapists treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician and operate only under such physician's direction. 
Massage technician means a person who administers a massage to another person, for any form of consideration. 
Operator means the person or organization which owns or maintains a massage establishment. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 10-42. - Operation in residential area prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any massage establishment to be operated in any section of the city which is zoned for residential purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 5-35)  
Sec. 10-43. - Notification of changes. 
Every massage establishment owner or operator shall report immediately to the health officer any changes of address or ownership of the massage establishment, and any changes or transfers of massage technicians employed in the business. 
(Code 1976, § 5-37)  
ARTICLE IV. - SECONDARY METAL RECYCLERS 
 
Sec. 10-44. - Purpose. 
This article is an exercise of the city's police power to promote, through regulation of secondary metal recyclers, the recovery of stolen property. This article provides licensing and recordkeeping requirements and enforcement procedures that will enable the Cedar Hill Police Department to identify and recover public and private property composed of certain metal that may have been illegally appropriated. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority of V.T.C.A., Texas Occupations Code § 1946.003 and shall be interpreted with reference to that code. It is the intent of this article to impose standards that are in addition to, and more stringent than, the requirements of Texas Occupations Code Chapter 1956, but which do not conflict with that statute. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-45. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bales of recycled metal. Metals processed with professional recycling equipment by compression, shearing, or shredding, to a form in which it may be sold by a secondary metal recycler consistent with industry standards. 
Check. A written order to a bank to pay a stated amount of money from the secondary metal recycler's bank account. 
Chief of police. The Chief of Police for the City of Cedar Hill and his designees. 
Ferrous metal. A metal that contains significant quantities of iron or steel. 
Hold notice. Written notification by the chief of police as herein defined to a secondary metal recycler stating that the secondary metal recycler may not sell, redeem, or dispose of certain regulated metal property that the chief of police has reasonable suspicion to believe has been stolen. 
Licensee. A person in whose name a license has been issued under this chapter or a person listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
Nonferrous metal. A metal that does not contain significant quantities of iron or steel, including, but not limited to, copper, brass, aluminum, bronze, lead, zinc, nickel, and their alloys. 
Passport. A passport issued by the United States government. 
Person. An individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, and any other legal entity. 
Personal identification certificate. A personal identification card issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety under V.T.C.A., Texas Transportation Code § 521.101, as amended. 
Purchase transaction. A transaction in which a secondary metal recycler gives consideration in exchange for regulated metal property. 
Recyclable can. Aluminum food or beverage containers, used food or beverage containers, or similar food or beverage containers, other than beer or beverage kegs. 
Regulated material. Has the meaning given that term by V.T.C.A., Texas Occupations Code § 1956.001(9), and includes, but is not limited to wiring, pipe, or conduit that is composed of or contains aluminum, copper, bronze or brass. 
Regulated metal property. Any item composed in whole or in part of any ferrous or nonferrous metal, other than an item composed of tin, as defined herein. Regulated metal property shall also include regulated material, as defined herein. 
Secondary metal recycler. Any person who: 
(a)  Is engaged in the business of purchasing, collecting, or soliciting regulated metal property; or 
(b)  Operates or maintains a facility where regulated metal property is purchased or kept for shipment, sale, transfer or salvage. 
Seller. Any person who, in a purchase transaction, receives consideration from a secondary metal recycler in exchange for regulated metal property. 
Tin. Metal consisting predominantly of light sheet metal ferrous scrap, including, large and small household appliances, construction siding, and construction roofing. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-46. - Records required. 
(a)  A secondary metal recycler shall maintain an accurate and legible record of each purchase transaction. Each transaction must be recorded separately. 
(b)  The record of each purchase transaction must be clearly printed or typewritten in English and contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the secondary metal recycler; 
(2)  The name and drivers license number or personal identification certificate number of the individual recording the information required by this section for the secondary metal recycler; 
(3)  The seller's name, address, sex, birth date, and the identifying number from the seller's current drivers license issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety, a current U.S. military identification card, a current U.S. passport, or a current personal identification certificate issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety; a secondary metal recycler shall not accept an out-of-state drivers license or identification card and shall not accept any paper or temporary identification cards or certificates; 
(4)  The license number, color, and style or make of any motor vehicle in which the regulated metal property is delivered in a purchase transaction, along with a digital photograph of the vehicle which clearly depicts the make, model, and license plates; 
(5)  The date and time of the purchase transaction; 
(6)  The weight, quantity, or volume, made in accordance with the custom of the trade, of the regulated metal property purchased; 
(7)  A general description, made in accordance with the custom of the trade, of the predominant types of regulated metal property purchased in the purchase transaction, along with a digital photograph of the materials; 
(8)  The amount of consideration given in a purchase transaction for the regulated metal property; 
(9)  A signed statement, in a form approved by the chief of police, from the seller in a purchase transaction affirming a legal right of ownership, the right to sign over title to the regulated metal property offered for sale, the address from which the regulated metal property was obtained and, if applicable, the license plate and vehicle identification number of the vehicle from which the regulated metal was obtained; 
(10)  A digital photograph of the seller that clearly depicts the seller's facial features; and 
(11)  Seller shall affix a clear and legible thumb print on the record of purchase. 
(c)  A person selling or attempting to sell regulated metal property to a secondary metal recycler shall: 
(1)  Display to the secondary metal recycler the person's current drivers license issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety, a current U.S. military identification card, a current U.S. passport, or a current personal identification certificate issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety; out-of-state drivers licenses or identification cards and paper or temporary identification cards or certificates are prohibited under this article; 
(2)  Sign a written statement provided by the secondary metal recycler affirming that the person is the legal owner of, or is lawfully entitled to sell, the regulated material offered for sale; and 
(3)  Utilize a lawfully operational vehicle to transport the regulated metal property to the secondary metal recycler unless the materials to be submitted consist of recyclable cans having a value of fifty dollars ($50.00) or less. 
(d)  The secondary metal recycler or the recyclers agent shall visually verify the accuracy of the identification presented by the seller at the time of each purchase of regulated metal property. 
(e)  After notice from the chief of police of the fraudulent or forged nature of a particular driver's license, military identification card, passport or personal identification certificate, the secondary metal recycler shall refuse to accept said fraudulent or forged document for the purpose of complying with the requirements of this article. The notice required under this subsection shall include a copy of the fraudulent or forged driver's license, military identification card, passport or personal identification card. 
(f)  A secondary metal recycler shall maintain on file the information, including photographs, required by this section for not less than three (3) years from the date of the purchase transaction. A secondary metal recycler shall make these records available for inspection by any peace officer, upon request, at the secondary metal recycler's place of business during the usual and customary business hours of the secondary metal recycler. 
(g)  The recordkeeping requirements of this section are in addition to any required by V.T.C.A. Texas Occupations Code Ch. 1956, as amended. 
(h)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(10) of this section that: 
(1)  An accurate and recognizable photograph of the seller, taken within the preceding six (6) months, was currently on file with the secondary metal recycler; and 
(2)  At the time of the purchase transaction, the secondary metal recycler, or an employee of the secondary metal recycler, visually verified that the seller was actually the person depicted in the file photograph. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-47. - Notice to sellers. 
(a)  A secondary metal recycler shall at all times maintain in a prominent place in the secondary metal recycler's place of business, in open view to a seller of regulated metal property, a notice in two-inch lettering that contains the following or similar language approved by the chief of police: "A PERSON ATTEMPTING TO SELL ANY REGULATED METAL PROPERTY MUST PRESENT SUFFICIENT IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED BY CITY OF CEDAR HILL'S SECONDARY METALS RECYCLERS ORDINANCE." This notice is in addition to the notice requirements set forth in V.T.C.A., Texas Occupations Code Ch. 1956. 
(b)  The notice required by this section may be contained on a sign that contains another notice required by law to be displayed by the secondary metal recycler. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-48. - Facsimile, telecopier or similar equipment required. 
(a)  A secondary metal recycler shall maintain at its place of business, or otherwise have immediate access to, a facsimile, telecopier or other equipment of similar function on which notifications of stolen property or other notifications relating to regulated metal property may be expeditiously received from the Cedar Hill Police Department. The equipment must be operable at all times during the usual and customary business hours of the secondary metal recycler. The secondary metal recycler shall maintain the facsimile number or other access number of the equipment on file with the chief of police and shall notify the chief of police within twenty-four (24) hours after any change in the number. 
(b)  The chief of police may provide to secondary metal recyclers notices of: 
(1)  Photocopies of fraudulent or forged driver's license, military identification card, passport, personal identification certificate or other document provided by sellers under this article; 
(2)  Individuals convicted of theft of regulated metal property or other offenses arising in the City of Cedar Hill; and 
(3)  Metal items reported or suspected stolen. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-49. - Restrictions on the purchase of regulated metal property. 
(a)  A secondary metal recycler shall conduct all purchase transactions only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. All payments for purchase transaction shall be by check. Cash payments are prohibited, except that cash payments may be made for up to fifty dollars ($50.00) of recyclable cans. 
(b)  A secondary metal recycler shall not purchase any of the following items of regulated metal property without obtaining proof that the seller owns the property (such as by a receipt or bill of sale) or proof that the seller is an employee, agent or contractor who is authorized to sell the item of regulated metal property on behalf of the person, business, or entity owning the property: 
(1)  A utility access cover; 
(2)  A street light or electric pole and any of their fixtures or hardware; 
(3)  A road or bridge guard rail; 
(4)  A street sign, traffic sign or traffic signal and any of their fixtures or hardware; 
(5)  A water meter cover; 
(6)  Any metal marked with any form of the name or initials of a governmental entity, including the City of Cedar Hill, another municipality, or the State of Texas; 
(7)  Property owned by a telephone, cable, electric, water or other utility provider, including communication, transmission and service wire; 
(8)  Railroad equipment, including but not limited to a tie plate, switch plate, E clip or rail tie junction; 
(9)  A funeral marker or funeral vase; 
(10)  A historical marker; 
(11)  Bales of recycled metal; 
(12)  Catalytic converters; 
(13)  A copper or aluminum condensing or evaporator coil from a heating or air conditioning unit; or 
(14)  An aluminum or stainless steel container or bottle designed to hold propane for fueling fork lifts. 
(c)  A secondary metal recycler shall maintain on file the information required by subsection (b) of this section for not less than one (1) year from the date of the purchase of the item of regulated metal property. A secondary metal recycler shall make these records available for inspection by any police officer, upon request, at the secondary metal recycler's place of business during the usual and customary business hours of the secondary metal recycler. 
(d)  A secondary metal recycler shall not purchase any item of regulated metal property from an intoxicated person. 
(e)  No metal recycling entity shall purchase or otherwise receive in the course of business, any item, ownership of which is claimed by any minor, or which may be in the possession or under control of a minor, unless; 
(1)  The only items offered for sale by the minor are recyclable cans; and 
(2)  The purchase transaction does not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(f)  A secondary metal recycler shall mail all payments for the recycled metals or catalytic converters to the current address listed on the seller's driver's license or personal identification certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-49. - Inspection. 
(a)  A secondary metal recycler shall, during the usual and customary business hours, allow a peace officer to: 
(1)  Inspect a secondary metal recycler's place of business; 
(2)  Copy or verify the correctness of documents, including records or reports required to be kept under this chapter; and 
(3)  Examine or inspect metal inventory. 
(b)  A secondary metal recycler who fails or refuses to comply with any part of subsection (a) above violates this chapter. The failure or refusal is grounds for suspension or revocation of a license. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-50. - Five-day hold on regulated metal property; segregation, labeling, and inspection of regulated metal property; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, a secondary metal recycler shall retain possession of purchased regulated metal property at the secondary metal recycler's local place of business and withhold the property from alteration, processing, resale or salvage use for five (5) days after purchase, unless the property is released sooner by written order of the chief of police or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsections (c) of this section, a secondary metal recycler shall segregate all regulated metal property purchased from a seller from regulated metal property purchased from other sellers and attach to the property, or to the container in which the property is held, a label indicating the name of the seller, the date on which the property was purchased and the number of the receipt on which the purchase information is recorded. If in any single purchase transaction, there are multiple items of regulated metal property of the same general type, only one representative item from each type of regulated property must be segregated and labeled in accordance with this subsection. 
(c)  The hold, segregation, and labeling requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to any item of regulated metal property composed predominantly of ferrous metal material, unless the secondary metal recycler has received notice that the chief of police has, in accordance with this subsection, designated the item or type of item as being subject to those requirements. The chief of police shall periodically review theft statistics on ferrous regulated metal property and establish a list of items or types of items that the chief of police determines are subject to the requirements of subsection (a) and (b). A current list must be maintained on file in the chief of police designee's office, or in another designated office of the Cedar Hill Police Department, so that it may be inspected by the public during the city's normal business hours. Notice of the list must be given to secondary metal recyclers in accordance with schedules and procedures established by the chief of police. A secondary metal recycler is presumed to have received notice of the list if the police department transmits the list to the facsimile number or access number provided by the secondary metal recycler under section 10-48 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-51. - Hold on stolen regulated metal property; hold notice. 
(a)  Whenever a peace officer has reasonable suspicion to believe that certain items of regulated metal property in the possession of a secondary metal recycler are stolen, the peace officer may issue a hold notice. The hold notice must: 
(1)  Identify those specific items of regulated metal property alleged to be stolen and subject to hold; and 
(2)  Inform the secondary metal recycler of the restrictions imposed on the regulated metal property under subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  A secondary metal recycler may not, for sixty (60) days from the date of receiving a hold notice under this section, process or remove from the secondary metal recycler's place of business any regulated metal property identified in the hold notice, unless the property is released sooner by the peace officer who issued the hold notice or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. At the expiration of the hold period, the hold is automatically released, and the secondary metal recycler may dispose of the regulated metal property unless otherwise directed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-52. - Offenses; defenses; penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article, or who fails to perform a duty required of him under this article, commits an offense. A person is guilty of a separate offense for each item of regulated metal property involved in a violation of this chapter. An offense under this chapter is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter that the regulated metal property involved: 
(1)  Was purchased from a charitable, philanthropic, religious, fraternal, civic, patriotic, social or school-sponsored organization or from any organization that is exempt from taxation under Section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended; 
(2)  Was purchased from any public officer acting in an official capacity as a trustee in bankruptcy, executor, administrator or receiver; from any public official acting under judicial process or authority, or from a sale on the execution, or by virtue, of any process issued by a court; 
(3)  Consists of aluminum food or beverage containers, used food or beverage containers, or similar food or beverage containers for the purpose of recycling, other than beer or beverage kegs; or 
(4)  Was purchased from a manufacturing, industrial or other commercial vendor that generates or sells regulated metal property in the ordinary course of its business. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-53. - License required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if, without a license issued under this article, he: 
(1)  Purchases regulated metal property in the city for resale or salvage use; 
(2)  Operates a business establishment in the city that purports to purchase regulated metal property for resale or salvage use; or 
(3)  In any other manner conducts business in the city as a secondary metal recycler. 
(b)  An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. Each applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  A person who wishes to purchase regulated metal property for resale or salvage use must sign the application as applicant. If the person is a legal entity, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, association, or joint venture, each individual who has a twenty (20) percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as an applicant. Each applicant must meet the requirements of section 10-54, and each applicant will be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that, at the time of the alleged offense, the person was purchasing regulated metal property for resale or salvage use under the specific authority of a valid license issued by the State of Texas or the United States government. A license must still be obtained under this section for those activities conducted by a secondary metal recycler that are not specifically authorized by a state or federal license. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-54. - Issuance of license; posting. 
(a)  The chief of police shall issue a license to an applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of an application unless it is determined that one or more of the following is true: 
(1)  An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse. 
(3)  An applicant failed to answer or falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form provided. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of two (2) or more offenses under this chapter, other than the offense of conducting business as a secondary metal recycler without a license, within two (2) years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect. 
(5)  An applicant has not obtained a certificate of occupancy for the premises in which the applicant intends to do business, or if the business or its location would otherwise be in violation of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cedar Hill or any other applicable city ordinance, state or federal law. 
(6)  The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid. 
(7)  An applicant has been convicted of a felony or a class A misdemeanor involving theft or fraud, including but not limited to theft, robbery, burglary, forgery, criminal simulation, deceptive business practices, securing execution of document by deception, or any other similar state or federal criminal offense, and three years have not elapsed since the termination of any sentence, parole or probation. The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect. If three (3) years have elapsed, the chief of police shall, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas Occupations Code § 53.023, as amended, determine the present fitness of the applicant to be licensed from the information and evidence presented with the application. 
(8)  An applicant has been convicted of an offense under any federal or state law providing recordkeeping or licensing requirements for persons purchasing or selling regulated metal property, and three (3) years have not elapsed since the termination of any sentence, parole or probation. The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect. 
(b)  The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the premises for which the license is granted. A license issued pursuant to this chapter is valid only for the location stated in the application. Should any licensee move a place of business from the place stated on the license to a new location, the licensee shall give the chief of police prior written notice and present the license to the chief of police to have the change of location noted on the license. 
(c)  A license must be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the licensed premises so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(d)  If the chief of police determines that issuance or renewal of a license should be denied, the chief of police shall send to the applicant or licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written statement of the reasons for the denial and of the applicant or licensee's right to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-55. - Fees. 
The annual fee for a license issued under this article is two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-56. - Expiration of license. 
Each license will expire one (1) year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 10-53. To ensure re-issuance of a license prior to expiration, application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-57. - Suspension. 
(a)  The chief of police shall suspend a license for a definite period of time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, if the chief of police determines that a licensee, an individual who is a business associate of the licensee in the same or a related business, a corporate officer of the licensee, or an employee of the licensee: 
(1)  Committed, in the aggregate, two (2) or more violations of this chapter within any six-month period; or 
(2)  Intentionally or knowingly impeded or refused to allow an inspection by any police officer authorized under this chapter. 
(b)  The chief of police shall send to the licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written statement of the reasons for the suspension, the date the suspension is to begin, the duration of the suspension, and the licensee's right to appeal. 
(c)  A licensee whose license is suspended may not operate as a secondary metal recycler inside the city during the period of suspension. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-57. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license if it is determined that one (1) or more of the following is true: 
(1)  A licensee has given a false statement as to a material matter submitted to the chief of police during the application process. 
(2)  A licensee, an individual who is a business associate of the licensee in the same or a related business or a corporate officer of the licensee, or an employee of the licensee has been convicted within a two-year period of three (3) or more offenses under this chapter. If a conviction is appealed, the time period between conviction and final disposition on appeal of the conviction is not included in calculating the two-year period if the conviction is affirmed. 
(3)  A licensee has been convicted of any felony or of a class A misdemeanor involving theft or fraud, including but not limited to theft, robbery, burglary, forgery, criminal simulation, deceptive business practices, securing execution of document by deception or any other similar state or federal criminal offense, and three (3) years have not elapsed since the termination of any sentence, parole or probation. The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect. 
(4)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense under any federal or state law providing recordkeeping or licensing requirements for persons purchasing or selling regulated metal property, and three (3) years have not elapsed since the termination of any sentence, parole or probation. The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect. 
(5)  A cause for suspension under section 10-57 has occurred and the license has already been suspended at least once within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(6)  The licensee does not qualify for a license under section 10-54(a). 
(7)  The chief of police shall send to the licensee by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written statement of the reasons for the revocation and of the licensee's right to appeal. 
(b)  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation will continue for one (1) year, and the licensee may not be issued a license for one (1) year from the date revocation became final. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation action has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the revocation became final. If the license was revoked under subsection (a)(3) or (a)(4) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license within three (3) years of the termination of any sentence, parole or probation. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-58. - Appeal. 
If the chief of police denies issuance or renewal of a license, or suspends or revokes a license, the aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the city manager within thirty (30) days. The action of the chief of police is final unless a timely appeal is made. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief of police in suspending or revoking a license until the city manager makes a final decision. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-59. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not: 
(1)  Transfer a license issued under this chapter to another; or 
(2)  Operate a business engaged in the purchase of regulated metal property for resale or salvage use under the authority of a license at any location other than the address designated in the license application. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
Sec. 10-60. - Bond or letter of credit from a financial institution. 
(a)  The chief of police shall require that an applicant for a license required by this article file a bond or letter of credit with the application. The bond or letter of credit must be: 
(1)  Satisfactory to the chief of police; 
(2)  In the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each license; 
(3)  Issued by a United States surety company or financial institution, in the case of the letter of credit authorized to do business in this state; and 
(4)  Valid at the time of the application and remain in effect during the entire term of the license. 
(b)  The aggregate liability of the surety or letter of credit may not exceed the amount of the bond. 
(c)  The bond or letter of credit must be in favor of the city for the use of the city and the use of a person who has a cause of action under this article against the metal recycling entity. 
(d)  The bond or letter of credit must be conditioned on: 
(1)  The metal recycling entity's compliance with this article and rules adopted under this article; and 
(2)  The payment of all amounts that become due to the city or to another person under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-360, § 1, 9-9-08)  
ARTICLE V. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSES. 
 
Sec. 10-71. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform licensing regulations to ensure sexually oriented businesses are operated by persons and in a manner that prevents casual high-risk sexual activity, prostitution, drug use, other criminal activity, or logistical difficulties and risks of physical endangerment to police officers responsible for policing such businesses. 
(b)  Intent. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access to sexually oriented entertainment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 10-72. - Findings. 
The facts and other matters set forth in the "Whereas" clauses that form the preamble to Ordinance No. 2010-419 are hereby adopted as findings of fact in support of the legislative action of the City of Cedar Hill in amending chapter 10, licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations to add article V, sexually oriented business licenses to the City of Cedar Hill's Code of Ordinances. Upon adoption of this article, the matters set forth in the "Whereas" clauses shall be incorporated into this article by reference to the adopting resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 10-73. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
Applicant. Any person, including any spouse of an individual owner, or any other entity required to submit any documentation and/or receive any approvals for operating sexually oriented business or working within a sexually oriented business within the City of Cedar Hill. 
Bath house, sexually oriented. An enterprise where a portion of its business is offering baths and/or showers with other persons present who are nude or displaying specified anatomical areas. 
Body painting studio, sexually oriented. An establishment where a portion of its business is the application of paint or other substance to or on the human body by any means of application, technique or process when the subject's body displays for the patron's view specified anatomical areas. 
Business, sexually oriented. Any of the following businesses: Sexually oriented cabaret, nightclub, bar or food service establishment; sexually oriented entertainment; sexually oriented motion picture theater; sexually oriented video viewing kiosk, booth or arcade; sexually oriented encounter center; sexually oriented media store; sexually oriented bathhouse; sexually oriented massage business; sexually oriented retail establishment; sexually oriented body painting studio; sexually oriented lingerie or swimwear modeling studio; sexually oriented modeling/photography studio; sexually oriented escort business; or any other such business establishment whose purpose is offering sexually oriented entertainment, media or merchandise. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult," "XXX" or similar terms, shall be considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as a sexually oriented business. Each such business is considered a separate land use for purposes of these regulations. For the purpose of this article, a business is not a sexually oriented business if its inventory, square footage, and product value devoted to sexually oriented merchandise (including media) is ten (10) percent or less and it offers no on-site sexually oriented entertainment. 
Business license, sexually oriented. Any license applied for under the sexually oriented business licensing ordinance establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses. 
Cabaret or nightclub, sexually oriented. A building or portion of a building which provides or allows the provision of live sexually oriented entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the public as an establishment where sexually oriented entertainment is available, but such definition shall not include any sexually oriented use prohibited by this section. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult entertainment," "strippers," "showgirls," "exotic dancers," "gentleman's club," "XXX" or similar terms, shall be considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
Chief of police. The Chief of Police for the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, or a designated agent. 
Child care facility, licensed. A facility licensed by the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services providing supervision for children thirteen (13) years of age or younger or for any individual who is deemed mentally challenged. 
Civic center building. A building or complex of buildings that house municipal offices and services, and which may include cultural, recreational, athletic, convention or entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a municipality. 
Customer. A person who: 
a.  Enters a business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; or 
b.  Enters a business and purchases, rents, or otherwise partakes of any material, merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services offered therein; or 
c.  Enters a business other than as an employee, vendor, service person, or delivery person. 
Display publically. The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item or activity in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others or from any portion of the premises where items and materials other than sexually oriented media or merchandise are offered for sale or rent to the public. 
Educational facility. A public or private kindergarten, primary, secondary and postsecondary educational facility offering instruction in the branches of learning and study required to be taught by the Texas Education Agency; and such federally-funded educational programs for preschool children as the Head Start Program. 
Employee. Any person who renders any service whatsoever for or to the customers of an establishment subject to this article or who works in or about an establishment subject to this article. 
Encounter center, sexually oriented. A business or enterprise that offers physical contact between two or more persons when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, for the purpose of engaging in specified sexually activity or touching specified anatomical areas, but not including a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
Entertainer, sexually oriented. Any person paid by some form of remuneration to provide entertainment to customers at a sexually oriented business; entertainment may consist of dancing, singing, modeling, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers whereby the entertainer is paid any form of remuneration directly or indirectly for such conversations. 
Entertainment, sexually oriented. Any of the following activities, when performed by a sexually oriented entertainer at a sexually oriented business: Dancing, singing, talking, touching, modeling (including lingerie or photographic), gymnastics, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers. 
Escort, sexually oriented. A person who offers to provide, for some form of remuneration, acts of sexually oriented entertainment or conduct to a client. 
Escort business, sexually oriented. A business or person that advertises or solicits in any way to prospective clients for the provision of sexually oriented escorts that will provide sexually oriented entertainment, companionship or conduct or employs or contracts with a sexually oriented escort, or refers or provides to a client a sexually oriented escort. 
Floor area, gross. The total area of the building accessible or visible to a person, including showrooms, theaters including stage area, service areas (but not including restrooms), behind-counter areas, areas used for storage of sexually oriented media or merchandise, and aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas. 
Frequently. Two or more times per month. 
Library, public. A publicly-owned facility in which literary and artistic materials, such as books, periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets, prints, records, and tapes, are kept for reading, reference, or lending. 
Licensee. Anyone issued a license under this article, sexually oriented business licensing. 
Lingerie or swimwear modeling studio, sexually oriented. An establishment or business that provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or similar wear to individuals, couples, or small groups. 
Manager. Any person designated by the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to be responsible for the operation of such business at a particular location at a particular time; when the owner, proprietor, or other principal in the business is present, such person may be considered the manager. 
Massage. The act of touching, stroking, kneading, stretching, friction, percussion, and vibration, and includes holding, positioning, causing movement of the soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body. 
Massage business, sexually oriented. Any business in which massages are offered as one of the business's services by a person who is not licensed as a massage therapist under the Texas State Statutes, Title 3, Chapter 455: Massage Therapy; or any business which provides massage for the purpose of sexual stimulation. 
Massage therapy. The profession in which a massage therapist licensed under the Texas State Statutes, Title 3, Chapter 455: Massage Therapy, applies massage techniques with the intent of positively affecting the health and well being of the client. 
Massage therapist. A person licensed as a massage therapist in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Department of State Health Services in accordance with the Texas State Statutes, Title 3, Chapter 455: Massage Therapy. 
Media. Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-ROMS, DVDs, other magnetic media, and undeveloped pictures. 
Media, sexually oriented. Media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Media store sexually oriented. A store with sexually oriented media for sale and/or rent, and to which any of the following applies: 
(1)  The sale and/or rental of sexually oriented media, whether alone or in conjunction with the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented merchandise, constitutes a principal business of the establishment, taking into consideration any of the following: 
a.  The value realized from the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented media and/or merchandise; 
b.  The floor area devoted to sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise; 
c.  The amount of inventory constituting sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise; or 
(2)  The business advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" media and/or merchandise business. 
Merchandise, sexually oriented. This term includes any of the following categories of merchandise: lingerie presented in combination with other merchandise contained within this definition; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; condoms or sexual lubricants presented in combination with other merchandise contained within this definition; sexually oriented novelties; and sexually oriented media which is separately defined in this section. 
Modeling/photography studio, sexually oriented. Any place where a person who appears nude or semi-nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity and is to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A sexually oriented modeling/photography studio does not include educational classes in conjunction with a private or public college, junior college, or university or that of an individual artist studio established solely for conduct of the artist. 
Motel, sexually oriented. A hotel, motel, or similar commercial lodging establishment that: 
(1)  Provides as its business accommodations to the public for any form of consideration for the purpose of viewing sexually oriented media or sexually oriented entertainment. This definition does not include lodging facilities that offer sexually oriented media via cable or satellite services on room televisions as ancillary television programming; or 
(2)  Is marketed as or offered as "adult," "XXX," "couples," or "sexually oriented" lodging facility; or 
(3)  Offers a sleeping room for a period of less than ten hours or allows a tenant or occupant to rent the room for a period of time of less than ten hours or allows the tenant to have a weekly or monthly rental of the room for the purposes of providing sexually oriented entertainment. 
Motion picture theater, sexually oriented. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, sexually oriented media are frequently shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or that is marketed as or offered as "adult," "XXX," or sexually oriented. Frequently shown media as characterized herein do not include sexually oriented speech and expressions that take place inside the context of some larger form of expression. This definition does not include any type of facility that would meet the definition of a sexually oriented video viewing kiosk, booth or arcade. 
Novelties, sexually oriented. Instruments, devices, toys, or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts or designed or marketed primarily for use in sexually oriented stimulation of specified anatomical areas. 
Nudity or state of nudity. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. See, also, "semi-nude." For purposes of this definition, body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex, whether wet or dried, and other similar substances shall not be considered a fully opaque covering. 
Operates. To cause to function, maintain or create or to put or keep in operation a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Operator. See "manager." 
Owner. The individual owner of an establishment, or if the legal owner is a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company, the term shall include all general partners, any limited partner with a financial interest of ten (10) percent or more, all corporate officers and directors, and any shareholder or member with a financial interest of ten (10) percent or more. "Owner" includes the spouse(s) of any of the above persons. 
Person. An individual, licensee, operating owner, manager, sexually oriented entertainer, firm, partnership, joint-venture, association, independent contractor, corporation (domestic or foreign), limited liability company, trust, estate, assignee, receiver or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Planning director. The Planning Director of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, or a designated agent. 
Premises. The physical location at which a business is located; as used in this section, the term shall include all parts of that physical location, both interior and exterior, which are under the control of the subject business, through ownership, lease or other arrangement. 
Protected highway buffer. A distance of five hundred (500) feet from the right-of-way line of U.S. Hwy. 67. 
Protected land use. A licensed child care facility, civic center building, educational facility, public library, recreational facility, or religious facility. 
Protected zoning district. Residential districts as shown in Article 4.1.2 Use Chart, Old Town-Residential District, Planned Development District developed for residential uses, and Mixed Use District where residential is a primary use. 
Public area. A portion of a sexually oriented business that is accessible to the customer, excluding restrooms, while the business is open for business. 
Recreational facility. A permanent facility devoted to recreational purposes such as parks, play fields, or community recreation buildings. 
Religious facility. A permanent facility exclusively used on a regular basis for religious assembly such as customarily occurs in a synagogue, temple, mosque, or church or convent or monastery. 
Retail store, sexually oriented. A store with sexually oriented merchandise for sale and/or rent, and to which any of the following applies: 
(1)  The sale and/or rental of sexually oriented merchandise, whether alone or in conjunction with the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented media, constitutes a principal business of the establishment, taking into consideration any of the following: 
a.  The value realized from the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented merchandise and/or media; 
b.  The floor area devoted to sexually oriented merchandise and/or sexually oriented media; 
c.  The amount of inventory constituting sexually oriented merchandise and/or sexually oriented media; or 
(2)  The business advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" merchandise business and/or media business. 
Sadomasochistic practices. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked. 
Semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity. The showing of the female areola or nipple with less than fully opaque covering. Showing of any other part of the anatomy defined under nude or state of nudity shall constitute being nude or in a state of nudity. For purposes of this definition, body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex, whether wet or dried, and other similar substances shall not be considered a fully opaque covering. 
Simulated nudity. A state of dress in which any device or covering, exposed to view, is worn that simulates any part of the genitals, pubic region, or areola of the female breast. 
Specified anatomical areas. Areas that include: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft or the human female areola or nipple; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal act. Any of the following offenses as defined by the Texas Penal Code enumerated below or any other state or federal laws addressing similar or related offenses below: 
(1)  Chapter 21 Sexual Offenses: 
a.  Public lewdness; 
b.  Indecent exposure; 
c.  Indecency with a child; 
d.  Improper photography or visual recording. 
(2)  Chapter 22 Assaultive Offenses: 
a.  Sexual assault; 
b.  Aggravated sexual assault. 
(3)  Chapter 25 Offenses Against the Family: 
a.  Prohibited sexual conduct. 
(4)  Chapter 43 Public Indecency: 
a.  Prostitution; 
b.  Promotion of prostitution; 
c.  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
d.  Compelling prostitution; 
e.  Obscenity; 
f.  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to minor; 
g.  Sexual performance by a child; 
h.  Possession of child pornography. 
(5)  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the above offenses. 
Specified sexual activities. Sex acts normal or perverted, actual or simulated, of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy. These activities include, but are not limited to the following: Bestiality, erotic or sexual stimulation with objects or mechanical devices, acts of human analingus, cunnilingus, fellatio, flagellation, masturbation, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or any excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth above with any person on the premises. This definition shall include apparent sexual stimulation of another person's genitals whether clothed or unclothed. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business. This means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; or 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of the law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
Video, sexually oriented. This definition is used to refer to any motion pictures, movies, films, videotapes, CD-ROMS, DVDs, computer images, slides, sound recordings, other magnetic media or electrical or electronic reproductions of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication that is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Video viewing arcade, sexually oriented. A building or any portion of a building wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any other form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Video viewing kiosk or booth, sexually oriented. Any kiosk, booth, cubicle, stall, or compartment that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat customers and is used for presenting videos or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, CD-ROMs, books, DVDs, magazines or periodicals) to show images of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by customers therein. The term "booth," "arcade booth," "preview booth," and "video arcade booth" shall be synonymous with the term "sexually oriented video viewing kiosk or booth." 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2013-527, § 1, 11-12-13)  
Sec. 10-74. - License required. 
(a)  A license for a sexually oriented business shall be required for the following sexually oriented business uses, or conversion of an existing business to one which is a sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Sexually oriented media store. 
(2)  Sexually oriented retail store. 
(3)  Sexually oriented motion picture theatre. 
(4)  Sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
(b)  No other type of sexually oriented business shall be granted a license to operate within the City of Cedar Hill. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to establish or operate a sexually oriented business. 
(1)  Without having obtained a sexually oriented business license under the provisions of this chapter; or 
(2)  During such time as a sexually oriented business license has expired or has been suspended or revoked; or 
(3)  In violation of any provision of this article. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to manage or provide entertainment within a sexually oriented business. 
(1)  Without having obtained a sexually oriented business manager or entertainer license as provided under this article; or 
(2)  During such time as a sexually oriented business manager or entertainer license has expired or has been suspended or revoked; or 
(3)  In violation of any provision of this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed sexually oriented business. 
(f)  It shall be prima facie evidence that a sexually oriented business has not obtained a sexually oriented business license if such business fails to post the license in the manner required herein. 
(g)  It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who performs any business, service or entertainment in a sexually oriented business had knowledge that such business was not licensed if the sexually oriented business license is not posted in the manner required herein. 
(h)  A license issued under this article shall be issued for only one sexually oriented use or position and to only the person listed on the application. Any change in the type of sexually oriented business use or position shall invalidate the license and require the licensee to obtain a new license for the change in use or position. 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 10-75. - License application fees. 
(a)  The following are the approved license application fees for licenses required under this article: 
(1)  The application fee for a new sexually oriented business license shall be one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00); 
(2)  The application fee for renewal of a sexually oriented business license shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00); 
(3)  The application fee for a new manager or entertainer license shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); and 
(4)  The application fee for renewal of a manager or entertainer license shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(b)  No application shall be processed without the required application fee paid in full at the time of application submission. 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 10-76. - Issuance of a sexually oriented business license. 
(a)  All applications for a sexually oriented business license shall be made with the City of Cedar Hill's Police Department. 
(b)  All completed applications for a sexually oriented business license shall provide the following information: 
(1)  A copy of the approved pre-submission application required by the Zoning Ordinance under Article 4, Section 4.1.7 Sexually Oriented Businesses, Subsection G., including any requests for an exemption to separation requirements filed pursuant to Section 4.1.7., Subsection I.; no application shall be accepted by the police department until such approval has been received; 
(2)  A copy of the site plan application submission as required by the Zoning Ordinance under Section 2.6 Site Plan Review; 
(3)  A diagram of the business's interior premises configuration, noting specific use of each space, square footages, walls or partitions, and total floor area of the building, drawn to a measurable scale of one (1) inch equals four (4) feet with all dimensions notated; 
(4)  The name of the sexually oriented business and identification of the type of sexually oriented business proposed (sexually oriented media store, sexually oriented retail store, sexually oriented motion picture theatre, or sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub); 
(5)  If the property owner is other than the applicant, the name of the property owner and a statement signed by the property owner stating that applicant has entered into a contract to acquire, lease or otherwise control the site or structure for use as a sexually oriented business; 
(6)  The applicant's name, any aliases, mailing address for receipt of notices, home address, home and office telephone numbers, occupation, date and place of birth and social security number, and tax identification number; all information required of the applicant shall also be required of the applicant's spouse; 
(7)  If the applicant is an entity other than an individual, each individual who has a ten (10) percent or greater interest in the entity proposing to own and/or operate the business must provide the same information as the individual applicant and sign the license application as an applicant; and 
(8)  A statement signed under oath by the applicant and the applicant's spouse that the applicant and applicant's spouse have personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; that the applicant and spouse grant permission to the city to perform any necessary background checks on persons or businesses listed on the application; and that the applicant and spouse have read all provisions of the Cedar Hill Code of Ordinances regulating sexually oriented businesses. 
(c)  Application processing—Sexually oriented business license. 
(1)  Within five (5) working days of receipt, the chief of police shall notify the applicant whether or not the application for the sexually oriented business license is determined complete. In the event the application is determined incomplete, the notification to the applicant shall include a written explanation of the reason(s) why the application is incomplete. 
(2)  Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application for a sexually oriented business license shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a complete application, the chief of police shall immediately transmit a copy of the application to the planning director, fire chief, and chief building official. Not later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the police department, the planning department, fire department, and building inspections department shall report the results of their investigation to the chief of police. The reports shall include the following: 
a.  It shall be the duty of the police department to perform background checks on the applicant(s) for the sexually oriented business license to determine whether the information contained in the application is true and correct and whether or not the applicant(s) complies with the criteria for holding a sexually oriented business license; 
b.  It shall be the duty of the fire department to determine whether the structure identified in the application for the sexually oriented business meets the standards of the applicable fire code; 
c.  It shall be the duty of the building inspections department to determine whether the structure identified in the application for the sexually oriented business meets the building code, and exterior and interior building standards required for sexually oriented business by this article and by the Zoning Ordinance under Section 4.1.7 Sexually Oriented Businesses; and 
d.  It shall be the duty of the planning department to determine whether the application meets the land use requirements of the Zoning Ordinance under Section 4.1.7 Sexually Oriented Businesses of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  Approval or denial—Sexually oriented business license. The chief of police shall approve and issue the sexually oriented business license required hereunder to an applicant within forty-five (45) calendar days after receipt of a complete application and the applicant shall be notified in writing of the chief of police's decision within five (5) working days thereof, unless the chief of police finds one (1) or more of the following to be true, in which case the application shall be denied: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide information required for issuance of the license or gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application form; 
(2)  The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; all applicants shall provide documentation issued by a state or federal agency bearing the applicants' date of birth and photographs as proof that the applicant is not under the age of eighteen (18); 
(3)  The applicant or spouse has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for deferred adjudication of, any felony within the past five (5) years or any misdemeanor within the past three (3) years where such felony or misdemeanor violation constitutes a specified criminal act as defined by this article; the fact that the applicant or spouse has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
(4)  The applicant or spouse has been convicted of an offense under this article or its predecessor within the past three (3) years; 
(5)  The applicant or spouse has had a sexually oriented business license, or comparable license, of any type revoked within the past five (5) years or one suspended within the past three (3) years, immediately preceding the date of application; the fact that the applicant or spouse has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
(6)  The applicant or spouse has held, within the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application, an ownership, operational or a managerial position, at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
(7)  The applicant or spouse owes delinquent city taxes or assessments or other financial obligations to the city and no arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations; 
(8)  The applicant's business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable governmental licensing, zoning, building, fire, health and property maintenance ordinances or codes, provided, that upon a showing that the premises meets said requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for reconsideration; or 
(9)  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(e)  Provisional license. If the chief of police is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following a determination of completeness, he shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall expire following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings as provided in section 10-81, appeal of license denial, suspension or revocation. The provisions of this article shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(f)  Site plan approval. The issuance of the license shall be subject to approval of any pending decision on a site plan required by the Zoning Ordinance under Section 2.6 Site Plan Review or any appeal taken from such decision. 
(g)  Information on license. The approved sexually oriented business license shall include the license number, name of the license holder, the date of issuance and expiration, the address of the sexually oriented business, and a statement that the license is not transferable. 
(h)  Posting. The approved sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the sexually oriented business's entrance so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 10-77. - Issuance of a manager or entertainer license. 
(a)  All applications for a manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business shall be made with the City of Cedar Hill's Police Department. 
(b)  No application for a manager or an entertainer license shall be accepted by the police department prior to licensing of the sexually oriented business for which the manager or entertainer license is applicable. 
(c)  All completed applications for a manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, any aliases, mailing address for receipt of notices, home address, home and office telephone numbers, occupation, date and place of birth and social security number, and tax identification number; 
(2)  The name and address of each sexually oriented business where the applicant intends to work and a valid copy of the current sexually oriented business license for each of the sexually oriented businesses in which the manager or entertainer proposes to work or perform; and 
(3)  A statement signed under oath by the applicant that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; that the applicant grants permission to the city to perform any necessary background checks on the applicant; and that the applicant has read all provisions of the Cedar Hill Code of Ordinances regulating sexually oriented businesses. 
(d)  The chief of police shall approve and issue the manager or entertainer license required hereunder to an applicant within forty-five (45) calendar days after receipt of a complete application unless the chief of police finds one (1) or more of the following to be true, in which case the application shall be denied: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide information required for issuance of the license or gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application form; 
(2)  The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; all applicants shall provide documentation issued by a state or federal agency bearing the applicants' date of birth and photographs as proof that the applicant is not under the age of eighteen (18); 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for deferred adjudication of, any felony within the past five (5) years or any misdemeanor within the past three (3) years where such felony or misdemeanor violation constitutes a specified criminal act as defined by this article; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant; 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of an offense under this article or its predecessor within the past three (3) years; 
(5)  The applicant has had a sexually oriented manager or entertainer license, or comparable license, of any type revoked within the past five (5) years or one suspended within the past three (3) years, immediately preceding the date of application; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant; 
(6)  The applicant has held, within the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application, an ownership, operational or a managerial position, at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
(7)  The applicant owes delinquent city taxes or assessments or other financial obligations to the city and no arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations; or 
(8)  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(e)  Application processing—Manager or entertainer license. 
(1)  Within five (5) working days of receipt, the chief of police shall notify the applicant whether or not the application for the manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business is determined complete. In the event the application is determined incomplete, the notification to the applicant shall include a written explanation of the reason(s) why the application is incomplete. 
(2)  Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application for manager or entertainer license shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed. 
(3)  Within forty-five (45) calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the chief of police shall approve or disapprove the application for a manager or entertainer license. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the chief of police's decision within a time period of five (5) working days thereof. 
(4)  If the chief of police is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following a determination of completeness, he shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall expire following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings as provided in Section 29.12 [section 10-81]. The provisions of this article shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(f)  Information on license. The approved manager and entertainer licenses shall include the license number, name of the license holder, including any stage name, licensee's photograph, the date of issuance and expiration, the address(s) of the sexually oriented business(es) where such license is applicable, and a statement that the license is not transferrable. 
(g)  Posting. A valid copy of the manager's license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business when that manager is on duty. A valid copy of the entertainer's license shall not be posted but shall be available on-site within the office of the sexually oriented business for inspection at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 10-78. - License terms and renewal. 
(a)  License terms and expiration. 
(1)  All licenses issued under this article shall be issued for a period of one (1) year and are required to be renewed annually. 
(2)  No license issued under this article shall be transferable to another person or entity. 
(3)  All licenses issued under this article shall expire on the last day of the calendar month during which the licenses were issued or renewed during the previous year. 
(b)  License renewal. 
(1)  All applications for license renewal shall be submitted to the police department no earlier than thirty (30) calendar days prior to the date of expiration. 
(2)  A license that is expired by more than thirty (30) calendar days shall be subject to the same license review procedures and criteria required of any applicant applying for a new license. 
(3)  If an application for renewal of a license has been submitted and accepted as complete by the police department, the licensee may operate under the existing license until issuance of a renewed license. 
(4)  The chief of police shall approve the license renewal within thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of a complete renewal application unless the chief of police finds one (1) or more of the following to be true (also applicable to the applicant's spouse if a renewal for a sexually oriented business license), in which case the application shall be denied: 
a.  The applicant has failed to provide information required for renewal of the license or gave false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application form; 
b.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for deferred adjudication of, any felony or misdemeanor violation that constitutes a specified criminal act as defined by this article; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
c.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has been convicted of an offense under this article; 
d.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant had a sexually oriented business license, or comparable license, of any type revoked; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application; 
e.  During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has held an ownership, operational or a managerial position, at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
f.  The applicant owes delinquent city taxes or assessments or other financial obligations to the city and no arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations; 
g.  The applicant's business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable governmental licensing, zoning, building, fire, health and property maintenance ordinances or codes, provided, that upon a showing that the premises meets said requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application shall be eligible for reconsideration; or 
h.  The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(5)  Application processing of license renewal. 
a.  Within five (5) working days of receipt, the chief of police shall notify the applicant whether or not the license renewal application is determined complete. In the event the application is determined incomplete, the notification to the applicant shall include a written explanation of the reason(s) why the application is incomplete. 
b.  Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed. 
c.  Within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the chief of police shall approve or disapprove the application for renewal of the license. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the chief of police's decision within a time period of five (5) working days thereof. 
(6)  If the chief of police is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following a determination of completeness, he shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall expire following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings as provided in section 10-81 appeal of license denial, suspension or revocation. The provisions of this article shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(7)  Information on license. The renewed licenses shall contain the same information required to be shown on the original license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 10-79. - License suspension. 
(a)  The chief of police shall suspend a license issued under this article for the following reasons: 
(1)  Licensee operated the sexually oriented business or performed sexually oriented entertainment in a location not approved for such activity; 
(2)  Licensee violated any requirement of the Zoning Ordinance related to the regulation of sexually oriented businesses; 
(3)  Licensee failed to maintain on-site a current list of all employees (contract or otherwise) along with their completed employment application and photo readily accessible for inspection within the premises; 
(4)  Licensee refused city or other governmental agency access to the premises and records; 
(5)  Licensee transferred a license issued under this article to another person or entity; 
(6)  Licensee allowed a person under the age of eighteen (18) years in or on the premises; 
(7)  Licensee allowed a person to appear in a state of semi-nudity or nudity or in a state of simulated nudity on the premises; 
(8)  Licensee reconfigured the interior of the premises without approval from the city; 
(9)  Licensee operated the business without a licensed manager on duty during the time the business was opened to the public; 
(10)  Licensee was delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business; 
(11)  Licensee demonstrated an inability to operate or manage the business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; or 
(12)  Licensee violated any of the "standards of conduct and operation" under section 10-83. 
(b)  The chief of police may suspend a license issued under this article for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
(c)  A licensee subject to suspension shall have the right to appeal the suspension under the procedures provided in section 10-81, appeal of license denial, suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 10-80. - License revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police shall revoke a license issued under this article for the following reasons: 
(1)  The licensee's license has been suspended more than twice during a twelve-month period; 
(2)  The licensed business was operated during a period of time when the license was suspended; 
(3)  A licensee omitted or gave false or misleading information on the license application, including, previous license revocation or suspensions, or convictions or deferred adjudication for misdemeanors and felonies constituting a specified criminal act; the fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license; 
(4)  A licensee has been convicted of, or received an order for deferred adjudication, for a felony or misdemeanor constituting a specified criminal act; 
(5)  A licensee or an employee has allowed possession, use, or sale of a controlled substance on the premises; 
(6)  A licensee or an employee has allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in Section 21.01, Texas Penal Code; or 
(8)  On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons committed specified criminal act in or on the licensee's premises; or 
(b)  The chief of police shall revoke a license issued under this article for a period of one (1) year. 
(c)  A licensee subject to revocation shall have the right to appeal the revocation under the procedures provided in section 10-81, appeal of license denial, suspension or revocation. 
(d)  A licensee that has had a license revoked shall be subject to the same license criteria required of any applicant applying for a new license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 10-81. - Appeal of license denial, suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Appeal. The applicant may appeal an unfavorable decision of the chief of police by filing a written petition with the city secretary requesting a hearing on the denial, suspension, or revocation of the license within ten (10) calendar days of the date the applicant receives notification of the chief of police's decision. The city council shall serve as the appeals board. The appeal shall be scheduled within twenty (20) calendar days of the date the petition is received in the office of the city clerk. The city secretary shall give written notice to the applicant of the time and place for the hearing on the applicant's appeal at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled date of hearing. 
(b)  Provisional license. During the appeal of a license denial, suspension, or revocation, the applicant shall be permitted to operate with a provisional license until the final disposition of the appeal proceedings before the city council. The provisions of this article shall fully apply to a provisional license. 
(c)  Deferring action on proceedings. If the applicant has filed an appeal with the zoning board of adjustments, to contest the decision of the planning director regarding any standard governing a sexually oriented business, or a variance request by the applicant is pending before the board, the city council may defer action on the license application pending resolution of the appeal or variance request by the board, but shall take up the matter at the first regular meeting of the city council following the board's decision. 
(d)  Decision. The city council shall issue a decision with findings within ten (10) calendar days after any hearing held in accordance with this section. The decision on appeal shall be governed by the same standards as that for the original decision-maker. The minutes of the city council meeting shall show the action taken on the license, and if the city council acts favorably on the appeal of the license, the city council shall direct the chief of police to issue the license. 
(e)  Notification of decision. If the appeal of the license denial, suspension or revocation is denied, the applicant shall be immediately notified by registered or certified mail to the address provided on the application, and the letter of notification shall state the basis for such denial. 
(f)  Judicial review. Upon denial of the appeal of the license denial, suspension, or revocation by the city council, an applicant may seek judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 10-82. - Inspection of premises. 
Inspections. Any sexually oriented business shall be deemed to have consented to periodic entry into and inspection of the business premises by appropriate city officials and inspection of only those business records necessary for the purpose of determining whether such business and persons are in compliance with the city's Code of Ordinances. This entry and inspection shall take place at any time the business is occupied or open for business. 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 10-83. - Standards of conduct and operation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented business, or any owner, manager, server, entertainer or employee thereof, or any customer of any sexually oriented business, while on or about the premises of the business, to fail to adhere to the standards of conduct and operation: 
(b)  Standards applicable to all sexually oriented businesses. The following standards apply to all sexually oriented business: 
(1)  Establishment license. All sexually oriented businesses shall post the license issued under this article in a conspicuous, easily viewable location, at eye level, at the main cash register for the business and lighted in a manner for ease of inspection; 
(2)  Manager on duty. All sexually oriented businesses shall have a licensed manager on duty at all times the business is open to the public for any purpose and said manager's name shall be posted in a conspicuous, easily viewable location, at eye level, at the main cash register for the business and lighted in a manner for ease of inspection; 
(3)  Employee records. All sexually oriented businesses shall maintain a current list of all employees (contract or otherwise) along with their completed employment application and photo readily accessible for inspection within the premises; 
(4)  Licenses available for managers and entertainers. Each manager issued a license under this ordinance shall, at all times when on the premises of the licensed business, have said license in his or her possession. The license for each entertainer shall be retained for ready inspection on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(5)  Age restriction. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted on the premises of any sexually oriented business; 
(6)  Interior observation. The interior of all sexually oriented businesses shall be configured in such a manner that offers an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises excluding restrooms; 
(7)  Restrooms. No restroom may contain any video equipment; 
(8)  Security cameras. Parking areas surrounding the sexually oriented businesses shall be continually monitored and said recordings from security cameras shall be maintained for a period of at least thirty (30) days; 
(9)  Exterior observation. The premises of all sexually oriented businesses shall be designed as to ensure that the interior of the premises is not observable from the exterior of the building; 
(10)  Exterior display. No sexually oriented business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of sexually oriented entertainers engaged in sexually oriented entertainment or any depiction relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any exterior source by display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening; 
(11)  Specified criminal acts and specified sexual activities prohibited. No owner, manager, employee, independent contractor, server, entertainer or a customer shall engage in any specified criminal act or any specified sexual activity on the premises of the business; 
(12)  Semi-nude or nude or simulated nudity. No person, including sexually oriented entertainers, shall be semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity, or nude or in a state of nudity, or in a state of simulated nudity, while on the premises of a sexually oriented business licensed under this article; 
(13)  Alcohol consumption. Consumption of alcohol on the premises of a sexually oriented business is strictly prohibited; and 
(14)  Posting of age restriction. A sign shall be posted at each entrance to a sexually oriented business stating, "It is unlawful for a person under eighteen (18) years old to enter this location." 
(c)  Standards for sexually oriented media store or retail store shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Separate room. If a business offers for sale or rent other media and/or merchandise, sexually oriented media and/or merchandise shall be kept in a separate room physically and visually separate from the remainder of the store by an opaque wall reaching at least eight (8) feet high or to the ceiling, whichever is less; 
(2)  Age limit. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted entry into a room containing sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise; 
(3)  Access. If a business offers for sale or rent other media and/or merchandise, access to the room containing sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be through a solid door, accessed by an electronic control device controlled and monitored by a clerk through direct visual control and posted with a sign clearly stating that no one under the age of eighteen (18) shall enter the room; 
(4)  Location. If a business offers for sale or rent other media and/or merchandise, the entrance to the room containing the sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be located so that it is as far as reasonably practicable from media and/or merchandise likely to be of interest to children; 
(5)  Room size. Any room wherein sexually oriented media and/or merchandise is offered for sale or rent shall be in an area containing at least six hundred (600) square feet and having no walls, dividers, curtains, screens, shades or other similar devices to obscure any part of the room from being monitored by the manager, unless it is to separate the sexually oriented merchandise and/or media from nonsexually oriented merchandise or media; 
(6)  On-site entertainment prohibited. At no time shall the store provide any type of sexually oriented on-site entertainment or show any type of sexually oriented electronic imagery on the premises. 
(7)  Displays. No displays of sexually oriented media, merchandise or images shall be visible from outside the room containing sexually oriented media and/or merchandise or from the exterior of the business; and 
(8)  Lighting. Any business that offers for sale or rent sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be well lit at a lighting level of at least thirty (30) foot candles measured three (3) feet from the floor; and 
(9)  Monitoring. Activities in any room having sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be monitored at all times by a store clerk through a video system located at the clerk's counter. 
(d)  Standards for sexually oriented motion picture theater shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Presentation area. All screenings of motion pictures, videos or other media shall occur in a room open to all customers of the establishment and containing at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area. No walls, dividers, curtains, screens, shades or other similar devices shall be used to obscure any part of the screening room; 
(2)  Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least five (5) foot-candles as measured at the floor; 
(3)  Seating. Seating shall consist of individual, theater-style chairs (maximum seat width twenty (20) inches), with solid arms separating the chairs. No couches, benches, portable chairs, beds, loose cushions or mattresses, or other forms of seating shall be provided. Separate spaces for wheelchairs shall be provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of the building code and the Americans with Disabilities Act; and, 
(4)  Sexually oriented merchandise or media. No sexually oriented motion picture theatre shall sell or rent sexually oriented merchandise or media. 
(e)  Standards for a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub shall be subject to the following additional standards: 
(1)  Room. All customer-related activities and entertainment shall take place in a room of at least six hundred (600) square feet and in a room that has an unobstructed view by all persons from any part of such room; 
(2)  Stage. All sexually oriented entertainment shall take place on stage elevated at least eighteen (18) inches above the surrounding floor area, with a minimum area of one hundred (100) square feet, and with a horizontal separation of at least sixty (60) inches between the edge of the stage and the nearest space to which customers have access. The horizontal separation shall be physically enforced by a partial wall, rail, or other physical barrier measuring a minimum of four (4) feet in height; 
(3)  Access. The manager and/or sexually oriented entertainer shall prohibit any person other than a licensed entertainer to occupy the stage area; 
(4)  Tip. All tips for sexually oriented entertainment shall be collected in containers that are accessible to customers; 
(5)  Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least fifteen (15) foot-candles as measured three (3) feet from the floor; 
(6)  Seating. Seating shall consist of chairs or open booths; No couches, beds, loose cushions or mattresses, or other forms of seating shall be provided; and 
(7)  Sexually oriented merchandise or media. No sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub or motion picture theatre shall sell or rent sexually oriented merchandise or media. 
(8)  Security. At all times the business is open and for an hour after closing, there shall be on-site a licensed peace officer employed by the business owner who holds a valid and current license (in good standing) issued by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education. The peace officer's duty shall be to assist in maintaining order and to report criminal activity or behavior. 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 10-84. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city may enforce this article by any methods not inconsistent with state law and City Charter. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this article commits a class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  Any person operating a sexually oriented business without a license or with an expired license, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00). 
(d)  Any person working as a sexually oriented entertainer or manager of a sexually oriented business without a license or with an expired license, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(e)  Any person violating any other provision of this article, upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 2010-419, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Secs. 10-85—10-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES  
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 10-90. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the welfare of the citizens of the city by monitoring credit access businesses in an effort to reduce abusive and predatory lending practices. To this end, this article establishes a registration program for credit access businesses, imposes restrictions on extensions of consumer credit made by credit access businesses, and imposes recordkeeping requirements on credit access businesses. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 10-91. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
Certificate of registration means a certificate of registration issued by the director under this article to the owner or operator of a credit access business. 
City means the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
Consumer means an individual who is solicited to purchase or retain, or who purchases or retains, the services of a credit access business. 
Consumer's language of preference is the language the consumer understands best regardless if it is English, Spanish or any other language. 
Credit access business has the meaning given that term in section 393.601 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended. 
Deferred presentment transaction has the meaning given that term in section 393.601 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended. 
Director means the director of the department or other designated unit by the city manager to enforce and administer the provisions of this ordinance and includes any representatives, agents, or department employees designated by the director. 
Extension of consumer credit has the meaning given that term in section 393.001 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended. 
Motor vehicle title loan has the meaning given that term in section 393.601 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended. 
Person means any individual, corporation, organization, partnership, association, financial institution, or any other legal entity. 
Registrant means a person issued a certificate of registration for a credit access business under this article and includes all owners and operators of the credit access business identified in the registration application filed under this article. 
State license means a license to operate a credit access business issued by the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under Chapter 393, Subchapter G of the Texas Finance Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION OF CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 10-92. - Registration required. 
A person may not operate or conduct business as a credit access business without a valid certificate of registration issued by the city. A certificate of registration is required for each physically separate credit access business location in the corporate limits of the city. A person commits an offense if the person acts, operates, or conducts business as a credit access business without a valid certificate of registration. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 10-93. - Registration application. 
(a)  To obtain a certificate of registration for a credit access business, a person must submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the director. The application must contain the following: 
(1)  The name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The business or trade name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number and telephone number of the credit access business. 
(3)  The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners/officers of the credit access business and other persons with a financial interest in the credit access business, and the nature and extent of each person's interest in the credit access business. 
(4)  A copy of a current, valid state license held by the credit access business pursuant to chapter 393, subchapter G, of the Texas Finance Code. 
(5)  A copy of a current, valid certificate of occupancy showing that the credit access business is in compliance with the city's Code of Ordinances and Zoning Code. 
(6)  A non-refundable application fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(b)  An applicant or registrant shall notify the director within forty-five (45) days after any material change in the information contained in the application for a certificate of registration, including, but not limited to, any change of address and any change in the status of the state license held by the applicant or registrant. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 10-94. - Issuance and display of certificate of registration; presentment on demand. 
(a)  The director shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed forty-five (45) days, after receiving a completed application and confirmation of the information provided therein. 
(b)  A certificate of registration issued under this section must be conspicuously displayed upon the premises of the credit access business and clearly visible to the public. The certificate of registration must be presented upon request of the director, city attorney, or any peace officer for examination. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 10-95. - Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration. 
(a)  A certificate of registration expires on the earlier of: 
(1)  December 31 of each year; or 
(2)  The date revocation, or other termination of the registrant's state license. 
(b)  A certificate of registration may be renewed by making application in accordance with section 10-93. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the registration. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 10-96. - Transfer or assignment. 
A certificate of registration for a credit access business is not transferable or assignable. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
DIVISION 3. - LOCATION OF CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 10-97. - Location of credit access businesses. 
Any lot containing a credit access business establishment shall be located pursuant to and in conformity with the provisions of chapter 23, article 4, of the Code of Ordinances of the city, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
DIVISION 4. - MISCELLANEOUS REQUIREMENTS FOR CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES 
 
Sec. 10-98. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  A credit access business shall maintain a complete set of records of all extensions of consumer credit made by the credit access business, which must include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the consumer. 
(2)  The principal amount of cash actually advanced. 
(3)  The documentation used to establish a consumer's income under section 10-99. 
(4)  The length of the extension of consumer credit, including the number of installments and renewals. 
(5)  The fees charged by the credit access business to arrange for obtain an extension of consumer credit. 
(b)  A credit access business shall maintain a copy of each written agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer). 
(c)  A credit access business shall maintain copies of all quarterly reports filed with the Texas consumer credit commissioner under section 393.627 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended. 
(d)  The records required to be maintained by a credit access business under this section must be retained for at least three (3) years and made available for inspection by the city upon request during the usual and customary business hours of the credit access business. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 10-99. - Restrictions on extensions of consumer credit. 
(a)  The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a deferred presentment transaction may not exceed twenty (20) percent of the consumer's gross monthly income. 
(b)  The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a motor vehicle title loan may not exceed the lesser of: 
(1)  Three (3) percent of the consumer's gross annual income; or 
(2)  Seventy (70) percent of the retail value of the motor vehicle. 
(c)  A credit access business shall use a paycheck or other documentation establishing income to determine a consumer's income. 
(d)  An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for repayment in installments may not be payable in more than four (4) installments. Proceeds from each installment must be used to repay at least twenty-five (25) percent of the principal amount of the extension of consumer credit. An extension of consumer credit that provides for repayment in installments may not be refinanced or renewed. 
(e)  An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for a single lump sum repayment may not be refinanced or renewed more than three (3) times. Proceeds from each refinancing or renewal must be used to repay at least twenty-five (25) percent of the principal amount of the original extension of consumer credit. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, an extension of consumer credit that is made to a consumer within seven (7) days after a previous extension of consumer credit has been paid by the consumer will constitute a refinancing or renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 10-100. - Consumer understanding of agreement required. 
(a)  Every agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer), must be written in the consumer's language of preference. 
(b)  Every credit access business location must maintain on its premises, to be available for use by consumers, agreements in both the English and Spanish languages. 
(c)  For every consumer who cannot read, every agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer) must be read to the consumer in its entirety in the consumer's language of preference, prior to the consumer's signature. 
(d)  For every consumer who cannot read, every disclosure and notice required by law must be read to the consumers in its entirety in the consumer's language of preference, prior to the consumer's signature. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 10-101. - Referral to consumer credit counseling. 
A credit access business shall provide a form, to be prescribed by the director, to each consumer seeking assistance in obtaining an extension of consumer credit which references non-profit agencies that provide financial education and training programs and agencies with cash assistance programs. The form will also contain information regarding extensions of consumer credit, and must include the information required by section 10-98(a)(1)-(5) of this ordinance specific to the loan agreement with the consumer. If the director has prescribed a form in the consumer's language of preference, the form must be provided in the consumer's language of preference. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
DIVISION 5. - VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES AND DEFENSES 
 
Sec. 10-102. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required under this article, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense each day or portion of a day during which a violation is committed, permitted or continued. 
(b)  An offense under this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article and need not be proved. 
(d)  The penalties provided for in subsection (b) are in addition to any other enforcement remedies that the city may have under its code of ordinances or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 10-103. - Defenses. 
It is a defense to prosecution under this article that at the time of the alleged offense the person was not required to be licensed by the state as a credit access business under chapter 393, subchapter G, of the Texas Finance Code, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2016-610, § 1, 12-13-16)  
Secs. 10-104, 10-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DONATION COLLECTION CONTAINERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-633, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 14, 2017, repealed the former Art. VII, §§ 10-106—10-112, and enacted a new Art. VII as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2015-570, 9-22-15. 
 
Sec. 10-106. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
Agent means a person who has contractual or other written authorization of a property owner to act on the owner's behalf for all activities and transactions regarding the property. 
City means the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
Donation collection container or donation bin means any attended or unattended receptacle made of metal, plastic, wood or other material for permanent or temporary use, designed or intended for the collection of unwanted or salvageable textiles, clothing, shoes, books, household goods, or other items of personal property. 
Lessee means a person who leases property from an owner with full authorization to control all activities on the owner's property. 
Operator means any person or organization who owns, operates, or is otherwise in control of a collection container located in the city. 
Owner means the person having legal title to property and also any and all persons shown as an owner of a property on the current county appraisal district records. 
Parcel or premises means a single lot or tract of land. 
Person means an individual, partnership, association, firm, company, corporation or organization of any kind. 
Principal activity means an activity that fulfills the primary function of an establishment, institution, or other entity. 
Principal building means a main building that is occupied by a principal activity. 
Registrant means any person, business entity or corporation that registers a donation collection container and is issued a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
Uptown overlay means the area within the boundaries of FM 1382, North Clark Road, Highway 67, Tidwell Street, Cedarview Drive, BNSF Railroad Right-of-Way, Bradenburg Street, Carrell Street, West Belt Line Road, Meadowridge Drive, Harrington Drive, North Broad Street, Wylie Street, and Straus Road. 
(Ord. No. 2017-633, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 10-107. - Purpose. 
The city has experienced a proliferation of collection containers and their placement in required parking spaces, required landscaped areas, and in or near residential zoning districts of the city, often without the property owner's permission. The proliferation of these containers contribute to visual clutter, and in areas throughout the city, collection containers have contributed to blight due to graffiti and poor maintenance, and the accumulation of debris and excess items outside of the collection containers. The purpose of these regulations is to promote the health, safety, and/or welfare of the public, and protect the property rights of the owners of premises on which the collection containers are located, by providing minimum blight-related performance standards for the operation of collection containers, including establishing criteria to ensure that: 
(1)  Material is not allowed to accumulate outside of the collection containers; 
(2)  The collection containers remain free of graffiti and blight; 
(3)  The collection containers are maintained in sanitary conditions; 
(4)  The collection containers are not placed without the approval of premises owners; 
(5)  Contact information is readily available so that the operators can be contacted if there are any blight-related questions or concerns, and that operators properly report information concerning the diversion of materials from landfills. 
This article regulates the size, number, placement, installation and maintenance of collection containers, as is necessary to accomplish the foregoing purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-633, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 10-108. - Permitted donation collection containers. 
(a)  A person or organization is permitted to place a collection container on a parcel in accordance with the provisions of this section: 
(1)  A donation collection container is only permitted on a lot that also contains a principal building that contains at least one (1) operating business or other lawful, ongoing activity. 
(2)  No more than one (1) donation collection container is permitted per parcel unless documented evidence is submitted to the director of code enforcement that a second bin is required due to the volume of items delivered to the site. A donation collection container must be operating at the site for at least ninety (90) days in order to establish that a second donation collection container is required. Both donation collection containers shall have the same operator/owner. 
(3)  The donation collection container(s) shall be appropriately located so as not to interfere with visibility triangles, on-site vehicle or pedestrian circulation, required setbacks, landscaping, parking, and any other requirements that may have been imposed as part of the site plan approval for the premises, and shall be placed on an improved surface. 
(4)  The donation collection container(s) shall be of the type that are enclosed by use of a receiving door and locked so that the contents of the bin(s) may not be accessed by anyone other than those responsible for the retrieval of the contents. 
(5)  Each donation collection container shall not cover a ground surface area in excess of five (5) feet by five (5) feet (twenty-five (25) square feet), nor be more than six (6) feet in height. 
(6)  No collection container shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet from any other collection container. 
(7)  Each collection container must be serviced not less than once weekly between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays and 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekends. Servicing shall include maintenance of the container, the removal of collected material, and the abatement of graffiti, litter or other nuisance condition prohibited by the Cedar Hill Code of Ordinances. 
(8)  The area around the collection container is the responsibility of both the owner of the container and the property owner and must be maintained free of trash, debris, and unwanted items. 
(9)  Donation collection containers are only allowed in the I-industrial, IP-industrial park, C-commercial and LR-local retail zoning districts, save and except for local retail zoning within the uptown overlay. No collection container shall be located within three hundred (300) feet of a residentially zoned premises. 
(10)  A donation collection container shall not be located within a public right-of-way. 
(11)  A donation collection container shall not be placed in a parking space required by the site plan for the premises. 
(12)  A donation collection container shall not be located within a setback of fifty (50) feet from any public roadway. 
(b)  If any donation collection container is placed without a permit, or if an inspection reveals that such container is not in compliance with this section, enforcement and abatement shall take place as generally provided under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-633, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 10-109. - Permit required. 
(a)  (1)  With the exception of donation collection containers described in subsection (2) below, a permit shall be required for each donation collection container placed and operated within the city. The permit shall be issued by the code enforcement department, within thirty (30) business days if it is determined by the code enforcement department that: 
a.  Each collection container is for a lawful use; 
b.  The proper types of collection containers are being used as described by this section; 
c.  The collection containers are being placed in a proper location as described by this section; 
d.  The owner, agent or lessee of the premises has provided written consent to place a collection container on the premises; 
e.  Name, address and phone number of the person or organization operating the collection container will be displayed on each donation collection container. 
(2)  Donation collection containers that are entirely enclosed within a principal building or are accessory to a principal activity on a property owned or leased by the operator of the container shall not require a permit. However, donation collection containers that are accessory to a principal activity on a property owned or leased by the operator of the container shall meet all of the requirements of section 10-108 of this article. 
(b)  A person or organization desiring a donation collection container permit under this article shall file an application with the code enforcement department on a form furnished by the code enforcement department. 
(c)  The application shall require the following: 
(1)  The applicant's name, business name and business address. 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership, the full name and residence address of each partner. 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation, or other form of legal entity, the full name and principal business address of the entity, and the name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of an authorized representative of the entity. 
(4)  A description of the donation collection container(s) to be covered by the permit. 
(5)  If the applicant is not the owner, agent or lessee of the parcel upon which the donation collection container(s) is to be located, the written consent of the owner, agent or lessee of the parcel shall be attached to the application. 
(6)  A site plan containing: 
a.  The location and dimensions of the parcel boundaries; 
b.  The location of all buildings; 
c.  Distance between the proposed collection container and parcel lines and buildings; and 
d.  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed driveways, garages, carports, parking spaces, maneuvering aisles or lanes; pavement and pavement striping/marking. 
(7)  The signature of the applicant and the owner, agent or lessee of the parcel acknowledging that they shall be equally responsible for compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations relating to collection containers and property maintenance. 
(d)  A permit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) shall be assessed for each new or additional collection container placed within the city. The permit shall expire on each annual anniversary of the permit and a renewal permit fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be required for each donation collection container. Each donation collection container shall display a current approved sticker provided by code enforcement department. The relocation of a permitted donation collection container on the same parcel during a permit year, that otherwise conforms to the requirements of this article, will not require a permit fee until the annual renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-633, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 10-110. - Enforcement; violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor which, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). However, a fine for the violation of a provision of this chapter that governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping or refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that an unmitigated violation of this article is committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate, punishable offense. A violation of this article includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Unpermitted placement of a collection container; 
(2)  Failure to service a collection container as required under this article; or 
(3)  Placing a collection container on the premises of another person without that person's consent. 
(b)  Nothing is this article shall preclude the city's pursuit of any and all other remedies allowed under civil and criminal statutes, and in equity, to address conditions which are treated in this article, under the theory of public nuisance or public health and safety. Neither shall the city be required, nor prohibited, to issue criminal citations before, after, or during any proceeding prescribed in this article. Specifically, in addition to provisions of this article, the city asserts full authority to exercise its right to remedies under all provisions of the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, including, but not limited to, Chapter 54, Subchapter B, Municipal Health and Safety Ordinances, in prosecution of civil suits for enforcement, injunctive relief, and civil penalties to remedy conditions of public concern described in this article. 
(c)  If a registrant receives more than three (3) convictions within one (1) calendar year the permit may be suspended by the director of code enforcement. The director of code enforcement shall request a hearing with the building appeals and advisory board for the permit to be revoked and, if applicable, the nuisance abated. 
(d)  If a registrant receives more than three (3) convictions within one (1) calendar year, the renewal of the permit may be refused by the director. The director of code enforcement shall give notice to the registrant in writing of the refusal of renewal. The registrant may appeal the decision of the director of code enforcement to the building appeals and advisory board in writing with fifteen (15) days from the notice of refusal of renewal. In the event that the building appeals and advisory board upholds the refusal of renewal the owner shall have seven (7) days to remove the donation collection container from the property it is located on. 
(Ord. No. 2017-633, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 10-111. - Joint and several liability for violations. 
The registrant, owner, agent, lessee or any other person in control of the property where the collection container is located and the person or entity which owns, maintains, or operates the collection container shall be jointly and severally liable for a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-633, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Sec. 10-112. - Appeals. 
The owner or registrant may appeal the decision of the director of code enforcement to suspend or deny the issuance or renewal of a permit to the building appeals and advisory board. Any such appeal must be made in writing and within thirty (30) days following the date of the decision to suspend or deny the issuance or renewal of a permit. The decision of the board shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2017-633, § 2, 11-14-17)  
Chapter 11 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Moving and demolition of buildings, § 4-161 et seq.; civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 5; illegal dumping, § 9-1; emergency ambulance service, § 6-71 et seq.; junked vehicles and junked trailers, § 9-106 et seq.; municipal court, Ch. 12; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; vehicle operation in parks, § 15-77; planning, Ch. 16; police, Ch. 17; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19; subdivision regulations, Ch. 20; vehicles for hire, Ch. 22. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 11-1. - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "Traffic Code of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas."  
Sec. 11-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. Whenever any words and phrases used in this chapter are not defined in this section but are defined in the state laws regulating traffic or the operation of vehicles, any such definition in such state law shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this chapter. 
All-terrain vehicle means a motor vehicle equipped with a saddle for the use of a rider, designed to propel itself with four or less tires in contact with the ground, designed by the manufacturer for off-road use by the operator only; and not designed by the manufacturer for farming or lawn care. 
Authorized emergency vehicle means vehicles of fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles, public and private ambulances for which permits have been issued by the state board of health, emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the governing body of an incorporated city, private vehicles operated by volunteer firemen or certified emergency medical services volunteers while answering a fire alarm or responding to a medical emergency, and vehicles operated by blood banks or tissue banks, accredited or approved under the laws of this state or the United States, while making emergency deliveries of blood, drugs or medicines, or organs. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, §2(d). 
Bicycle means every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than fourteen (14) inches in diameter. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 2(f). 
Bus means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than twenty-three (23) passengers and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle other than a taxicab, designed and used for transportation of persons for compensation. 
Commercial motor vehicle means any motor vehicle designed or used for the transportation of property, or for delivery purposes, operating primarily for profit, not including a passenger automobile, passenger bus, motorcycle, panel delivery truck, pick-up truck, or vehicle used in the delivery of the United States mail. 
Crosswalk means: 
(1)  That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of the traversable roadway. 
(2)  Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 15. 
Driver means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 10(c). 
Intersection means: 
(1)  The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) highways which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. 
(2)  Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. If such intersecting highway also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
(3)  The junction of an alley with a street or highway shall not constitute an intersection. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 14. 
Loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles doing the unloading of passengers or materials. 
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider an designed to propel itself with not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 2(c). 
Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter they shall mean standard time. 
Official traffic-control device means all signs, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purposes of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 18(a). 
Oversized commercial vehicle means any vehicle designated below, or any vehicle designed for the transport of property or cargo with a gross vehicle weight or registered weight, as those terms are defined by the Texas Transportation Code, of more than seventy-five hundred (7,500) pounds, the equivalent of 3.75 tons, or any vehicle that is more than twenty-two (22) feet in length from end to end, more than eight (8) feet in width at its widest point, or more than eight (8) feet in height at their highest point, including but not limited to the following designated vehicles: dump trucks, truck-tractors, tractor-trailers, semi-trailers, concrete mixing trucks, stake-bed trucks, buses, trailers, or other similar vehicles. The term "oversized vehicle" shall exclude any self-contained recreational vehicle which has a kitchen, bath or sleeping quarters and is designed for recreational purposes. 
Park or parking, when prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the loading or unloading of merchandise or passengers. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 20E. 
Passenger loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Pedestrian means any person afoot. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 10(b). 
Police officer means every officer of the police department or any other officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
Private road or driveway means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
Railroad means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 7(a). 
Railroad train means a steam or diesel engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
Recreational vehicle/travel trailer/camper means a vehicular portable structure designed for a temporary or short term occupancy for travel, recreation or vacation. This term does not include mobile homes, which are designed for year-round occupancy. 
Right-of-way means the right of one (1) vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 20. 
Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 20. 
Safety zone means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 16. 
School crossing guard means a responsible person over the age of eighteen (18) years who is designated by a local authority to direct traffic in school crossing zones for the protection of children going to and leaving from a public or private primary or secondary school, or any combination thereof. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 20K. 
School crossing zone means a crosswalk designated upon any street by a local authority to facilitate safe crossing of the street by children going to or leaving from a public or private elementary or secondary school, or any combination thereof. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 20L. 
Semi-trailer means every vehicle without motor power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so construed that some of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by the motor vehicle, including but not limited to lowboys, goosenecks, fifth wheel, and other similar vehicles. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 13(d). 
Stop, when required, means complete cessation of movement. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 20G. 
Stop or stopping, when prohibited, means any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 20H. 
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 13(a). 
Tractor-trailer means a combination of a truck-tractor and a semi-trailer. 
Traffic means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 19. 
Traffic-control sign or device means all signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of the city council for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
Traffic-control signal means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 18(b). 
Trailer means every vehicle without motor power, designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure exclusively and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight and of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle, including but not limited to pop-up campers, tent trailers, flatbeds, and other similar vehicles. 
Truck-tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing/hauling other vehicles and not construed to carry a load other than part of the weight of the vehicle and load being drawn or that is engaged with a semi-trailer in the transportation of vehicles and that transports the vehicles on part of the truck tractor. 
Vehicle means every mechanical device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn or moved upon a street, highway, waterway, or airway, except devices moved exclusively by human power, or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, including but not limited to motor vehicle, boat, boat trailer, stock trailer, recreational vehicle, truck, camper, camper top, travel trailer, utility trailer, truck-tractor, trailer or semi-trailer. 
(Ord. No. 85-754, § 1, 2-12-85; Ord. No. 97-345, § 1, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 98-81, § 1, 7-14-98) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 11-3. - Signs, signals and devices to be placed by city manager. 
The city manager and personnel acting under his/her authority are authorized and directed to place and maintain traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required and as he/she or they may deem necessary to regulate traffic under city ordinances or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Ord. No. 2000-47, § 1, 11-14-00)  
Sec. 11-4. - General duties of police department. 
It shall be the duty of the police department of this city to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Cross reference— Police generally, Ch. 17.  
Sec. 11-5. - Obedience to police officers and school crossing guards. 
(a)  No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer invested by law or this chapter with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(b)  No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction to stop and yield to pedestrians given by any school crossing guard while in the performance of his duties in a designated school crossing zone. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 23.  
Sec. 11-6. - Directing traffic by police officers and fire department. 
Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic, either in person or by means of visible or audible signals in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department or fire department, or both, may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(2).  
Sec. 11-7. - Application of chapter—To governmental vehicles. 
The provisions of this chapter which are applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the highways and streets shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, this state or any county, city, town, district or any other political subdivision of this state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this chapter with reference to authorized emergency vehicles. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 24(f).  
Sec. 11-8. - Same—To drivers of authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property; 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of section 124 of article 6701d, Revised Civil Statutes, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle that is used for law enforcement purposes may operate without using the emergency warning devices required by this subsection only when the driver is responding to an emergency call or when he or she is in pursuit of a suspected violator of the law and he or she has probable cause to believe that: 
(1)  Knowledge of his or her presence will cause the suspect to destroy or lose evidence of a suspected felony; 
(2)  Knowledge of his or her presence will cause the suspect to cease a suspected continuing felony before the driver has acquired sufficient evidence to establish grounds for arrest; 
(3)  Knowledge of his or her presence will cause the suspect to evade apprehension or identification of the suspect or his or her vehicle; or 
(4)  Traffic conditions on a multilaned roadway are such that movements of motorists in response to the emergency warning devices may increase the potential for a collision or may unreasonably extend the duration of the pursuit. 
(d)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle that is used for law enforcement purposes may not operate without using the emergency warning devices as provided above unless he or she has first notified a designated office of his or her intention to operate without such devices. The designated office to which such notification is made shall keep an accurate record of the exact time notification is received. 
(e)  The forgoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, Ch. 9. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 24(b)—(f).  
Sec. 11-9. - Same—To street workmen and equipment. 
Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles and other equipment while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway but shall apply to such persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 24(a).  
Sec. 11-10. - Same—To pushcarts, bicycles, animal-drawn vehicles. 
Every person propelling any pushcart, riding animals, riding a bicycle or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 25.  
Sec. 11-11. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. 
No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any scooter, coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.  
Sec. 11-12. - Signals by hand and arm or by signal lamps. 
(a)  Any stop or turn signal when required herein shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise provided in paragraph (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required signal shall be given by, signal lamps when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds two (2) inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds fourteen (14) feet. The latter measurement shall apply to any single vehicle, also to any combination of vehicles. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 69.  
Sec. 11-13. - Method of giving hand-and-arm signals. 
All signals required in this chapter given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 70.  
Sec. 11-14. - Opening and closing vehicle doors. 
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 176.  
Sec. 11-15. - Blocking intersections and crosswalks. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.  
Sec. 11-16. - Notices or summons—Failure to obey. 
(a)  Any person who violates his written promise to appear, given to an officer upon an arrest for any traffic violation is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge on which he was originally arrested. 
(b)  Any driver of a motor vehicle who unlawfully neglects to answer to the charges set forth in a written notice affixed to such motor vehicle by a police officer as provided by authority of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge for which such notice was originally given.  
Sec. 11-17. - Same—Giving wrong name or address. 
It shall be unlawful for any person when giving a written promise to appear, or given a written notice by any police officer to appear before the municipal court to answer for an offense against any law of this state, or any ordinance of the city, to give an assumed or fictitious name or a false place of residence or address, or any other than the true name and the true place of his residence or address, upon the request of such officer.  
Sec. 11-18. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Amount of fine. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(b)  Payment of fine. Any person who has received any notice to appear in answer to a traffic charge under this chapter may, within the time specified in the notice, appear at the traffic violations bureau and answer the charge set forth in such notice by paying a prescribed fine, and, in writing pleading guilty to the charge, waiving a hearing in court and giving power of attorney to the person in charge of the bureau to make such a plea and pay such fine in court. 
(c)  Statutory bail for court appearance. Any person who has been guilty of three (3) or more traffic violations, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, within the preceding twelve (12) months shall not be permitted to pay a fine at the traffic violations bureau, and he must make statutory bail for appearance in court. 
(d)  Disposition of fines and forfeitures. All fines or forfeitures collected upon a plea of guilty or upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury and deposited in the general fund.  
Sec. 11-18.1. - Delinquent fines. 
(a)  Collection of fees on delinquent fines. The municipal court of the city is hereby authorized to collect a fee on delinquent fines resulting from motor vehicle misdemeanor offenses under any statute or municipal ordinance that regulates: (1) Parking or stopping of a motor vehicle; (2) Driver's conduct or condition while operating a motor vehicle; or (3) The condition of a motor vehicle while it is being operated. 
(b)  Time when fine delinquent. A fine is delinquent and subject to a collection of a fee if the fine has not been paid before the thirty-first day after it is due. 
(c)  Fee for delinquent fine. The fee for each delinquent fine shall be the lesser of: 
(1)  Twenty (20) percent of the amount of the fine; or 
(2)  Fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall upon conviction in the municipal court of the city be punished by a fine not exceeding the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 95-240, §§ 1—4, 9-26-95) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-240, §§ 1—4, adopted September 26, 1995, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 11-18.1 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 11-19. - Imposition of fees—For warrant, special expense. 
(a)  Warrant fees. The city council does hereby officially adopt article 45.06 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the State of Texas, as amended, and does hereby specifically adopt and prescribe a warrant fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest for an offense under section 38.11, Texas Penal Code, or under section 149, Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (article 6701(d), Revised Civil Statutes). 
(b)  Paid to city treasury. All warrant fees shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
(c)  Special expense fees. The municipal court of the city is hereby authorized to collect a special expense fee for services performed in cases in which the laws of the state require that a case be dismissed because of actions by or on behalf of the defendant which were subsequent to the date of the alleged offense. Such actions are specifically limited to compliance with the provisions of subsection (a), section 143A, Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (article 6701(d), Revised Civil Statutes). Such special expense fee shall be the sum of ten dollars ($10.00). It is hereby found and determined that the special expense fee of ten dollars ($10.00) is less than the actual expenses which would be incurred in connection with the services performed in such special cases, and therefore, the ten dollar ($10.00) fee is proper. 
(Ord. No. 87-921, §§ 1—3, 9-22-87) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-921, §§ 1—3, adopted Sept. 22, 1987, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as § 11-19 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 11-20. - Same—For driving safety course. 
(a)  Imposed. The municipal court is hereby authorized and empowered to collect a fee from any person requesting a driving safety course pursuant to section 143A, Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways (article 6702(d), Revised Civil Statutes, as amended). 
(b)  Paid to city treasury. Any person requesting a driving safety course shall be required to pay a fee in the municipal court in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00). Such fee shall be used to cover the cost of administering the appropriate sections of the state statutes regulating the applicability of driving safety course requests, and all of such fees shall be deposited in the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
(c)  Nonrefundability. If any person requesting a driving safety course does not take the course, such person shall not be entitled to a refund of such fee required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 87-922, §§ 1—3, 9-22-87) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-922, §§ 1—3, adopted Sept. 22, 1987, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as § 11-20 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 11-21. - Same—For making arrest without warrant, Class C misdemeanor. 
(a)  Imposed. A defendant convicted of a Class C misdemeanor in the municipal court shall pay the fee of three dollars ($3.00) for services performed in the case by a peace officer in making an arrest without warrant for the Class C misdemeanor. 
(b)  Assessed on conviction. The fee shall be assessed on conviction, regardless of whether the defendant was also arrested at the same time for another offense, and shall be assessed for each arrest made of a defendant arising out of the offense for which the defendant has been convicted. For the purpose of this section, the term "arrest" includes the issuance by a peace officer of a written notice to appear in court, following the defendant's alleged violation of a traffic law or municipal ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 87-923, §§ 1, 2, 9-22-87) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-923, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 22, 1987, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as § 11-21 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 11-22. - Same—For dismissal of proceedings on presentation of insurance. 
(a)  Authorization. Section 1C of the Texas Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act (article 6701(h), Revised Civil Statutes, as amended) provides that failure to maintain financial responsibility as defined by the act shall be punishable as a Class C misdemeanor, and such section imposes certain fines. The municipal court has been authorized to dismiss certain proceedings brought pursuant to this section upon presentation of proof of insurance by motorists charged with violation of such act. 
(b)  Imposed. The municipal court shall require payment of a ten dollar ($10.00) fee before dismissing any proceedings under Section 1C of the Texas Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act (article 6701(h), Revised Civil Statutes, as amended). The ten dollar ($10.00) fee collected by the municipal court pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the city treasury and may be used by the municipal court to defray expenses incurred in administering this section. 
(Ord. No. 87-925, §§ 1, 2, 9-22-87) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-925, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 22, 1987, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as § 11-22 at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 11-23—11-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 11-31. - Drive on right side of roadway; exceptions. 
(a)  Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
(2)  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three (3) marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; or 
(4)  Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic. 
(b)  Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(c)  Upon any roadway having four (4) or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as permitted under subsection (a)(2) hereof. However, this subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left turn into or out of an alley, private road, or driveway. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 52.  
Sec. 11-32. - Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions. 
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon the roadways having width for not more than one (1) line of traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 53.  
Sec. 11-33. - No passing zone. 
The city council is hereby authorized to determine by resolution those portions of any street or highway in the city limits where overtaking and passing or driving on the left side of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may, by appropriate signs or markings on or at the side of the roadway, indicate the beginning and ending of such zones. When such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to any ordinarily observant person every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
(Code 1976, §§ 17-111—17-113; Ord. No. 80-557, §§ 1—3, 4-8-80) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 58(a). 
Traffic Regulations reference—Miscellaneous traffic-control devices, Sched. IX(d).  
Sec. 11-34. - Overtaking a vehicle on the left. 
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules stated in this chapter: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(2)  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 54.  
Sec. 11-35. - When overtaking on the right permitted. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement not occupied by parked vehicles of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles in each direction; 
(3)  Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one (1) direction of movement, whether the roadway is free from obstruction and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway, except as provided in section 54A of article 6701d, Revised Civil Statutes. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 55.  
Sec. 11-36. - Driving left of center of roadway. 
(a)  No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible, and is free of oncoming traffic for sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable and in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within two hundred (200) feet of any approaching vehicle. 
(b)  No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  Where sight restriction is such that the section of highway being traversed lies within a no passing zone as determined and marked in accordance with section 11-33; 
(2)  When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing; 
(3)  When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel. 
(c)  The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway, nor to any driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road, or driveway. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, §§ 56, 57.  
Sec. 11-37. - Driving on roadways laned for traffic. 
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent with this chapter shall apply: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle shall drive as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and the vehicle shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes and provides for two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for making a left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official traffic-control devices. 
(3)  Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the direction of every such sign. 
(4)  Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 60.  
Sec. 11-38. - Driving on divided highways. 
Whenever any highway has been divided into two (2) roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated driving section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police officers. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover or intersection as established by public authority. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 62.  
Sec. 11-39. - Reckless driving. 
Every person who drives any vehicle in willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving and upon conviction shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 51.  
Sec. 11-40. - Emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle within a business or residential district emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 92.  
Sec. 11-41. - Overtaking and passing school bus. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway inside or outside of a business or residential district upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any school children shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on such school bus a visual signal as specified in section 124 of article 6701d, Revised Civil Statutes, and such driver shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion or is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the visual signals are no longer actuated. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
(Code 1976, § 17-21) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 104.  
Sec. 11-42. - Driving through garage, gasoline station. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating an automobile or other gasoline-propelled vehicle to drive same into or through any garage or gasoline station without coming to a full stop while in such garage or gasoline station.  
Sec. 11-43. - Starting parked vehicle. 
No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing or parked unless and until such movement can be made with safety. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 67.  
Sec. 11-44. - Following fire apparatus or ambulance. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped to answer a fire alarm. 
(b)  No driver of a vehicle, except a driver on official business, may follow closer than five hundred (500) feet behind an ambulance when the flashing red lights of the ambulance are operating. No driver of a vehicle may drive or park his vehicle at a place where an ambulance has been summoned for an emergency call in a manner calculated to interfere with the arrival or departure of the ambulance. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 100.  
Sec. 11-45. - Crossing fire hose. 
No driver of any vehicle shall drive over an unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 101.  
Sec. 11-46. - One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands. 
(a)  The city council may, by resolution, designate any highway or any separate roadway under its jurisdiction for one-way traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)  Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic the driver of a vehicle shall drive only in the direction designated. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall drive only to the right of such island. 
(Code 1976, § 17-32; Ord. No. 85-788, § 1, 5-28-85) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 59. 
Traffic Regulations reference—One-way streets, Sched. IV.  
Sec. 11-47. - Following too closely. 
(a)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when following another vehicle, maintain an assured clear distance between the two (2) vehicles, exercising due regard for the speed of such vehicles, traffic upon and conditions of the street or highway, so that such motor vehicle can be safely brought to a stop without colliding with the preceding vehicle, or veering into other vehicles, objects or persons on or near the street or highway. 
(b)  The driver of any motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residential district and which is following another motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle shall whenever conditions permit leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger, except that this shall not prevent a motor truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle from overtaking and passing any like vehicle or other vehicle. 
(c)  The drivers of motor vehicles driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residential district in a caravan or motorcade whether or not towing other vehicles shall drive so as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger. This provision shall not apply to funeral processions. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 61.  
Sec. 11-48. - Driving on sidewalk. 
No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 187.  
Sec. 11-49. - Limitations on backing. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same upon any shoulder or roadway of any controlled-access highway. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 173.  
Sec. 11-50. - Riding on motorcycles. 
A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one (1) person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two (2) persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the rear or side of the operator. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 174.  
Sec. 11-51. - Clinging to moving vehicle. 
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon any roadway. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 181.  
Sec. 11-52. - Displaying advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate any vehicle on any street within the corporate limits of the city for the primary purpose of displaying advertising.  
Sec. 11-53. - Operation of certain vehicles restricted. 
The city council hereby declares the act of operating an all-terrain vehicle or unregistered motorcycle on off-road, city controlled property within the city and outside the city limits of unincorporated areas for a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet, in any manner offensive or annoying to any other person whomever, to be and constitute a public nuisance, and such act is hereby declared to be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 85-754, § 2, 2-12-85; Ord. No. 95-381, § 2, 7-14-98)  
Sec. 11-54. - Cargo spillage unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any commercial motor vehicle upon a public street or highway within the corporate limits of the city, in such a manner as to permit any portion of the cargo of such vehicle, either liquid or solid cargo, to fall out of, spill from, or blow out of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 84-693, § 1, 2-14-84)  
Sec. 11-55. - Load limits; weighing authorized. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or park any vehicular load in excess of weight limits as posted on any streets, or portions thereof, as established by the city council from time to time. 
(b)  The city council does hereby authorize its city manager and the police chief, or either of them, to provide for the placement and direction of such signs, signals and traffic-control devices as are reasonably necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section. 
(c)  Any police officer of the city having reason to believe that the gross weight or axle load of a loaded motor vehicle is unlawful is authorized to weigh the same by means of portable or stationary scales furnished or approved by the department of agriculture. In the event the gross weight of such vehicle is found to exceed the maximum gross weight authorized by law, such police officer shall have the option to demand and require the operator or owner of such motor vehicle to unload such portion of the load as may be necessary to decrease the gross weight of such vehicle to the maximum authorized by law. In the event the axle load of any such vehicle be found to exceed the maximum authorized by law, such officer shall, at his option, demand and require the operator or owner thereof to rearrange his cargo, if possible, to bring such vehicle and load within the maximum axle load authorized herein; and if this cannot be done by rearrangement of said cargo, then such portion of the load as may be necessary to decrease the axle load to the maximum authorized by law shall be unloaded before such vehicle may be operated further over the public streets located wholly within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, such violation shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances, and each and every instance of the violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate punishment for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 84-693, §§ 2, 3, 2-14-84; Ord. No. 85-790, §§ 5—7, 6-25-85; Ord. No. 87-906, § 5, 3-24-87)  
Sec. 11-56. - Truck traffic in residential areas. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
Residential street or alley shall mean any street or alley in an area zoned residential which abuts or fronts a city lot and/or block upon which residential single-family and/or multifamily dwellings are located. 
Truck shall mean any truck, semitractor-trailer, van and/or tractor, any of which has a payload of more than five thousand (5,000) pounds. 
(b)  Unlawful to operate on a residential street or alleyway. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a truck, as defined herein, upon a residential street or alleyway within the corporate limits of the city except as excluded in paragraph (c) of this section. 
(c)  Exceptions. The following exceptions shall not constitute an offense pursuant to the terms of this section: 
(1)  The use of residential streets and/or alleyways by emergency vehicles. 
(2)  The use of residential streets and/or alleyways by commercial vehicles engaged in a bona fide delivery of goods or services within a residential area. 
(3)  The use of residential streets and/or alleyways by garbage and/or trash collection trucks used for the purposes of collecting and/or transporting garbage from residential areas. 
(4)  The use of residential streets and/or alleyways where signs are posted permitting such use and access. 
(d)  Additional sanctions. In addition to the penalties provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances, the police department of the city shall also have the authority and power to order towing of any truck which is parked and found to be in violation of this section, and the owner of such truck shall be responsible to the city for the payment of all towing charges, services and fees prior to the release of any such property to the owner. 
(Code 1976, §§ 17-131—17-133, 17-135; Ord. No. 79-526, §§ 1—3, 5, 7-10-79; Ord. No. 85-762, § 1, 2-26-85)  
Sec. 11-57. - Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Idling Limitations Rule. 
(a)  Adoption. The city council endorses and adopts by reference the TCEQ Idling Limitations rule as published in the Texas Administration Code, Title 30, Part 1, Chapter 114, Subchapter J, Operational Controls for Motor Vehicles, Division 2, Locally Enforced Motor Vehicle Idling Limitation. 
(b)  Penalty. An offense of this section shall be punishable in accordance with any and all penalty provisions of the TCEQ as set forth in the Texas Administration Code, Title 30, Part 1, Chapter 114, Subchapter J, Operational Controls for Motor Vehicles, Division 2, Locally Enforced Motor Vehicle Idling Limitation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-382, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-09)  
Secs. 11-58—11-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RIGHT-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 11-71. - Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway. 
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley, building, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 74.  
Sec. 11-72. - Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection. 
(a)  Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs as authorized in subsection (a) of section 91 of article 6701d, Revised Civil Statutes. 
(b)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop as required by subsection (b) of section 91A of article 6701d, Revised Civil Statutes, and after having stopped shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another highway or which is approaching so closely on such highway as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection; provided, however, that, if such a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection, after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure to yield the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 84-710, § 1, 6-26-84; Ord. No. 84-740, § 1, 10-23-84; Ord. No. 85-779, § 1, 3-26-85) 
Traffic Regulations references—Stop intersections, Sched. I; yield right-of-way, Sched. II. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 73.  
Secs. 11-73—11-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SPEED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Traffic Regulations reference—Speed limits, Sched. VII. 
 
Sec. 11-86. - Alleys. 
(a)  The speed limit along any public alley, located within the corporate limits of the city, shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(b)  The city council does hereby authorize its city manager and the police chief of the city, or either of them, to provide for the placement and direction of such signs, signals and traffic-control devices as are reasonably necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 86-859, §§ 1, 2, 8-26-86)  
Sec. 11-87. - Speed limits. 
Whenever, after an engineering and traffic investigation, the city council shall find that the circumstances are such that the maximum reasonable and safe speed for the operation of vehicles under the conditions found to exist at specific locations upon the streets or highways is greater or less than thirty (30) miles per hour, the city council shall, by resolution, describe such location and state what it finds to be the maximum reasonable and safe speed at such location, and, when signs are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall drive a vehicle at any such location at a speed greater than the maximum so established by the council and indicated by signs. 
(Code 1976, §§ 17-41, 17-42, 17-44.51, 17-44.52, 17-44.61, 17-44.62, 17-44.71, 17-44.72, 17-44.201, 17-44.202, 17-44.221, 17-44.222, 17-44.241; Ord. No. 80-572, § 1, 9-23-80; Ord. No. 80-575, §§ 1, 2, 10-14-80; Ord. No. 83-651, §§ 1—3, 2-8-83; Ord. No. 84-742, §§ 1, 2, 10-23-84; Ord. No. 85-780, §§ 1, 2, 3-26-85) 
Traffic Regulations reference—School zones, Sched. VIII.  
Sec. 11-88. - Construction or maintenance work zone. 
From an after December 13, 2005, the speed limit for all streets within a construction or maintenance work zone in the corporate city limits of Cedar Hill, Texas, shall be the speed limit posted within the limits of such construction or maintenance work zone based upon an engineering and traffic investigation made pursuant to Sections 545.352 and 545.356 of the Texas Transportation Code. 
(b)  The City Manager of Cedar Hill is hereby authorized to cause to be erected appropriate signs indicating such speed zones based upon an engineering and traffic investigation made pursuant to Sections 545.352 and 545.356 of the Texas Transportation Code. 
(c)  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor offense and penalties will be in compliance as outlined in Chapter 542.404 of the Texas Transportation Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-273, §§ 1, 2, 4, 12-13-05) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2005-273, §§ 1, 2, 4, adopted December 13, 2005, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has been added as § 11-88 at the editor's discretion.  
Secs. 11-89—11-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TURNS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Traffic Regulations reference—Miscellaneous traffic-control devices, Sched. IX(b), (C). 
 
Sec. 11-101. - Turning movements and required signals. 
(a)  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in section 11-103, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(b)  A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(c)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this chapter to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 68(a)—(c).  
Sec. 11-102. - Limitations on turning around. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety and without backing or otherwise interfering with other traffic. A complete turn shall not be made at any intersection of any two (2) streets or upon any street or alley in the city where the city council may determine that it is unsafe to make a complete turn and shall have caused to be posted at such place in or at the side of the street or alley a sign showing that a complete turn is prohibited.  
Sec. 11-103. - Turning at intersections. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Right turn. Both the approach for a right turn, and a right turn, shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  Left turn. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
(3)  Left turn from two-way street into one-way street. Approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of such centerline where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street shall be made by entering the intersection as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway by which the intersection is entered and by passing to the right of the centerline of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection. 
(4)  Left turn where both streets are one-way. Where both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left turn, and a left turn, shall be made as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(b)  The city council with the cooperation of the police department may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection and when markers, buttons, or signs are so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 65(a), (b).  
DIVISION 5. - SCHOOL ZONES 
 
Sec. 11-104. - Designated school zones. 
The following roads are designated as reduced speed "School Zones" between posted times, when school zone lights are flashing, or both: 
(1)  On S. Clark Road from a point 515 feet south of Little Creek Road to a point 1810 feet south of Little Creek Road. 
(2)  On Joe Wilson Road from a point 165 feet south of Pondview Drive to a point 300 feet south of Calvert Drive. 
(3)  On Joe Wilson Drive from a point 150 feet north of Pickard Drive to a point 325 feet south of Castleman Drive. 
(4)  On Pickard Drive from Joe Wilson Road to a point 115 feet south of LaRue Drive. 
(5)  On Parkerville Road from a point 300 feet west of Pickard Drive to a point 260 feet east of Pickard Drive. 
(6)  On Lakeridge Parkway from Woodlake Drive to a point 150 feet north of Waters Edge Drive. 
(7)  On High Pointe Lane from a point 173 feet north of Bradford Street to a point 150 feet south of Fuller Drive. 
(8)  On Fuller Drive from a point 50 feet west of High Pointe Lane to a point 261 feet west of Cumberland Drive. 
(9)  On New Clark Road from a point 120 feet east of Old Straus Road to a point 500 feet east of High Pointe Lane. 
(10)  On Roberts Street from a point 105 feet north of Beltline Road to a point 60 feet north of Chambers Street. 
(11)  On Wylie Street from a point, North Broad Street to Straus Road. 
(12)  On Harrington Drive from a point, North Broad Street to North Roberts Road. 
(13)  On North Broad Street from a point, Wylie Street to Harrington Drive. 
(14)  On Williams Street from a point, High Pointe Lane to a point 60 feet north of Middleton Street. 
(15)  On Pleasant Run Road from a point 730 feet west of Duncanville Road to a point 84 feet east of Bending Oak Drive. 
(16)  On Cannady Drive from a point 60 feet south of Beltline Road to a point 220 feet south of Whitney Street. 
(17)  On Sims Drive from a point 90 feet south of Beltline Road to a point 105 feet south of Whitney Street. 
(18)  On Parkerville Road from a point 298 feet east of Parkway Drive to a point 130 feet east of Somerset Drive. 
(19)  On Somerset Drive from Parkerville Road to a point 285 north of Parkerville Road. 
(20)  On West Wintergreen Road from a point 525 feet west of New Clark Road to a point 500 feet west of High Pointe Lane. 
(21)  On North Waterford Oaks Drive from a point 30 feet north of Paul Street to a point 5 feet north of Redding Street. 
(22)  On Whitney Street from a point 150 feet west of Cannady Drive to Sims Drive. 
(23)  On Redding Drive from a point 180 feet north of Calvert Drive to Waterford Oaks Drive. 
(24)  On High Pointe Lane from a point south of Pemberton Drive to a point north of Trees Drive. 
(25)  On Fairway Drive, to a point west of Lake Ridge Parkway. 
(Ord. No. 2020-710 , § 1, 9-22-20)  
Sec. 11-105. - Speed limitation. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle in a School Zone between posted times, when school zone lights are flashing, or both, on public school days at a speed greater than twenty (20) miles per hour, and any speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour is prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable nor prudent under the circumstances then existing and is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 2020-710 , § 1, 9-22-20)  
Sec. 11-106. - Use of wireless communication device prohibited. 
Any and all vehicular traffic shall be prohibited from the use of wireless communication devices, pursuant to and as defined in Texas Transportation Code Section 545.425, in a School Zone between posted times, when school zone lights are flashing, or both, on public school days. 
(Ord. No. 2020-710 , § 1, 9-22-20)  
Secs. 11-107—11-114. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Traffic regulations references—Parking prohibited at all times, Sched. V; parking prohibited during certain hours, Sched. VI. 
 
Sec. 11-115. - No parking zone. 
(a)  [No parking area designated.] From and after December 13, 2005, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation or any other entity to park a motor vehicle, or any vehicle, trailer or other obstruction in any area so designated a "no parking zone" by the City Council of the City of Cedar Hill. 
(b)  Areas to be designated and signs to be erected. The City Manager of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, is hereby directed and authorized to designate no parking areas within the corporate city limits, as from time-to-time directed and requested by the city council, and to cause to be erected appropriate signs indicating the no parking areas so designated. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Any person, firm, corporation or any other entity violating any of the provisions of this section or failing to comply with the requirements of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed the maximum fine allowed by law. Each day the said violation is committed or continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(d)  Additional sanctions. In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (c) hereof, the Police Department of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, shall also have the authority and the power to order towing of any motor vehicle, trailer or other obstruction from the no parking zone at any time, and the owner of such motor vehicle, trailer or other obstruction shall be responsible to the City of Cedar Hill for payment of all towing charges, services and fees prior to the release of any such vehicle or property to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2005-274, §§ 1—4, 12-13-05)  
Sec. 11-116. - Parallel parking. 
It shall be unlawful to park any character of vehicle upon any street, except as provided in this chapter, in any other manner than that such vehicle shall be parallel with the street upon which it is parked and upon the right side thereof, determined by the way such vehicle is headed and parked so that the wheels on the right-hand side of such vehicle shall be within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway.  
Sec. 11-117. - Angle parking. 
It shall be lawful to park vehicles at an angle not greater than forty-five (45) degrees to the line of traffic at such places as the city council shall by resolution determine that angle parking shall be permitted and shall cause the same to be marked or signed. In all places where sidewalks and curbs have been properly set back and provisions made for parking vehicles across or inside of the usual curbline on any street in the city. In leaving such angle parking space cars shall not be backed into the traffic lane any further than necessary to get straightened out and faced in the proper direction for traffic between such space and center of the street.  
Sec. 11-118. - Responsibilities of owner regarding parking violations. 
No person shall allow, suffer or permit any vehicle registered in his name to stand or be parked in any street in the city in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the directions of official signs of this city regulating the standing or parking of vehicles.  
Sec. 11-119. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (c) and except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand or park a vehicle: 
a.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street; 
b.  On a sidewalk; 
c.  Within an intersection; 
d.  On a crosswalk. 
(2)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
a.  In front of a public or private driveway; 
b.  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant; 
c.  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
d.  Upon any public street within twenty-five (25) feet of the entrance or exit to any alley. 
e.  Within thirty (30) feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
f.  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance (when properly signposted); 
g.  At any place where official signs prohibit standing; 
h.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings; 
i.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
j.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
k.  On any railroad track; 
l.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
m.  On the side of the street opposite the alley entrance or exit within twenty-five (25) feet of the entrance or exit on designated trash collection days. 
(3)  Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers: 
a.  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
b.  At any place where official signs prohibit parking; 
c.  Within ten (10) feet of a neighborhood delivery postal collection box unit or a grouping of four (4) to a property line postal receptacles. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such a distance as is unlawful. 
(c)  A person may stop, stand, or park a bicycle on a sidewalk if the bicycle does not impede the normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic on the sidewalk. 
(Code 1976, §§ 17-72, 17-91; Ord. No. 79-529, § 2, 6-26-79; Ord. No. 81-590, § 1, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 84-735, § 1, 10-9-84; Ord. No. 85-760, § 1, 2-26-85; Ord. No. 85-765, § 1, 3-12-85; Ord. No. 2013-515, § 1, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 2018-640, § 1, 4-24-18; Ord. No. 2019-674, § 1, 4-23-19) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 95.  
Sec. 11-120. - Parking prohibited in fire lanes. 
It is hereby declared to be illegal and unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle, trailer, or obstruction within a fire lane within the corporate limits of the city, regardless of whether such fire lane is located on public or private property. 
(Code 1976, § 17-71; Ord. No. 79-529, § 1, 6-26-79; Ord. No. 2011-431, § 1, 3-22-11) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 11-121. - Parking prohibited in red painted zones around commercial trash containers or dumpsters. 
It is hereby declared to be illegal and unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle, trailer, or other obstruction within the red painted zones around commercial trash containers or dumpsters, regardless of whether such commercial trash container or dumpster is located on public or private property within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 17-73; Ord. No. 79-529, § 3, 6-26-79) 
Cross reference— Garbage, trash and refuse, § 9-36 et seq.  
Sec. 11-122. - Erection of signs authorized. 
There may be erected at such places or points on streets, as may be authorized and directed by the city council, appropriate signs notifying and warning drivers of vehicles that there are certain prescribed regulations or restrictions on parking vehicles on such streets or parts of streets. Such signs shall clearly indicate the specific kind of regulation or restriction applicable to that particular street or part of such street on which the signs are erected. Such prescribed regulations or restrictions may include: 
(1)  No parking at any time; 
(2)  No parking during certain specified hours; 
(3)  No parking of vehicles of more than a specified rated weight capacity; 
(4)  No parking of vehicles with trailers or semitrailers attached; 
(5)  Limits on parking longer than a specified length of time; 
(6)  Establishment of loading and unloading zones; 
(7)  Establishment of taxicab stands; 
(8)  No parking in front of theaters; 
(9)  Other similar directions and restrictions as may be authorized by the city council.  
Sec. 11-123. - Authority to impound vehicles; fee. 
Any vehicle parked in violation of any provision of this chapter or any regulation established pursuant to this chapter at a place where parking is prohibited or parking time is limited may be removed and impounded by the police department and an impounding fee of such amount as established by the city council from time to time assessed against and collected from the owner or driver of the vehicle before the release of such vehicle. The payment of this impounding fee shall not excuse such owner or driver of the vehicle from the charge of violating such provisions or regulations prohibiting or limiting such parking. 
(Ord. No. 85-765, § 3, 3-12-85)  
Sec. 11-124. - Unattended motor vehicle. 
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition and effectively setting the brake thereon, and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 97.  
Sec. 11-125. - Handicapped parking spaces. 
(a)  Definition. The term "disabled" as used herein shall have the same definition as set forth in article 6675a-5e.1, Revised Civil Statutes, as amended. 
(b)  The city council does hereby authorize its city manager or his designee to designate specific parking spaces upon public property as handicapped parking spaces. The owners of private property open to the public for parking purposes may, with the authorization and approval of the city manager, designate specific spaces as handicapped parking spaces. All such spaces shall be designated by signs legibly stating that such parking spaces are restricted to use only by the handicapped. A record of such designation, approval and the location of such signs shall be maintained by the city manager or his designee, or under the city manager's authority, for the purpose of enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Restricted to designated vehicles. Only disabled persons or persons transporting a disabled person shall park a vehicle in any parking space or parking area designated specifically for the physically handicapped in accordance with subsection (b), and it is hereby an offense for any person not so disabled or transporting a disabled person to park a vehicle in any such designated parking space. It shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that a vehicle is not parked or used for transportation of disabled persons, if such vehicle does not have a specially designated symbol, tab or device stating "disabled" thereupon and issued by the state highway department and properly displayed on the vehicle. 
(d)  Enforcement and penalty. Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the city, such violation shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), and each and every instance of the violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 87-946, §§ 1—3, 12-8-87)  
Sec. 11-126. - Parking on public right-of-way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in a public street, alley, or other public place for a continuous period of time longer than forty-eight (48) hours. 
(b)  No recreational vehicle, travel trailer, boat or boat trailers or any other vehicle unable to operate under its own power shall be parked or stored on any public right-of-way in any district. The provisions of this section shall not prevent the parking or standing of said vehicles upon the public street in such zoned area for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading of passengers or property, for the connection or disconnection of such vehicles or trailers, provided such parking or standing shall not exceed two (2) hours in duration, unless hooked to an operable motor vehicle, and in no case, shall exceed forty-eight (48) hours. 
(c)  At no time shall a recreational vehicle in excess of eight (8) feet in width, or eleven (11) feet in height, or thirty-six (36) feet in length be parked or stored on any public right-of-way. Recreational vehicles shall include but not be limited to recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes, boats, boat trailers or combinations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 91-087, § 1, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 97-345, § 1, 10-14-97)  
Sec. 11-127. - Parking in residential districts. 
(a)  No vehicle in excess of eight (8) feet in width or thirty-six (36) feet in length shall be parked or stored in any residential front yard or side yard. 
(b)  No vehicle shall be parked or stored on an unimproved surface in the front or sideyard. Exception: See paragraph (f) of this section. All weather surface shall be on a minimum concrete pad large enough to hold the vehicle or trailer. 
Exception: See paragraph (f) of this section. All weather surface shall be on a minimum concrete pad large enough to hold the vehicle or trailer. 
(c)  No driveway or improved parking surface shall cover more than fifty (50) percent of a residential front yard. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the above the parking or storing of vehicles is permissible in an unimproved driveway if an existing residence is served by a driveway which does not constitute an improved parking surface at the time this ordinance is adopted. Vehicles shall be placed on material similar to existing onsite driveway material. 
(e)  It is permissible for the parking or storing of vehicles on an unimproved surface if said vehicles are parked in the rear yard. 
(f)  Any vehicle located in the side yard and behind a six-foot solid screening fence, need not be located on an improved surface. 
(Ord. No. 91-087, § 2, 8-13-91; Ord. No. 98-377, §§ 1, 2, 6-23-98  
Sec. 11-128. - Parking, standing or storing of vehicles in residential districts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or owner to allow to park, stand or store any truck-tractor, semi-trailer, trailer, bus, commercial dumpster, oversized commercial vehicle or any commercial motor vehicle with a rated capacity in excess of one (1) ton, according to the manufacturer's classification, upon any public right-of-way, street, alley, parkway, vacant or undeveloped lot/land, private premises or public place within the City of Cedar Hill, within any area zoned as residential, multifamily or apartment zoning. 
(b)  This section shall not prevent the parking or standing of the above described vehicles in such areas for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading of passengers, freight, merchandise or property; nor prevent the parking of buses owned and operated by church or day care center within such districts from parking on a parking lot owned and maintained by such church or day care center; nor prevent the parking of any such vehicles owned and operated by Cedar Hill Independent School District from parking on property owned and maintained by the Cedar Hill Independent School District. 
(c)  Provided further, that this subsection shall not apply to street construction, maintenance and repair equipment trucks, rollers and implements or to trucks, equipment, trailers and vehicles used by any public service utility companies, the city or its contractors engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities or city services. 
(Ord. No. 97-345, § 2, 10-14-97)  
Sec. 11-129. - Parking or standing of vehicles for sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand a vehicle on any public right-of-way, street, parking lot, playground, athletic field, park, vacant lot/land, or public or private school for the principal purpose of displaying it for sale.  
Sec. 11-130. - Parking, standing or storing of vehicles in commercial, industrial or retail districts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or owner to allow to park, stand or store any truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, bus, oversized commercial vehicle or commercial motor vehicle upon any public right-of-way, street, alley, parkway, vacant or undeveloped lot/land or public place within any area zoned as either commercial, local retail, industrial or industrial park, or planned development districts according to the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Cedar Hill. 
(b)  Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to street construction, maintenance and repair equipment, trucks, rollers and implements or to trucks, equipment, trailers and vehicles used by any public service utility companies, the city or its contractors engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities or city services or to motor buses when taking on or discharging passengers at the customary bus stops or any other vehicle designated herein when actually parked at a designated loading zone in those areas of limited parking where loading zones are designated or where it is not lawful to park any commercial motor vehicle for the purpose of accepting, from the immediate shipper, or delivering to the consignee or addressee, any transportable thing. 
(c)  Provided, however, that this section shall also not apply to any vehicle defined or designated herein developing mechanical defect after such vehicle has commenced to run, en route, making it unsafe to proceed further, and in this event it shall be lawful to stand or park the vehicle during the time necessary to make emergency repairs. 
(d)  Provided, further, that this subsection shall not apply to any such designated motor vehicle used by any commercial business, church, day care center, United States Postal Service, or the Cedar Hill Independent School District located on such premises, or if the business provides service, maintenance or repair of such designated vehicles. 
(e)  Provided, however, that it shall be a defense to a violation of this subsection in these zoning districts if the City of Cedar Hill has erected appropriate signs permitting parking in such area. 
(Ord. No. 97-345, § 2, 10-14-97)  
Sec. 11-131. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine as outlined in Chapter 12 (Municipal Court) of this Code of Ordinances. When any person, firm, or corporation refuses to comply with the provisions of this Code or in emergency circumstances, then pursuant to Section 431.001 of the Texas Local Government Code, the offending vehicle may be impounded or the tires/towing mechanism blocked to prohibit the vehicle from moving. The impounded vehicle(s) shall be taken into custody and have fees assessed (wrecker, storage, and taxes) in the same manner as described in section 11-123 of this chapter. 
(b)  If any vehicle is found in violation of any provision of this section or of state statute regulating the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle, and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle is the person, firm or corporation who committed the violation. This presumption is refutable and shall have the effects and consequences set forth in Section 2.05 of the Texas Penal Code. 
(c)  The Texas Department of Transportation's computer-generated record of the registered vehicle owner is prima facie evidence of the contents of record. 
(d)  If any vehicle is found in violation of any provision of this section or state statute regulating the stopping, standing, parking or storing of a vehicle, the owner of the property upon which the vehicle is unlawfully stopped, standing, parked or stored, as determined by the tax rolls, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the owner allowed or intended such vehicle to be unlawfully stopped, standing, parked or stored on such property. This presumption is refutable and shall have the same effects and consequences set forth in Section 2.05 of the Texas Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 97-345, § 2, 10-14-97)  
Secs. 11-132—11-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS, SIGNALS AND DEVICES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Procedure regarding crossing of intersections with traffic signals during moving of buildings, § 4-170. 
Traffic regulations reference—School zones, Sched. VIII; miscellaneous traffic-control devices, Sched. IX. 
 
Sec. 11-141. - Traffic-control signal legend. 
(a)  Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one (1) at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and such lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to the traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal, as provided in section 11-142, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Steady yellow indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection. 
b.  Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal as provided in section 11-142, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway. 
(3)  Steady red indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but, if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, and may then turn right or, if the intersecting streets are both one-way streets and left turns are permissible, may turn left, after standing until the intersection may be entered safely, yielding right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. Traffic not so turning shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown. The city may prohibit such turns on a steady red signal by posting a notice that turns of that type are prohibited. Such notice shall be erected at such intersection giving notice thereof. 
b.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in section 11-142, pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway. 
(b)  If an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 33.  
Sec. 11-142. - Pedestrian-control signals. 
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk," "Don't Walk," or "Wait" are in place such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Don't walk or Wait. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the "Don't Walk" or "Wait" signal is showing. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 34.  
Sec. 11-143. - Flashing signals. 
(a)  Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a traffic sign or signal it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through an intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(b)  This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by the rules as set forth in section 11-146 of this Code of Ordinances. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 35.  
Sec. 11-144. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(c)  No person shall place or maintain a flashing light or flashing electric sign of any kind or color within one thousand (1,000) feet of any intersection unless a permit is granted by the state highway and public transportation commission for such flashing light or electric sign. 
(d)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(e)  In addition to being a misdemeanor as set out in section 143 of article 6701d, Revised Civil Statutes, every such prohibited sign, signal, light or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 36.  
Sec. 11-145. - Interference with official devices or signals. 
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 37.  
Sec. 11-146. - Signals indicating approach of train. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet, but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall not proceed until he can do so safely when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train; 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered, or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a train; 
(3)  A railroad engine approaching within approximately fifteen hundred (1500) feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such engine by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing is an immediate hazard; or 
(4)  An approaching train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 86.  
Sec. 11-147. - Stop and yield signs. 
(a)  There may be installed or erected at such points on streets, as may be authorized and directed by the city manager, appropriate signs notifying drivers of vehicles to come to a full stop. Such signs, devices or markings are to bear the word "Stop" and to be located in such position and to be provided with letters of a size to be clearly legible from a distance of at least one hundred (100) feet along the street upon which the sign is placed. All such signs shall be illuminated at night or so placed as to be illuminated by streetlights or by the headlights of approaching motor vehicles. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver of a vehicle and every motorman of a streetcar approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. 
(b)  There may be installed or erected at approaches to intersections of streets and on streets at approaches to intersections of streets with state designated through highways, as may be directed by the city manager, appropriate "Yield right-of-way" signs. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
(c)  Every "Stop," "Yield right-of-way" and other traffic signs and signals erected or installed in the city shall conform to the state highway and public transportation commission's manual and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 2000-47, § 1, 11-14-00) 
Traffic Regulations references— Stop intersections, Sched. I; yield right-of-way, Sched. II. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 91A.  
Secs. 11-148—11-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 11-161. - Subject to traffic regulations. 
(a)  Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals at intersections as provided in this chapter, but at all other places pedestrians shall be accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this article. 
(b)  Pedestrians shall strictly comply with the directions of all official traffic-control signals in the city. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 76(a).  
Sec. 11-162. - Drivers to exercise due care. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 79.  
Sec. 11-163. - On roadways. 
(a)  Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
(b)  Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall when possible walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction. 
(c)  No person shall stand in the right-of-way of any roadway or alleyway for the purpose of: 
(1)  Either orally or in writing, asking for a ride, employment, goods, services, financial aid, monetary gift, or any article representing monetary value for any purpose; or 
(2)  Either orally or in writing, selling or offering for sale any goods, services or publications; or 
(3)  Either orally or in writing, advertising for a business; or 
(4)  Distributing goods, services or publications; or 
(5)  Soliciting signatures on a petition or soliciting opinions or comments for a survey. 
(d)  No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 2005-230, § 1, 2-22-05) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 81.  
Sec. 11-164. - Use of right half of crosswalk. 
Pedestrians shall move, whenever possible, upon the right half of a crosswalk. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 80.  
Sec. 11-165. - Blind and incapacitated pedestrians. 
(a)  No person may carry a white cane on a public street or highway unless the person is totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection or crosswalk where a pedestrian guided by a support dog or carrying a white cane is crossing or attempting to cross shall take necessary precautions to avoid injuring or endangering the pedestrian. The driver shall bring the vehicle to a full stop if injury or danger can be avoided only by that action. 
(c)  The failure of a totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person to carry a white cane or be guided or aided by a support dog does not deprive the person of the rights and privileges conferred by law on pedestrians crossing streets or highways and does not constitute evidence of contributory negligence. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A. Human Resources Code, § 121.007.  
Sec. 11-166. - Right-of-way in crosswalks. 
(a)  When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. This provision shall not apply under the conditions stated in section 11-167(b). 
(b)  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 77.  
Sec. 11-167. - Crossing at other than crosswalks. 
(a)  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the highway. 
(b)  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(c)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
(d)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 78.  
Secs. 11-168—11-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ACCIDENTS 
 
Sec. 11-181. - Removing vehicle from scene of accident. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver or any other person to remove such vehicle from the scene of the accident until authorized to do so by a police officer of the police department; provided, this section shall not apply if there exists or arises a duty on the part of such driver or other person in control of such vehicle to use such vehicle in carrying any person injured in such accident to a physician or surgeon for medical or surgical treatment.  
Sec. 11-182. - Reports by drivers, occupants. 
(a)  Reporting accident by driver. The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more, shall immediately by the quickest means of communication, either verbal or written, give notice of such accident to the police department if such accident occurs within this city. 
(b)  When driver unable to report. Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a required accident report and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of making a report, such occupant shall make or cause to be made such report. 
(c)  Supplemental reports. Any officer of the police department may require any driver of a vehicle involved in an accident of which report must be made as provided in this article, to make a supplemental oral or written report whenever the original report is found to be insufficient, or inadequate in the opinion of such officer, and may require witnesses of accidents to render reports to such department. 
State Law reference— Authority to require reports, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 49.  
Sec. 11-183. - Reports by law enforcement officers. 
Every law enforcement officer, other than members of the police department and the state department of public safety, who in the regular course of duty investigates a motor vehicle accident of which report must be made as required in this section, either at the time of and at the scene of the accident or thereafter by interviewing participants or witnesses shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after completing such investigation, forward a written report of such accident to the police department. Every such accident report shall be made on the appropriate form provided by the police department and shall contain all of the information required therein unless not available. Such reports shall be without prejudice to the officer so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department.  
Sec. 11-184. - Driver of wrecker not to interfere with investigation. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver or any person in charge of any vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch or towing device, who has answered a call to, or is attending the scene of, any collision or accident of one (1) or more vehicles on any street or highway in this city, to remove or attempt to remove any vehicle involved in such collision or accident, or in any way to interfere with or change the position of any such vehicle, except upon authority or direction and in the presence of a police officer, unless such change is made or attempted for the purpose of releasing a person imprisoned within or under such vehicle involved in such collision or accident. It shall be unlawful for the driver or person in charge of any such vehicle equipped with a crane, hoist, winch or towing device to remove any vehicle from the scene of such accident or collision without the consent of the owner of the vehicle so removed, unless directed by a police officer to remove such vehicle as a public safety measure or for the protection of private property.  
Sec. 11-185. - Accident involving injury to or death of any person or damage to vehicle. 
(a)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible without obstructing traffic more than is necessary but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of such accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section. However, when an accident occurs on a main lane, ramp, shoulder, median, or adjacent area of a freeway in a metropolitan area and each vehicle involved can be normally and safely driven, each driver shall move his vehicle as soon as possible off the freeway main lanes, ramps, shoulders, medians, and adjacent areas to a designated accident investigation site, if available, a location on the frontage road, the nearest suitable cross street, or other suitable location to complete the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section, so as to minimize interference with the freeway traffic. 
(b)  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his name, address, and the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and the name of his motor vehicle liability insurer, and shall upon request and if available exhibit his operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying, or the making of arrangements for the carrying, of such person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, §§ 39, 40.  
Sec. 11-186. - Duty upon striking unattended vehicle. 
The driver of any vehicle which collides with and damages any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave in a conspicuous place in, or securely attached to and plainly visible, the vehicle struck, a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof, and shall make report of such accident when and as required in section 11-182(a) of this article. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 41.  
Sec. 11-187. - Striking fixtures upon highway. 
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to fixtures legally upon or adjacent to a street or highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact and of his name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit his operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's license, and shall make report of such accident when and as required in section 11-182(a) of this article. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 42.  
Sec. 11-188. - Records and reports by garages. 
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop shall keep a record of all damaged vehicles which show evidence of having been involved in an accident or wreck or struck by bullets. This record shall be available for police inspection and shall show the name of the driver or person in charge of the vehicle, the license number, model and type of same, a description of damage of vehicle and the date brought in for repair. 
State Law reference— Authority to require reports by garages, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 49b.  
Sec. 11-189. - Removing glass, etc., from wrecked or damaged vehicles. 
Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such vehicle.  
Secs. 11-190—11-205. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 
 
Sec. 11-206. - Identification of funeral processions. 
A funeral procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display of a pennant or other identifying insignia upon the outside of each vehicle or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the chief of police.  
Sec. 11-207. - Drivers in a procession. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe.  
Sec. 11-208. - Driving through funeral or other procession. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers.  
Secs. 11-209—11-225. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - VEHICLE EQUIPMENT 
 
Sec. 11-226. - Mufflers; prevention of noise, etc. 
(a)  Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a highway. 
(b)  The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or smoke. 
(c)  Every new motor vehicle and new motor vehicle engine beginning with the model year 1968 shall at all times be so equipped that crankcase emissions are not discharged into the ambient atmosphere from the vehicle or engine. 
(d)  The owner or operator of any new motor vehicle or new motor vehicle engine beginning with the model year 1968 equipped with an exhaust emission system shall maintain the exhaust emission system in good operable condition and shall use it at all times that the motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine is operated. The owner or operator of the motor vehicle or motor vehicle engine shall not remove or intentionally make inoperable within the state the exhaust emission system, or any part thereof, except where the purpose of removal of the exhaust emission system, or part thereof, is to install another exhaust emission system, or part thereof, which is intended to be equally effective in reducing atmospheric emissions from the vehicle or engine. 
Cross reference— Regulations concerning loud noises at public places of business, § 14-21 et seq. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.A.C.S. art. 6701d, § 134.  
Secs. 11-227—11-237. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PHOTOGRAPHIC TRAFFIC SIGNAL ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 11-238. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
Department shall mean the Police Department of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
Intersection shall mean the place or area where two (2) or more streets or roadways intersect and is defined as the common area at the junction of two (2) or more streets or roadways, the dimensions of which include only the common area within the connection of the lateral curb lines or, in the absence of curb lines, the lateral boundary lines of the streets or roadways. 
Owner shall mean the owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation or the Texas Department of Public Safety or the analogous department or agency of another state or county. 
Photographic traffic signal enforcement system shall mean a system that: 
(1)  Consists of a camera system installed to work in conjunction with an electrically operated traffic-control signal; and 
(2)  Is capable of producing at least two (2) recorded images that depicts the license plate attached to the rear of a motor vehicle that is not operated in compliance with the instructions of the traffic-control signal. 
Recorded image means an image recorded by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system that depicts the rear of a motor vehicle and is automatically recorded on a photograph or digital image. 
System location means the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic traffic signal enforcement system is directed and in operation. 
Traffic-control signal shall mean a traffic-control device that displays alternating red, amber and green lights that directs traffic when to stop at or proceed through an intersection. 
(Ord. No. 2006-306, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 11-239. - Imposition of civil penalty for violations. 
(a)  An owner is liable for a civil penalty of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) if the owner's motor vehicle proceeds into an intersection at a system location when the traffic control signal for that motor vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal. 
(b)  An owner who fails to timely pay the civil penalties set forth above shall be subject to a late payment penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 2006-306, § 1, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2007-325, § 1, 8-14-07)  
Sec. 11-240. - Enforcement; procedures. 
(a)  The department shall be responsible for the enforcement and administration of this article. 
(b)  In order to impose a civil penalty under this article, the department shall mail or have mailed a notice of violation to the owner of the motor vehicle not later than the thirtieth day after the date of the violation is alleged to have occurred addressed to: 
(1)  The owner's address as shown on the registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation or the Texas Department of Public Safety; or 
(2)  If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, to the owner's address as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country analogous to the Texas Department of Transportation or the Texas Department of Public Safety. 
(c)  A notice of violation issued under this article shall substantially contain the following: 
(1)  A description of the violation alleged; 
(2)  The date, time, and location of the violation; 
(3)  A copy of the recorded image of the vehicle involved in the violation; 
(4)  The amount of the civil penalty to be imposed for the violation; 
(5)  The date by which the civil penalty to be imposed for the violation; 
(6)  A statement that the person named in the notice of violation may pay the civil penalty in lieu of appearing at an administrative adjudication hearing; 
(7)  Information that informs the person named in the notice of violation: 
a.  Of the right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty in an administrative adjudication; 
b.  Of the manner and time in which to contest the imposition of the civil penalty and the appeal process; and 
c.  That failure to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability is an admission of liability. 
(8)  A statement that the recorded image is evidence in a proceeding for the imposition of a civil penalty; 
(9)  A statement that failure to pay the civil penalty within the time allowed shall result in the imposition of a late penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00); and 
(10)  Any other information deemed necessary by the department. 
(d)  A notice of violation under this article is presumed to have been received on the tenth day after the date the notice of violation is mailed. 
(e)  In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the department in its sole discretion may mail a warning notice to an owner. 
(Ord. No. 2006-306, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 11-241. - Reserved.  
Sec. 11-242. - Administrative adjudication hearing. 
(a)  A person who receives a notice of violation may contest the imposition of the civil penalty by requesting in writing an administrative adjudication of the civil penalty within 30 days after receipt of the notice of violation. Upon receipt of a timely request, the department shall notify the person of the date and time of the hearing on the administrative adjudication. The administrative adjudication hearing shall be held before a hearing officer appointed by the city manager. 
(b)  Failure to pay a civil penalty or to contest liability in a timely manner shall be deemed as an admission of liability, the full amount of the civil penalty assessed in the notice of violation shall be due and payable, and is a waiver of the right to appeal under this section. 
(c)  The civil penalty shall not be assessed if after a hearing, the hearing officer enters a finding of no liability. 
(d)  In an administrative adjudication hearing, the issues must be provided at the hearing by a preponderance of the evidence. The reliability of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system used to produce the recorded image of the violation may be attested to in an administrative adjudication hearing by affidavit of an officer or employee of the City of Cedar Hill or the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate the system and who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. An affidavit of an officer, employee or agent of the city that alleges a violation based on an inspection of the pertinent recorded image is admissible in a proceeding under this article and is evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit. 
(e)  A person who is found liable for a civil penalty after an administrative adjudication hearing shall pay the civil penalty and costs within ten (10) days of the hearing. 
(f)  Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, a person who fails to pay the amount of a civil penalty or to contest liability in a timely manner is entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing on the violation if: 
(1)  The person files an affidavit with the hearing officer stating the date on which the person received the notice of violation that was mailed to the person; and 
(2)  Within the same period required by this section for a hearing to be timely requested, but measured from the date the mailed notice was received as stated in the affidavit, the person requests an administrative adjudication hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2006-306, § 1, 9-26-06; Ord. No. 2007-325, § 2, 8-14-07)  
Sec. 11-243. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)  It shall be an affirmative defense to the imposition of civil liability under this article, to be proven by a preponderance of the evidence, that: 
(1)  The traffic-control signal was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person. 
(2)  The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the lawful order or direction of a police officer. 
(3)  The operator of the motor vehicle violated the instructions of the traffic-control signal so as to yield the right-of-way to an immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle. 
(4)  The motor vehicle was being operated as an authorized emergency vehicle under Chapter 546 of the Texas Transportation Code and that the operator was acting in compliance with that chapter. 
(5)  The motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle and being operated by a person other than the owner of the vehicle without the effective consent of the owner. 
(6)  The license plate depicted in the recorded image of the violation was a stolen plate and being displayed on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle for which the plate had been issued. 
(7)  The presence of ice, snow, unusual amounts of rain or other unusually hazardous road conditions existed that would make compliance with this article and with the traffic-control signal more dangerous under the circumstances than noncompliance. 
(8)  The person who received the notice of violation was not the owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(b)  To demonstrate that at the time of the violation the motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle or the license plate displayed on the motor vehicle was a stolen plate, the owner must submit proof acceptable to the hearing officer that the theft of the vehicle or license plate had been timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 2006-306, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 11-244. - Appeal. 
A person who is found liable after an administrative adjudication hearing may appeal that finding of civil liability to the municipal court of the City of Cedar Hill by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the municipal court. The notice of appeal must be filed not later than the thirtieth-first day after the date on which the administrative adjudication hearing officer entered the finding of civil liability. If the notice of appeal is not timely filed, the right of appeal is waived. Unless the person, on or before the filing of the notice of appeal, posts a bond in the total amount of the penalty, fees and costs, an appeal does not stay the enforcement of the civil penalty. An appeal shall be determined by the municipal court by trial de novo. Any affidavits submitted at the administrative adjudication hearing to establish the reliability of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system shall be admitted by the municipal judge in the trial de novo, and the facts must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence. A person found liable by the municipal court shall pay an appellate filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) in addition to the civil penalty and any other costs and fees due the City of Cedar Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2006-306, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 11-245. - Order. 
(a)  Following an administrative adjudication hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written order stating: 
(1)  Whether the person charged with the violation is liable for the violation; and 
(2)  The amount of any civil penalty, late penalty, and administrative adjudication costs assessed against the person. 
(b)  The order issued under subsection (a) of this section may be filed with the office of the hearing examiner. The hearing examiner shall keep the orders in a separate index and file. The orders may be recorded using microfilm, microfiche, or data processing techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2006-306, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 11-246. - Effect of liability; exclusion of civil remedy. 
(a)  The imposition of a civil penalty under this article is not a criminal conviction for any purpose. 
(b)  A civil penalty may not be imposed under this article on the owner of a motor vehicle if the operator of the vehicle was arrested or was issued a citation and notice to appear by a peace officer for the same violation of Section 544.007(d) of the Texas Transportation Code recorded by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system. 
(c)  An owner who fails to pay the civil penalty or to timely contest liability for the penalty is considered to admit liability for the full amount of the civil penalty stated in the notice of violation mailed to the person. 
(d)  The city attorney is authorized to file suit to enforce collection of a civil penalty imposed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-306, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 11-247. - Civil nature of penalties and costs. 
The penalties, costs and fees assessed under this article and collected by the City of Cedar Hill are not to be deemed or considered as criminal fines, penalties or forfeitures for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2006-306, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 11-248. - Traffic safety fund. 
The penalties and fees collected from the imposition of civil liability under this article shall be deposited in a traffic safety fund account established by the city council. Funds from the traffic safety fund may be expended only for costs of automated signal enforcement under this article, public traffic or pedestrian safety programs, traffic enforcement and intersection improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2006-306, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Chapter 12 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty for code violations, § 1-7; civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 5; fine for illegal dumping, § 9-1; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11; offenses, Ch. 14; police, Ch. 17. 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Jurisdiction. 
The municipal court of the city shall have exclusive original jurisdiction within the territorial limits of the city in all criminal cases that: 
(1)  Arise under the ordinances of the municipality; and 
(2)  Are punishable only by a fine not to exceed: 
(a)  Two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) in all cases arising under municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning, and public health and sanitation other than vegetation and litter violations; and 
(b)  Five hundred dollars ($500.00) in all other cases. 
(Ord. No. 87-924, § 2, 9-22-87) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-924, §§ 2, 3, adopted Sept. 22, 1987, did not specifically amend this Code; at the discretion of the editor such provisions have been codified as §§ 12-1 and 12-2.  
Sec. 12-2. - Imposition of fines. 
The municipal court of the city is hereby empowered and authorized by the city council to provide in all municipal criminal cases: 
(1)  A fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) upon conviction in all cases arising under municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning, and public health and sanitation other than vegetation and litter violations; or 
(2)  A fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) in all other cases. 
(Ord. No. 87-924, § 3, 9-22-87) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 12-1.  
Sec. 12-3. - Municipal court security fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a municipal court building security fund to be used only to finance the following items when used for the purpose of providing security services for buildings housing a municipal court: 
(1)  The purchase of repair X-ray machines and conveying systems; 
(2)  Hand-held metal detectors; 
(3)  Walk through metal detectors; 
(4)  Identification cards and systems; 
(5)  Electronic locking surveillance equipment; 
(6)  Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables or contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services; 
(7)  Signages; 
(8)  Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems; 
(9)  Locks, chains or other security hardware; and 
(10)  Any other item or for any other purpose authorized by Article 102.017 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure as may be amended by the Texas Legislature from time to time. 
(b)  A defendant convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court of the city shall pay a three dollar ($3.00) security fee as costs of court. A person is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the costs and pay them to the municipal treasurer or other official of the city who discharges the duties delegated to the municipal treasurer for deposit in a fund to be known as the municipal court building security fund. 
(Ord. No. 95-230, § 1, 9-12-95)  
Sec. 12-4. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  Establishment of municipal court technology fund. There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund (the "fund") pursuant to Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0172. 
The fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(b)  Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(1)  The fee shall be in the amount of four dollars ($4.00). 
(2)  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
a.  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
b.  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
c.  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(3)  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after January 1, 2001. 
(4)  The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the director of finance of the city, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(c)  Designated use of the fund and administration. 
(1)  The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of, or to maintain, technological enhancements for the Municipal Court of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, including: 
a.  Computer systems; 
b.  Computer networks; 
c.  Computer hardware; 
d.  Computer software; 
e.  Imaging systems; 
f.  Electronic kiosks; 
g.  Electronic ticker writers; or 
h.  Docket management systems. 
(2)  The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council of the City of Cedar Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2019-675, § 2, 4-23-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-675, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 23, 2019, repealed the former § 12-4, and enacted a new § 12-4 as set out herein. The former § 12-4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2000-50, §§ 1—7, adopted Dec. 12, 2000.  
Sec. 12-5. - City marshal. 
(a)  Establishment of the city marshal. There is hereby created the office of city marshal, to be filled by qualified persons, appointed by the city manager or his designee. The city marshal and all persons serving in the capacity as city marshal shall meet all qualifications necessary to be certified as peace officers by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education. 
(b)  The city marshal, acting under the direction of the city manager or his designee, shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Execute warrants of arrest, subpoenas, summons, and other legal process issued by a judge of the municipal court; 
(2)  Execute other warrants of arrest, subpoenas, summons, and other legal process as determined by the municipal court administrator; 
(3)  Serve as bailiff of the municipal court when necessary; 
(4)  Perform such other duties as may be in the authority of certified peace officers or as may be determined by the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  The city marshal and deputies shall serve as peace officers of the city and have full police authority in the exercise of their assigned duties. 
(d)  The city marshal is not a member of the police department of the city; however the city marshal is eligible for membership in the Texas Municipal Retirement System. The city marshal's office will be responsible for carrying the commission of all marshals through the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education. 
(e)  The city marshal shall be required to take an oath of office before entering upon the discharge of duties, the oath shall be subscribed by the person taking it and shall be filed and preserved in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2005-232, § 1, 2-22-05)  
Sec. 12-6. - Juvenile case manager fund and fee. 
(a)  There is hereby created a juvenile case manager fee (the "fee"), as authorized by V.T.C.A. Code of Criminal Procedure, Arts. 102.0174 and 45.056. The fee shall be in the amount of five dollars ($5.00). 
(b)  Except as otherwise herein provided, a defendant who is convicted of a fine-only misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall pay the fee as a cost of court. A person is considered convicted of an offense if: 
(1)  The judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person is placed on deferred disposition; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court may waive the fee in cases of demonstrated financial hardship on the part of a convicted defendant if the defendant is indigent, has insufficient resources or income to pay the fee, or is otherwise unable to pay all or part of the underlying fine or costs. 
(d)  All fees collected by the municipal court shall be deposited into the juvenile case manager fund (the "fund") established under this section. 
(e)  The fund may be used only to finance the salary, benefits, training, travel expenses, office supplies, and other necessary expenses relating to the position of a juvenile case manager that is employed by the municipal court under V.T.C.A. Code of Criminal Procedure, Art. 45.056(a). The fund may not be used to supplement the income of an employee whose primary role is not that of a juvenile case manager. 
(Ord. No. 2012-484, § 1, 9-11-12)  
Chapter 13 - NATURAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; planning, Ch. 16; subdivision regulations, Ch. 20. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 13-1—13-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STORAGE FACILITIES AND EXTRACTION SITES 
 
Sec. 13-16. - Placement regulated. 
From July 1, 1984, the placement of all natural resource storage facilities and extraction sites shall be regulated by and controlled by the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-711, § 1, 6-26-84)  
Sec. 13-17. - Natural resources regulated. 
This article shall pertain to and regulate the following natural resource activities: 
(1)  The storage or extraction of sand, caliche, stone, clay or gravel. 
(2)  The storage or extraction of gold, silver, coal, uranium, or any other mineral or natural resource which requires the extraction of such minerals by subsurface mining, strip mining or tunneling or boring. 
(3)  The exploration, extraction, production or storage of oil, natural gas or any related petroleum products, as well as the placement of oil, petroleum or gas wells. 
(Ord. No. 84-711, § 2, 6-26-84)  
Sec. 13-18. - Placement in certain zones prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to place any of the regulated natural resource storage facilities or extraction sites designated in section 13-17 within any area of the city, which has been zoned by the city for residential or multifamily use. It shall further be unlawful to place any of the regulated natural resource storage facilities or extraction sites within five hundred (500) feet of any residential or multifamily structure in any zone. 
(Ord. No. 84-711, § 3, 6-26-84)  
Sec. 13-19. - Lawful zones. 
The following zones within the corporate limits of the city shall be lawful and permitted zones for the placement of regulated natural resources, subject to the further regulations in this article: 
(1)  Commercial districts. 
(2)  Industrial districts. 
(3)  Industrial park districts. 
(Ord. No. 84-711, § 4, 6-26-84)  
Sec. 13-20. - Facility and site permit—Required; application; required information. 
(a)  Before placement of any natural resource storage facility or extraction site, an application must be made to the city secretary for a natural resource storage facility or extraction site permit. In addition to all other inquiries which may be made by the city for the issuance of such permit, the following information must appear with the application: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner of the property. 
(2)  The name and address of the applicant applying for the natural resource storage facility or extraction site permit. 
(3)  A complete description of the property location. 
(4)  A complete description of the scope of the project, including anticipated construction of any permanent structures. 
(5)  The proposed duration of the project. 
(6)  The type of equipment to be utilized on the project. 
(7)  The number of employees to be permanent employees of the project. 
(8)  The location of the nearest utilities and fire hydrants. 
(9)  The security precautions to be enforced by the owner or applicant relative to the project. 
(10)  Evidence of public liability insurance of the owner and applicant, evidencing liability insurance applicable for the specific project. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the application for the permit, the city secretary shall certify to the city council that a true and complete application for the permit has been filed with the city. The city council shall thereafter hold a public hearing at its next regularly scheduled city council meeting, at which time the issuance of the permit shall be discussed and action taken in an open public meeting on such permit request. 
(Ord. No. 84-711, § 5, 6-26-84) 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10.  
Sec. 13-21. - Injunctive relief. 
In addition to all other penalties in connection with this article, the city shall also be empowered to request the issuance of temporary restraining orders, temporary injunctions and permanent injunctions from a court of competent jurisdiction in Dallas County, to prohibit the unlawful violation of any of the provisions of this article related to the regulated natural resource storage facilities and extraction sites. Injunctive relief shall not be exclusive of any other remedies and is provided in the interest of the public safety, health and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-711, § 7, 6-26-84)  
Sec. 13-22. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall, upon conviction in the municipal court, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. Each hour shall constitute a new violation of this article and shall be punishable as a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 84-711, § 6, 6-26-84)  
Secs. 13-23—13-42. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TREE CARE 
 
Sec. 13-43. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not specifically defined shall have the meanings given in Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as revised. 
Public trees shall mean any trees, shrubs, bushes and all woody vegetation on city parks or city-owned property and rights-of-way. 
Park trees shall mean any trees, shrubs, bushes and all woody vegetation in city parks, and in all areas owned by the city and to which the public has access. 
(Ord. No. 2008-368, § 1, 11-11-08)  
Sec. 13-44. - Establishment of a tree care advisory committee. 
(a)  Committee membership. The city council hereby creates an advisory committee known as the "tree care advisory committee," hereinafter referred to as the "committee." The committee shall consist of three (3) members from the parks board approved by the city council. Members of the tree care advisory committee will serve without compensation and at the pleasure of the city council. 
(b)  Term of office. Committee members shall be appointed for one-year terms. 
(c)  Meetings. The committee shall meet a minimum of four (4) times each year. The parks and recreation director or his designee, or the chair of the committee may schedule additional meetings as needed. 
(d)  Officers. The committee shall annually select one of the members to serve as chair, and may appoint a second member to serve as vice-chair. 
(e)  Duties. The duties of the committee shall include: 
(1)  Coordinating and promoting Arbor Day activities; 
(2)  Developing and updating a five-year plan to plant trees on city property; 
(3)  Developing public awareness and education programs relating to trees; 
(4)  Reviewing parks and recreation department concerns relating to tree care; 
(5)  Submitting an annual report of its activities to the city council; 
(6)  Submitting the annual application to renew the Tree City USA designation; and 
(7)  Other duties that may be assigned by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2008-368, § 1, 11-11-08)  
Sec. 13-45. - Tree protection plan option. 
(a)  The parks and recreation director and/or his designees shall have the responsibility to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees and woody plants on all city streets, rights-of-way, and city parks. The parks and recreation director and/or his designee in appropriate cases, and upon consultation with a property owner, may remove or prune a tree on private property which threatens the safety of those who may use a city street or city park. 
(b)  The parks and recreation director and/or his/her designee may recommend the removal of any tree or part thereof that threatens the safety of any person or by which by reason of its location or nature threatens any electric line, telephone line, gas line or any municipal water or sewer line or any public improvement, or any tree which is affected by any injurious fungus, insect or other pest disease. 
(c)  No person shall remove, destroy, or cause the removal or destruction of a tree on city property or in any city park without first having obtained written permission for such removal or destruction from the parks and recreation director. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to attach any cable, wire, rope, sign or any other object to any city tree, plant or shrub without the written permission from the parks and recreation director. 
(Ord. No. 2008-368, § 1, 11-11-08)  
Sec. 13-46. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by law. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2008-368, § 1, 11-11-08)  
Secs. 13-47—13-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TREE PRESERVATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), adopted July 10, 2007, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 13-40—13-67. However, in order to keep Art. II and Art. III in the Code and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 13-61—13-103. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 13-61. - Purpose 
The general purpose of these regulations is to establish the standards for the preservation and protection of a diminishing natural resource, in particular the native and other adapted existing site trees located in the City of Cedar Hill, and to encourage the planting of trees to replace and supplement our urban forest during the development, construction, and redevelopment process. It is the general intent of this article to protect mature trees that are eight (8) or more caliper inches in size, except for species that are identified as unprotected. In adopting this article, the city council expressly recognizes that protected trees often must be removed during the development process and thus it is necessary to define mitigation measures that over time will result in the reforestation of the city. Specific purposes include the following: 
(1)  Preserve and enhance the existing natural features of Cedar Hill that attract people to this community. 
(2)  Encourage preservation of existing public and private shade trees and ornamental trees. 
(3)  Define reasonable measures to preserve existing protected trees. 
(4)  Increase the population and the life span of protected trees. 
(5)  Improve the air quality and environmental comfort of both business and residential citizens. 
(6)  Reduce the erosive effects of rainfall. 
(7)  Prevent the indiscriminate destruction or removal of mature trees. 
(8)  Increase property values by improving the aesthetic qualities of the built environment by incorporating existing mature trees into the built environment. 
(9)  Encourage the preservation of tree groves in order to protect and decrease fragmentation of wildlife habitat. 
(10)  To balance the needs of development with the goals of preserving mature trees. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07)  
Sec. 13-62. - General requirements. 
(1)  Applicability. The provisions of this article IV apply as follows: 
(a)  To any activity resulting in removal of any protected tree on any lot or parcel of land, or on public land, that is not exempt under section 13-63(1) or (3); 
(b)  To any plat application or site plan application that is not exempt under section 13-63(2); and 
(c)  To any building permit application that is not exempt under section 13-63(2). 
(2)  Prohibition on removal of protected tree. 
(a)  For purposes of this article IV, a protected tree is any species of tree eight (8) caliper inches or more in size and that is not an unprotected tree species. 
(b)  No protected tree shall be removed unless: 
(i)  The tree is located on property subject to an exempt development application or activity pursuant to section 13-63; or 
(ii)  Removal of the tree has been authorized under a tree protection plan pursuant to division 2 of this article, or a tree removal permit pursuant to division 3 of the article, and the removal of the protected tree is fully mitigated. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07; Ord. No. 2010-426, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-10)  
Sec. 13-63. - Exempt activities and applications. 
(1)  Exempt activities. The following activities are exempt from these regulations. Whenever the removal of a protected tree is authorized for an activity by this subsection, the activity also is exempt from any other obligation imposed by these regulations related to protection of trees. 
(a)  Single-family and duplex units. Removal of a protected tree by the owner or authorized agent of a finally platted lot, or a parcel that is occupied by a single-family or duplex dwelling unit, for which the city has authorized occupancy. 
(b)  Pre-existing public contracts. Removal of a protected tree on property for which a design contract has been awarded by the city council on or before the effective date of these regulations. 
(c)  Public utilities and infrastructure. Removal of a protected tree by the city, another governmental entity or a public utility in any right-of-way or easement dedicated to and accepted by the city. 
(d)  Sports and recreation facilities. Removal of a protected tree within soccer, baseball, football or other sports facilities, and within golf courses and approved hike and bike trails, which are open for public use. 
(e)  Pre-existing paved surfaces. Replacement or maintenance of any paved surface that existed on or before the effective date of these regulations and that is located within the critical root zone of a protected tree. 
(f)  Plant nursery. Activities within a plant nursery related to trees grown on the premises solely for sale, retail or wholesale. 
(g)  Pruning. Tree pruning solely for purposes of removing diseased limbs or to shape for aesthetic and safety purposes, according to the applicable provisions of the Texas Association of Nurserymen Grades and Standards. 
(h)  Large single-family zoned lots. Removal of a protected tree by the owner or authorized agent on a platted lot that is one-half (½) acre or larger in size, and is zoned for single-family use, and for which a building permit for a single-family. 
(2)  Exempt development applications. The following development applications are exempt from these regulations: 
(a)  Zoning applications. Any application to change the zoning district classification of property or amend the regulations applicable to the district. 
(b)  Plat applications, not including replats. 
(i)  Any plat application approved before or on the effective date of this article IV; or 
(ii)  Any plat application pending for approval on such date, provided the application is subsequently approved; or 
(iii)  Any subsequent plat application in the same series as the approved or pending plat application. 
(iv)  For plat applications filed after the effective date of this article IV, the applicant must seek a determination from the tree preservation administrator pursuant to procedures in section 13-76 that the application is exempt based on prior approvals. 
(c)  Site plan applications. Any application for a site plan required by the zoning ordinance and approved before or on the effective date of this article IV or any site plan application pending for approval on such date, provided the application is subsequently approved. 
(d)  Building permit applications. 
(i)  Any application for a building permit approved before or on the effective date of this article IV; or 
(ii)  Any building permit application pending for approval on the effective date, provided the application is subsequently approved; 
(iii)  Any building permit application filed after the effective date of this article IV for a single-family or duplex residential use on a lot or tract in a subdivision subject to an exempt plat application; or 
(iv)  Any building permit application filed after the effective date for a nonresidential or apartment use on land subject to an exempt site plan application; or 
(v)  Any building permit application for land on which all protected trees have been removed pursuant to an approved tree protection plan. 
(vi)  For building permit applications filed after the effective date of this article IV, or for applications for land on which all protected trees have been removed pursuant to an approved tree protection plan, the applicant must seek a determination from the tree preservation administrator pursuant to procedures in section 13-83 that the application is exempt based on prior approvals. 
(e)  Vested applications. Any application for which it is determined pursuant to section 20-30 of the City Code of Ordinances that the applicant has a vested right to proceed under prior regulations, provided that the application or a prior approved application upon which the vesting claim is based remains in effect for such land. 
(3)  Conditional exemptions. The following activities are exempt from these regulations, subject to conditions, upon approval of the tree preservation administrator pursuant to procedures in section 13-76: 
(a)  Emergency conditions. During the period of an emergency, such as a tornado, storm, flood or other natural disaster, the requirements of this article may be waived as deemed necessary by the emergency management coordinator or other designee of the tree preservation administrator. 
(b)  Utility and drainage easement maintenance. Utility service providers, including the city, or their contractors, agents, successors and assigns shall have the right to maintain their facilities, through removal or trimming of protected trees located within lawfully designated easements or rights-of-way, so as to prevent any part of such trees from becoming a danger to public health, safety and welfare by interfering with utility service. Where possible, trimming shall be done in a manner such that the aesthetics and health of the trees are not destroyed. 
(c)  Diseased or damaged trees. A disease or damaged protected tree may be removed by the city or the owner of the land on which the tree is located upon certification by a landscape architect or other qualified professional that the tree is diseased or damaged beyond the point of recovery, or removal is necessary to prevent the spread of the disease to adjacent, healthy trees, when approved by the tree preservation administrator. 
(d)  Public health and safety. A protected tree that is in danger of falling or otherwise poses a hazard to the public health or safety may be removed by the city or the owner of the land on which the tree is located, when approved by the tree preservation administrator. 
(e)  Agricultural and ranching activities. Removal of a protected tree within a vacant tract or parcel of land at least five (5) acres in size in conjunction with farming or ranching activities, except activities conducted within a flood plain or riparian buffer zone, or for which a sedimentation and erosion control plan must be approved. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07; Ord. No. 2010-426, §§ 1, 3, 4, 12-14-10)  
Sec. 13-64. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this article IV: 
(1)  Caliper inches. The measurement of the average cross-sectional diameter of the trunk of an existing tree at four and one-half (4½) feet above grade in inches. If the tree is on a slope, it shall be measured from the high side of the slope. Newly planted trees shall be measured six (6) inches above grade. 
(2)  Drip line. The vertical line that runs from the outermost portion of the crown of the tree to the ground. 
(3)  Non-disturbance area. Any area of a proposed subdivision or site within which no grading or other development activities will take place and which has been buffered, as required by division 4 (entitled additional standards) of this article. 
(4)  Pad site. The footprint of a principal building or addition to a principal building to be placed on a platted lot or tract, as evidenced from an approved building permit application, together with all land lying within ten (10) linear feet of such footprint. Platted lots that are zoned for single-family use and for which a permit for a single-family dwelling has been issued may include driveways, patios, swimming pools and other paved areas normally associated with single-family dwellings. 
(5)  Removal of tree. The act of directly or indirectly cutting down, destroying, taking out, or effectively removing a tree. 
(6)  Riparian buffer zone. The transitional areas between uplands and adjacent streams, ponds, lakes, and other fresh water bodies, characterized by the presence of moisture tolerant vegetation on banks, edges, or limits of fresh water bodies. 
(7)  Tree grove. A clustering of four (4) or more trees, excluding those tree species listed as unprotected trees, below, that have a combined caliper measurement of thirty-six (36) inches or greater and trunks spaced at no greater than ten-foot intervals. 
(8)  Tree preservation administrator. The person assigned by the city manager to administer this tree preservation ordinance. 
(9)  Unprotected tree. Any tree of the following species regardless of size: 
Silver Maple 	Acer saccharinum 
Sugar Hackberry 	Celtis laevigata 
Hackberry 	Celtis occidentalis 
Honey Locust 	Gleditsia tracanthos 
Bois d'arc 	Maclura pomifera 
Mimosa 	Albizia julibrissin 
Red Mulberry 	Morus rubra 
White Mulberry 	Morus alba 
White (Silver) Poplar 	Poplus alba 
Lombardy Poplar 	Populus nigra italica 
Cottonwood 	Populua deltoids 
Willow 	genus Salix 
Bradford Pear 	Pyrus calleryana 
Green Ash 	Fraxinus pennsylvanica 
Arizona Ash 	Fraxinus velutina 
Black Locus 	Robinia pseudoacacia 
 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07; Ord. No. 2010-426, §§ 1, 5, 12-14-10)  
Secs. 13-65—13-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TREE PROTECTION PLAN 
 
Sec. 13-71. - Plan required for plats and site plans. 
A tree protection plan must be prepared and submitted with (i) every non-exempt application for plat approval; (ii) every non-exempt application for site plan approval for non-residential or multi-family uses; and (iii) every non-exempt building permit application for which plat or site plan approval has not been obtained and is not required. No plat, site plan or building permit application subject to this division shall be determined to be complete unless accompanied by a proposed tree protection plan. The application for a tree protection plan shall be submitted with the first application for the development, unless deferred under section 13-73. The tree protection plan shall contain both a tree inventory pursuant to section 13-74, and a tree mitigation plan pursuant to section 13-75. The application shall be forwarded to the tree preservation administrator for processing and decision in accordance with section 13-76. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07)  
Sec. 13-72. - Application requirements. 
The application for a tree protection plan shall include the following information or documents: 
(1)  Name and contact information for the applicant; 
(2)  Name and location of the proposed subdivision or development for which the tree protection plan is being submitted; 
(3)  An aerial photograph or other graphic depiction of the property clearly demarcating areas within which vegetation will not be removed or otherwise disturbed during the development process ("non-disturbance areas"); 
(4)  Certification that all non-disturbance areas have been fenced and designated as non-development zones; 
(5)  A tree inventory, prepared in accordance with section 13-74; 
(6)  Certification that each protected tree that is not to be removed has been tagged with an identification tag and flagged with survey tape; 
(7)  A map or other graphic depiction designating the location of protected trees to be removed in relation to proposed rights-of-way, easements or lot improvements; 
(8)  A table summarizing the inventory of protected trees to be preserved and those to be removed; 
(9)  A summary illustrating the measures that will be taken to preserve protected trees that are not designated for removal in accordance with section 13-85; 
(10)  A mitigation plan prepared in accordance with section 13-75; and 
(11)  Payment of any reforestation fees proposed in the mitigation plan. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07)  
Sec. 13-73. - Tree protection plan options. 
(1)  An applicant for a master land plan may request deferral of a tree protection plan until the time of application for preliminary plats, provided that adequate measures are taken to prevent removal of any protected tree. The tree preservation administrator shall initially decide the deferral request, subject to appeal to the city council. 
(2)  An applicant for plat or site plan approval may elect one of the following options in preparing the tree protection plan: 
(a)  Removal of trees only in designated rights-of-way. The applicant must agree to designate and secure all land subject to the application lying outside of proposed rights-of-way or easements as non-disturbance areas. The applicant then may limit the tree inventory required by section 13-74 to areas within such rights-of-way or easements, and is required to mitigate only removal of protected trees in tree groves pursuant to section 13-75. 
(b)  Removal of protected trees outside of designated rights-of-way. If the applicant elects to prepare a tree protection plan that also proposes removal of protected trees on the lots to be platted or the land outside rights-of-way and easements, the tree inventory required by section 13-74 must be prepared for the entire property subject to the application, and, in addition to the requirements in subsection (a), the applicant is required to mitigate removal of protected trees on all land outside rights-of-way or easements pursuant to section 13-75. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07; Ord. No. 2010-426, § 6, 12-14-10)  
Sec. 13-74. - Tree inventory requirements. 
(1)  A tree inventory shall be prepared by a qualified professional. 
(2)  The tree inventory shall be prepared on a scaled drawing consistent with the scale on which the proposed development is graphically depicted, and shall identify the following elements: 
(a)  The boundaries of all tree groves and each non-disturbance area; 
(b)  The location of all trees greater than or equal to eight (8) caliper inches in diameter by key number; 
(c)  Identification of each protected tree and non-protected tree greater than eight (8) caliper inches, by species (common and scientific names), diameter and key number; 
(d)  Identification of each protected tree to be removed by key number; and 
(e)  Total caliper inches of protected trees to be removed and of those the removal of which is to be mitigated. 
(3)  The tree preservation administrator may authorize a tree inventory method that differs from the one described in subsection (2) above provided the method accurately indicates the number of trees, their species, and the total caliper inches of protected trees within the inventory area. 
(4)  Non-disturbance areas. Once a non-disturbance area has been designated and protected in accordance with section 13-85, no further inventory of trees within the boundaries of the area is required. 
(5)  Tagging. The preparer shall tag each protected tree and non-protected tree greater than or equal to eight (8) caliper-inches in diameter and designate on the tag the inventory number and indicate if the tree is to be preserved or removed. The preparer shall also identify and fence all non-disturbance areas within the development, or the proposed pad site, if the survey is prepared for purposes of a tree removal permit. 
(6)  Measurements. The following methods shall be used to measure the diameter of a tree: 
(a)  Single-trunk tree. The diameter of a single-trunk tree shall be calculated by measuring the diameter of the trunk at breast height (four and one-half (4½) feet above grade). 
(b)  Multi-trunk tree. The diameter of a multi-trunk tree shall be calculated by combining the diameter of the largest stem or trunk with one-half (½) of the diameter of each additional stem or trunk, each measured at breast height (four and one-half (4½) feet above grade). 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07; Ord. No. 2010-426, § 7, 12-14-10)  
Sec. 13-75. - Mitigation plan requirements. 
General requirements. The removal of any protected tree, except trees in rights-of-way, easements or pad sites authorized for removal under a tree protection plan, shall be fully mitigated in accordance with one (1) or more of the following methods. The applicant may elect among options (1) through (3), or a combination of such options. Tree preservation administrator approval is required for option (4). The mitigation plan shall include a detailed description of the methods proposed for mitigating removal of protected trees. 
(1)  Transplanting the protected trees; 
(2)  Planting new trees at approved locations that replace a protected tree to be removed, either: 
(a)  Having twice the diameter in caliper inches of the protected tree to be removed, for tree protection plans submitted with plat or site plan applications; or 
(b)  Having the same diameter in caliper inches as that of the protected tree to be removed, for tree protection plans submitted with building permit applications, or for tree removal permits not associated with development activities. 
(3)  Paying the cash equivalent ("mitigation fee") of the number of caliper inches required to replace the caliper inches of the protected tree to be removed into a reforestation fund ("urban forest fund"), that will be used by the city to plant trees in street rights-of-way, parks or other public spaces; or 
(4)  The preservation of smaller, more desirable trees, as described in section 13-86(2), upon approval of the tree preservation administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07)  
Sec. 13-76. - Approval procedures. 
(1)  Completeness of application. The tree preservation administrator shall review each application for a tree protection plan to determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the procedures in City Code of Ordinances section 20-6. If the administrator determines that the tree protection plan application is incomplete, the plat, site plan or building permit application with which the plan is submitted also shall be deemed incomplete. 
(2)  Decision on exemption claim. Where a plat application, site plan application or building permit application is accompanied by a claim for exemption from the requirements of this division 2, the tree preservation administrator shall determine whether the application is exempt under section 13-63, and shall report his decision to the official responsible for processing the plat, site plan or building permit application within ten (10) working days of the date the application is submitted. If the application is determined to be exempt, the responsible official shall process it in accordance with applicable requirements. If the application is determined to be subject to the requirements of this division 2, the responsible official shall advise the applicant of the administrator's decision and not process the application further until a complete tree protection plan has been submitted with the application. The applicant may appeal the tree preservation administrator's decision in the manner provided in section 13-103(2). 
(3)  Decision. The tree preservation administrator shall decide whether to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application for a tree protection plan in accordance with the criteria in subsection (4). The tree preservation administrator shall decide the application within thirty (30) days of the date a complete application is submitted. 
(a)  Conditional approval of the tree protection plan shall constitute conditions applicable to approval of the plat or site application for the property subject to the plan. No final plat application, site plan application or building permit application subject to this division 2, however, shall be approved until the tree protection plan has been approved. 
(b)  Denial of the tree protection plan shall result in denial of the associated plat, site plan or building permit application. 
(c)  An appeal of the tree preservation administrator's decision to the city council in accordance with section 13-103 shall stay final action on the associated plat, site plan or building permit application. 
(4)  Criteria for approval. In deciding the application for a tree preservation plan, the tree preservation administrator, or the city council on appeal, shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the application based on the following criteria: 
(a)  The tree inventory correctly identifies each protected tree on the development site; 
(b)  Each protected tree has been appropriately tagged and keyed; 
(c)  The mitigation plan for each protected tree to be removed meets the requirements of section 13-75; and 
(d)  The proposed tree protection measures during development satisfy the requirements of section 13-85. 
(5)  Effect. Approval of a tree protection plan authorizes the applicant to remove protected trees from the site during the construction process in accordance with the plan. No protected tree shall be removed, however, until all of the following have occurred: 
(a)  All non-disturbance areas and protected trees not to be removed during development have been demarcated and secured on the ground in accordance with measures set forth in this article; 
(b)  All proposed mitigation fees have been paid. 
(6)  Occupancy limitations. No building permit for a single-family or duplex residential use, nor certificate of occupancy for other uses, shall be finally approved until all mitigation measures approved for a tree protection plan have been undertaken and verified by the administrator, or performance secured by a letter of credit or other form of surety approved by the city attorney. 
(7)  Plan verification and enforcement. Approval of a tree protection plan authorizes the tree preservation administrator to inspect the property during or after construction to determine whether the tree protection plan has been followed. If the tree preservation administrator determines that protected trees not designated for removal have been removed, or that adequate measures are not being taken to preserve protected trees during development, he may seek immediate enforcement of the plan, including measures to stop work on the development, until additional mitigation has been made in accordance with section 13-50. Prior to acceptance of improvements for the development or issuance of a building permit, the tree preservation administrator shall verify that the developer's obligations under the tree protection plan have been fully satisfied, and, in the event that some obligations have not been fulfilled, shall identify measures to bring the development into compliance with the approved tree protection plan, which shall serve as conditions for acceptance of improvements or issuance of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07; Ord. No. 2010-426, § 8, 12-14-10)  
Secs. 13-77—13-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TREE REMOVAL PERMIT 
 
Sec. 13-81. - Permit required. 
A tree removal permit application must be submitted (i) with every non-exempt application for a building permit or (ii) every non-exempt activity not associated with development that is intended to or may foreseeably result in removal of a protected tree. The application shall be submitted to the tree preservation administrator for processing and decision in accordance with section 13-83. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07; Ord. No. 2010-426, § 9, 12-14-10)  
Sec. 13-82. - Application requirements. 
(1)  Application contents where building permit sought. The application for a tree removal permit that accompanies a building permit application shall include the following information or documents: 
(a)  Name and contact information for the applicant; 
(b)  Address and location of the platted lot or tract for which the tree removal permit is being submitted; 
(c)  The approved tree protection plan, if any, for the platted lot or tract to be developed; 
(d)  A tree inventory prepared in accordance with section 13-74; 
(e)  A tree mitigation plan prepared in accordance with section 13-75; 
(f)  A schematic and appropriately scaled site plan showing the layout of the lot or tract, including the proposed pad site and the location of each protected tree on the lot or tract in relation to the pad site; 
(g)  Certification that each protected tree that is not to be removed has been tagged with an identification tag and flagged with survey tape; 
(h)  A map or other graphic depiction designating the location of protected trees to be removed in relation to the pad site; 
(i)  A table summarizing the inventory of protected trees to be preserved and those to be removed outside the boundaries of the pad site; 
(j)  A summary of the measures that will be taken to preserve protected trees that are not designated for removal; 
(k)  Payment of any reforestation fees proposed to mitigate protected tree removal. 
(2)  Application contents for tree removal not associated with development. Where the applicant seeks authorization to remove a protected tree in conjunction with activities not associated with development, the following information or documents shall be submitted: 
(a)  Name and contact information for the applicant; 
(b)  Address and location of the platted lot or tract for which the tree removal permit is being submitted; 
(c)  Identification of each protected tree to be removed, consistent with section 13-74; 
(d)  A description of the methods to be used to mitigate the removal of each protected trees, consistent with section 13-75; and 
(e)  Payment of any reforestation fees proposed to mitigate protected tree removal. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07)  
Sec. 13-83. - Approval procedures. 
(1)  Completeness of application. The tree preservation administrator shall review each application for a tree removal permit to determine whether the application is complete in accordance with the procedures in City Code of Ordinances section 20-6. If the tree removal permit application is incomplete, the application for such permit, together with the accompanying application for a building permit, shall be deemed incomplete. 
(2)  Decision on exemption claim. Where a building permit application is accompanied by a claim for exemption from the requirements of this division 3, the tree preservation administrator shall determine whether the application is exempt under section 13-63, and shall report his decision to the official responsible for processing the building permit application within ten (10) working days of the date the application is submitted. If the application is determined to be exempt, the responsible official shall process it in accordance with applicable requirements. If the application is determined to be subject to the requirements of this division 3, the responsible official shall advise the application of the administrator's decision and not process the application further until a complete tree protection plan has been submitted with the application. The applicant may appeal the tree preservation administrator's decision in the manner provided in section 13-103(2). 
(3)  Decision. The tree preservation administrator shall decide whether to approve, conditionally approve or deny the application for a tree removal permit in accordance with the criteria in subsection (4). The tree preservation administrator shall decide the application within thirty (30) days of the date a complete application is submitted. Conditional approval of the tree removal permit shall constitute conditions applicable to approval of the building permit application for the property subject to the permit. Denial of the tree removal permit shall result in denial of the associated building permit application. An appeal of the tree preservation administrator's decision to the city council in accordance with section 13-103 shall stay final action on the building permit application. 
(4)  Criteria for approval. In deciding the application for a tree removal permit, the tree preservation administrator, or the city council on appeal, shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the application based on the following criteria: 
(a)  The application is consistent with any approved tree protection plan applicable to the lot or tract; 
(b)  Where required, the tree inventory correctly identifies each protected tree on the lot or tract; 
(c)  Where required, each protected tree outside the pad site has been appropriately tagged and keyed; 
(d)  Each protected tree to be removed (and where applicable, lies outside the pad site) has been adequately mitigated in accordance with the requirements of section 13-75; and 
(e)  The proposed tree protection measures during development of the lot or tract satisfy the requirements of section 13-85. 
(5)  Effect. Approval of a tree removal permit authorizes the applicant to remove protected trees from the site during the construction process or other activity in accordance with the permit. No protected tree shall be removed, however, until all of the following have occurred: 
(a)  All non-disturbance areas and protected trees not to be removed during development have been demarcated and secured on the ground in accordance with measures set forth in this article. 
(b)  All proposed mitigation fees have been paid. 
(6)  Plan verification and enforcement. Approval of a tree removal permit authorizes the tree preservation administrator to inspect the property during or after construction to determine whether the requirements of the tree removal permit have been satisfied. If the tree preservation administrator determines that protected trees not designated for removal have been removed, or that adequate measures are not being taken to preserve protected trees during development of the lot or tract, he may seek enforcement of the plan, including measures to stop work on the development, until additional mitigation has been made in accordance with section 13-75. The tree preservation administrator shall verify that the owner's obligations under the tree removal permit have been fully satisfied, and, in the event that some obligations have not been fulfilled, shall identify measures to bring the development into compliance with the approved tree removal permit. 
(7)  Occupancy limitations. No building permit for a single-family or duplex residential use, nor certificate of occupancy for other uses, shall be finally approved until all mitigation measures have been undertaken and verified by the administrator, or performance secured by a letter of credit or other form of surety approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07; Ord. No. 2010-426, § 10, 12-14-10)  
Sec. 13-84. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ADDITIONAL STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 13-85. - Tree protection during development. 
The subdivider or developer shall assure that protected trees are preserved throughout the development process. 
(1)  Non-disturbance areas. Each non-disturbance area within the development site shall be fenced to assure that the area will remain in a natural state. Fencing shall be adequate to prevent entry of vehicles or machinery, storage of materials or goods, or any other type of trespass that could harm the preserved area during the construction period, as determined by the tree preservation administrator. 
(2)  Construction areas. The following measures shall be put into effect by the subdivider or developer to assure preservation of protected trees that are not to be removed during construction. 
(a)  A four-foot plastic fencing, or where approved by the tree preservation administrator, silt fencing, shall be installed around the drip line of all protected tree(s) prior to commencement of construction. 
(b)  A construction entrance that avoids protected trees shall be established prior to commencement of construction. 
(c)  Construction, placement of fill, excavation, storage of construction materials, cleaning of equipment, the disposal of waste materials, or other construction related activity is prohibited under the canopy or within the drip line of any protected tree, unless expressly authorized in writing by the tree preservation administrator. Major changes of grade (i.e. six (6) inches or greater) within the canopy or drip line will require additional measures to maintain proper oxygen and water exchange with the roots. Root pruning will be required when construction activity is authorized under the drip line of protected trees, and must be completed a minimum of two (2) weeks prior to any construction activity within the drip line. 
(d)  Attachments or wires shall not be attached to any protected tree. Cables, tree rods, and similar hardware installation that aid structural integrity of a protected tree are exempt from this section, if approved in writing by the tree preservation administrator. 
(e)  Any trees removed shall be chipped and used for mulch on site or hauled off-site. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07)  
Sec. 13-86. - Implementation of mitigation plan. 
(1)  Replanted trees. All trees planted to mitigate removal of protected trees, including transplanting of a protected tree, shall be located within public rights-of-way, within the street yard, or other public land located within the boundaries of the original development site from which protected tress were removed, or, where authorized by the tree preservation administrator, at an alternative public site. 
(a)  Minimum tree size to be planted shall be four-inch caliper and of the species listed as a "large or medium tree" on the "selected plant list" in the Cedar Hill landscape ordinance. 
(b)  The species of trees planted shall be varied, with no one (1) species accounting for more than thirty (30) percent of the total trees planted. 
(c)  The total caliper inches of new trees planted shall be not less than twice the total caliper inches of protected trees that are removed. 
(d)  Ongoing maintenance for the newly planted tree shall be guaranteed for a period not less than two (2) years following acceptance of improvements or issuance of a building permit. Maintenance typically shall require installation of permanent irrigation, unless alternative measures are authorized by the tree preservation administrator. 
(2)  Preservation of smaller, desirable trees. When authorized by the tree preservation administrator, preservation of trees of a species other than an unprotected tree may mitigate removal of a protected tree, provided that the total caliper inches of such preserved trees is equal to or greater than the total caliper inches of the protected tree to be removed. Trees to be preserved shall be no smaller than four (4) caliper inches in diameter, shall be in healthy and thriving condition prior to construction and shall be subject to the same protection measures as for protected trees, as set forth in subsection (1). 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07)  
Secs. 13-87—13-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - URBAN FOREST FUND 
 
Sec. 13-91. - Establishment of urban forest fund. 
(1)  Account established. The city's finance department shall establish an interest-bearing account into which mitigation fees collected under this article are deposited and to which interest is allocated. Interest earned on the account into which the mitigation fees are deposited shall be considered funds of the account and shall be used solely for the purposes described in section 13-92. 
(2)  Fee established. A mitigation fee hereby is established in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per caliper inch for each protected tree removed and that has not been otherwise mitigated pursuant to this article. 
(3)  Collection of fees. Mitigation fees shall be collected either at the time of application for approval of a tree protection plan required under division 2, or at the time of building permit application for fees due under division 3. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07)  
Sec. 13-92. - Use of fees. 
Mitigation fees deposited in the urban forest fund shall be used solely to replant protected trees in street rights-of-way, parks or other public places. Expenditure of such funds shall be at the discretion of the tree preservation administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07)  
Secs. 13-93—13-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND RELIEF MEASURES 
 
Sec. 13-101. - Administration. 
An application for a tree protection plan or an application for a protected tree removal permit shall be submitted to the tree preservation administrator in accordance with division 2 or division 3 of this article IV, respectively. The tree preservation administrator shall be the responsible official for processing or initially approving the application. The tree preservation administrator also shall be the enforcement official for this article IV. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07; Ord. No. 2010-426, § 1, 12-14-10)  
Sec. 13-102. - Enforcement. 
(1)  Penalty. Any person, firm, corporation, agent, or employee thereof who violates the provisions of this article IV shall be shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) per caliper inch for each protected tree removed, destroyed or damaged in violation of this article, not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation, or a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for violation of any other duty imposed by this article. The unauthorized removal of each protected tree shall be considered a separate offense. The penalty imposed by this section shall be in addition to any and all mitigation required pursuant to division 4 of this article IV and any other remedy authorized by the Code of Ordinance, City of Cedar Hill, Texas, or by statute, not inconsistent with this section. 
(2)  Removal of public trees. It shall be deemed a violation of this article for any person or firm to engage in the business or occupation or pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees within the city without first procuring approval from the tree preservation administrator. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07; Ord. No. 2010-426, § 1, 12-14-10)  
Sec. 13-103. - Relief measures. 
(1)  Variance. An applicant for a tree protection plan or protected tree removal permit may request a variance to one of more requirements of this article IV. The city council may grant the variance upon determining that strict application of the provisions of this article will create an undue hardship that has not been created by the actions of the applicant. 
(2)  Appeal of tree preservation administrator decision. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the tree preservation administrator, including an exemption determination, may file an appeal with the city council. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the tree preservation administrator, shall state the nature of the complaint and shall be accompanied by an unconditional waiver of any statutory or ordinance deadline for deciding a development application with which the decision is associated. The city council shall hear such an appeal within thirty (30) days of its filing and shall decide the appeal based on the same criteria applicable to the decision of the tree preservation administrator. 
(3)  Vested rights petition. Any property owner or applicant for a development permit may file a vested rights petition pursuant to section 20-30 of the City Code of Ordinances to determine whether the land proposed for development is exempt from the requirements of this article IV because the property owner or applicant has acquired a vested right to proceed under prior regulations. The petition shall be processed and decided in accordance with the procedures and standards in section 20-30. An appeal from the tree preservation administrator's decision on an exemption for a development application, where the exemption is based upon a claim of vested rights, shall be decided under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-320, § 1(Exh. A), 7-10-07; Ord. No. 2010-426, § 1, 12-14-10)  
Secs. 13-104—13-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 13-121. - Title. 
This article may be known and cited as the Stormwater Management Ordinance for the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-122. - Scope. 
This article focuses on water quality, storm drainage, grading activities, and erosion and sediment control practices within the geographical limits of the city, including any areas subsequently annexed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-123. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are as follows: 
(a)  To maintain and improve the quality of water impacted by the storm drainage system within the City of Cedar Hill. 
(b)  To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff and illicit discharges from industrial, commercial, residential, and construction sites into the storm drainage system within the City of Cedar Hill. 
(c)  To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of pollutants, such as trash, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste, sediment, and other pollutants into the storm drainage system. 
(d)  To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous consumer products. 
(e)  To facilitate compliance with local, state and federal mandates and permits by owners of construction sites within the City of Cedar Hill. 
(f)  To enable the City of Cedar Hill to comply with federal, state, and local laws and regulations applicable to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permitting requirements for stormwater discharges. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-124. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations when used in this article shall have the designated meanings: 
(a)  BMP—Best management practices. 
(b)  CFR—Code of Federal Regulations. 
(c)  EPA—U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(d)  ESC—Erosion and sediment control. 
(e)  MEP—Maximum extent practicable. 
(f)  MS4—Municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(g)  NOI—Notice of intent. 
(h)  NOT—Notice of termination. 
(i)  NPDES—National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(j)  SWP3—Stormwater pollution prevention plan. 
(k)  TAC—Texas Administrative Code. 
(l)  TCEQ—Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
(m)  TPDES—Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(n)  USC—United States Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-125. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agricultural crop management practices shall mean all land farming operations, including plowing or tilling of land for the purpose of crop production or the harvesting of crops. 
Applicant shall mean any person who submits an application to the city for a permit pursuant to this article. 
Below ground installations shall mean any activity that causes excess sediment laden water, concrete sawing wash water, wash water or drilling mud pumped from an excavation or structure and shall be treated as sediment laden runoff for erosion control purposes. 
Best management practices (BMP) shall mean the management practices and methods to control pollutants in stormwater. BMP are of two types: "source controls" (nonstructural) and "treatment controls" (structural). Source controls are practices that control pollution by reducing potential pollutants at their source, before they come into contact with stormwater. Treatment controls remove pollutants from stormwater. 
Building shall mean any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
City shall mean the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
Clearing shall mean any act by which vegetative cover, structures or surface material is removed, including, but not limited to, root mat or topsoil removal. 
Commercial shall mean any business, trade, industry, or other activity engaged in for profit. 
Construction site shall mean any location where construction activity occurs. 
Contaminated shall mean containing harmful quantities of pollutants. 
Contractor shall mean any person or firm performing or managing construction work at a construction site, including any construction manager, general contractor or subcontractor. Also includes, but is not limited to, earthwork, paving, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical or landscaping contractors, and material suppliers delivering materials to the site. 
Detention shall mean a stormwater management technique of which the primary function is to control the peak rate of stormwater surface runoff by utilizing temporary storage and a controlled rate of release. This may include, but shall not be limited to, the use of reservoirs, roof tops, parking areas, holding tanks, in-pipe and in-channel storage. 
Detention facility shall mean a temporary or permanent natural or man made structure that provides for the temporary storage of stormwater runoff. 
Developer shall mean any person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, state agency, or political subdivision thereof engaged in development. 
Development shall mean any man-made change to improved or unimproved real property including the construction or reconstruction of buildings or structures; paving, excavation, grading, filling or similar operation; or the filing and recording of a subdivision plat. 
Director shall mean the Director of Public Works for the City of Cedar Hill or his/her authorized designee. 
Discharge shall mean any addition or release of any pollutant, stormwater or any other substance whatsoever into a storm drainage system. 
Discharger shall mean any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility. 
Easement shall mean authorization by a property owner for use by another person or persons of all or any portion of the owner's land for a specified purpose. 
Environmental protection agency (EPA) shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the regional office thereof, any federal department, agency, or commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and any duly authorized official of the EPA or such successor agency. 
Erosion shall mean the wearing away of the ground surface as a result of the movement of wind, water, ice, gravity, artificial means and/or land disturbance activities. 
Erosion and sediment control (ESC) plan shall mean a site plan which includes details, showing the property where land disturbing activity will take place and showing the locations and types of BMP or equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff and erosion and to retain sediment on a particular site during the period in which pre-construction and construction related land disturbances, fills, and soil storage occur, and before final improvements are completed. 
Erosion and sediment control standards shall mean the erosion and sediment control design criteria and specifications adopted in writing by the director as part of the city standard construction details. 
Excavation shall mean any act by which soil is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed, and includes the conditions that result from that act. 
Facility shall mean any building, structure, installation, from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant. 
Fertilizer shall mean a substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form available to plants and is used primarily in promoting or stimulating the growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop. 
Final approval shall mean completion of a project, site or building in accordance with city requirements and ordinances. In the case of a building, a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
Fire protection water shall mean any water, including any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person to control or extinguish a fire or to inspect or test fire equipment. 
Fill shall mean any act, by which soil is deposited, placed, pushed, pulled, or transported and includes the conditions that result from that act. 
Floodplain shall mean the land area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, or lake which is likely to be flooded in the event of a one-hundred-year flood, or as shown on the National Flood Insurance Program maps. 
Garbage shall mean animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
Grading shall mean any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, moved, leveled, stockpiled, or any combination thereof, and includes the conditions that result from that act. 
Grading permit shall mean the permit required for any land disturbance activity. 
Groundwater shall mean any water residing below the surface of the earth or percolating into or out of the earth. 
Hazardous substance shall mean any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part 302. 
Hazardous waste shall mean any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261. 
Illicit discharge shall mean any discharge to the storm drainage system that is prohibited under this article. 
Industrial waste (or commercial waste) shall mean any wastes produced as a by-product of any industrial, institutional or commercial process or operation, other than domestic sewage. 
Inspection shall mean the periodic field review of erosion and sediment control measures as defined in the erosion and sediment control plan for the purposes of determining compliance. 
Land disturbance shall mean any act by which soil is moved and land changed that may result in erosion or the movement of sediments, and may include tilling, clearing, grading, excavating, stripping, stockpiling, filling and related activities, and the covering of land surfaces with an impermeable material. 
Maximum extent practicable (MEP) shall mean the use or those best management practices, which, based on sound engineering and hydro-geological principles, will, to the greatest degree possible, given all relevant considerations, including technology, climate and site conditions, prohibit erosion and sedimentation from a site during and after development. 
Mobile commercial cosmetic cleaning (or mobile washing) shall mean power washing, steam cleaning and any other method of mobile cosmetic cleaning of vehicles and/or exterior surfaces engaged in for commercial purposes or related to a commercial activity. 
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) shall mean the system of conveyances, including roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catch basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins and ponds owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and not used for collecting or conveying sanitary sewage. 
Non-point source shall mean any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a "point-source". 
Notice of intent shall mean the notice of intent that is required by the TCEQ or EPA to discharge stormwater. 
Notice of termination shall mean the notice of termination as required by the TCEQ or EPA to request termination of coverage from a stormwater permit once construction activities have ceased. "Notice of violation" shall mean a written notice detailing any violations of this article and any action expected or the violators. 
Off-site borrow area shall mean a source of earth fill material used in the construction of embankments or other earth fill structures, that is located on another parcel of property other than where the principal construction is occurring. 
Off-site sedimentation shall mean deposit of soil material beyond the limits of the property undergoing land disturbing activity or in city streets, alleys or drainage facilities in an amount sufficient to constitute a threat to public safety or comfort. 
Off-site spoil area shall mean an area on another parcel of property, other than where the principal construction is occurring, where excess earth, rock or construction material is disposed of. 
Oil shall mean any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to: petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil, synthetic oil, motor oil, cooking oil, grease, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste. 
One hundred year storm" shall mean a rainstorm having a one-percent probability of occurrence in any given year. 
Operator shall mean the person or persons associated with a large or small construction activity that meets either of the following two criteria: 1) have operational control over the site specifications; and 2) have the day-to-day operational control of those activities at the site necessary to ensure compliance with SWP3 requirements and any permit conditions. 
Owner shall mean the person who owns a facility, part of a facility or land. 
Permanent erosion control devices shall mean devices or practices installed prior to final approval and maintained after final approval to prevent or minimize the erosion and deposit of soil materials. Such devices may include, but shall not be limited to, permanent seeding, sod, storm drain channels, channel linings, storm drain pipes, outlet velocity control structures and stormwater detention structures. 
Permanent ground cover shall mean permanent vegetative cover on all bare soil areas of a property not covered by a permanent structure or landscaping improvements, including but not limited to, live sod, perennial grasses or other materials which lessen runoff and soil erosion on the property. 
Permit shall mean a written permission giving consent for a specific activity. 
Person shall mean any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, church, governmental entity, or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns, including all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
Pesticide shall mean a substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel or migrate any pest. 
Petroleum product shall mean a product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel or lubricant in a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor oil, motor gasoline, gasohol, other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and #1 and #2 diesel. 
Plat shall mean a legally recorded plan of a parcel of land indicating the location and dimension of such features as streets, alleys, lots, easements and other elements pertinent to a subdivision. 
Pollutant shall mean any substance attributable to water pollution, including but not limited to rubbish, garbage, solid waste, litter, debris, dirt, soil, concrete, rocks, bricks, or other waste building material, yard waste, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, pet waste, animal waste, domestic sewage, industrial waste, sanitary sewage, wastewater, septic tank waste, mechanical fluid, oil, motor oil, used oil, grease, petroleum products, antifreeze, surfactants, solvents, detergents, cleaning agents, paint, heavy metals, toxins, household hazardous waste, small quantity generator waste, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, soil and sediment. 
Pollution shall mean the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, any water that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, plant life, property, or public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
Private storm drainage system shall mean all privately or publicly owned ground, surfaces, structures or systems, excluding the MS4, that contribute to or convey stormwater, including but not limited to roofs, gutters, downspouts, lawns, driveways, pavement, roads, streets, curbs, gutters, ditches, inlets, drains, catch basins, pipes, tunnels, culverts, channels, detention basins, ponds, draws, swales, streams. 
Project shall mean any man-made change involving the construction, reconstruction, maintenance or improvement of real property and structures. 
Public owned improvements shall mean improvements such as (but not limited to) concrete channel liner, improved channel, pipes of various sizes and materials, box culverts and miscellaneous other concrete structures all on public property or in a public easement. 
Public property shall mean property owned by the city, state, or federal government or dedicated to such agency. 
Public storm drainage system shall mean any underground-enclosed pipe system and/or improved channel that is on public property or within a public easement. 
Qualified person shall mean a person who possesses the required certification, license, or appropriate competence, skills, and ability as demonstrated by sufficient education, training, and/or experience to perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with the regulatory requirements and generally accepted industry standards for such activity. 
Release shall mean to dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, inject, leach, dispose or otherwise introduce into the storm drainage system. 
Responsible party (RP) shall mean a business entity, utility agency, developer, property owner, contractor or holder of a building permit who is required to comply with the terms of this article. 
Sampling shall mean the procedures associated with the determination of settleable solids and may include suspended solids in a discharge sample of water. 
Sediment shall mean any solid material, mineral or organic, that has been deposited in water, is in suspension in water, is being transported or has been removed from its site of origin by wind, water, or gravity. 
Sediment control shall mean measures that prevent sediment from leaving the site. 
Site shall mean a parcel of land, or a combination of parcels contiguous on which grading is performed as a single unified operation. 
Small quantity generator waste shall mean any hazardous waste generated by a small quantity generator. 
Soil shall mean the unconsolidated mineral and organic material on the immediate surface of the earth that serves as a natural medium for the growth of land plants. 
Soil storage shall mean the activity of depositing soil or other earth materials for later use or disposal. 
Solid waste shall mean any garbage, rubbish, refuse and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, construction, mining or agricultural operations, and residential, community and institutional activities. 
Stabilization shall mean practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
Staging area shall mean an on-site or off-site location used by a contractor to store materials for a project, to assemble portions of equipment or structures, to store equipment or machinery, to park vehicles, or for other construction related uses. 
State shall mean the State of Texas. 
Stop work order shall mean the suspension of all city permits with no approvals or inspections of work for the site or project being performed. 
Storm drainage system shall mean all surfaces, structures and systems that contribute to or convey stormwater, including private drainage systems, the MS4, surface water, groundwater, Surface Water in the State, and Waters of the United States. 
Stormwater shall mean runoff resulting from precipitation. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3) shall mean a document that is required by a permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity, including construction, and describes the BMP to be implemented at a site, to reduce to the maximum extent practicable the discharge of pollutants. 
Stormwater runoff shall mean water resulting from precipitation which is not absorbed by the soil, evaporated into the atmosphere, or entrapped by ground surface depressions and vegetation, and which flows over the ground surface. 
Structure shall mean that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Subdivision development shall mean activities associated with the platting of any parcel of land into two or more lots and includes all construction activity taking place thereon. 
Surface water in the state shall mean lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, wetlands, marshes, inlets, canals, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all water-courses and bodies of surface water, that are subject to the jurisdiction of the state; except that waters in treatment systems which are authorized by state or federal law, regulation, or permit, and which are created for the purpose of waste treatment are not considered to be water in the state. 
Temporary erosion control devices shall mean devices installed or practices implemented and maintained during land disturbing activities to prevent, minimize or control the erosion and deposit of soil materials. 
These regulations shall mean the article in its entirety. 
TPDES shall mean the program delegated to the State of Texas by the EPA pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b). 
TPDES permit shall mean a permit issued by TCEQ, as the permitting agency, that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to surface water in the state. 
Uncontaminated shall mean not containing harmful quantities of pollutants. 
Used oil (or used motor oil) shall mean any oil that, as a result of use, storage or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original properties. 
Utility agency shall mean private utility companies, contractors working for private utility companies and are engaged in construction or maintenance of utility distribution lines and services, including water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas, telephone, television and communication services. 
Vegetative cover shall mean any grasses, shrubs, trees and other vegetation that hold and stabilize soils. 
Water quality standard shall mean the narrative and numerical criteria designation set for a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable uses deemed by state or federal regulatory standards to be necessary to protect those uses. 
Waters of the United States shall mean all waters which are currently used, were used in the past or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and the flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other Waters of the United States, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as Waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of "Waters of the United States" at 40 CFR Section 122.2; but not including waters in the treatment systems which are authorized by state or federal law, regulation, or permit, and which are created for the purpose of waste treatment. 
Yard waste shall mean leaves, grass clippings, tree limbs, brush, soil, rocks or debris that result from landscaping, gardening, yard maintenance or land clearing operations. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-126. - Public responsibilities. 
The city's authorized representatives are authorized to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
Operation and maintenance of public owned facilities: 
(a)  The city's department of public works shall be responsible for maintaining the conveyance of public runoff within the city owned public storm drainage system either improved or unimproved, located within public right-of-way or city owned property. It is the responsibility of the property owners to mow and keep these drainage ditches clean. Further, the property owners are prohibited from modifying or adding any fill material to the drainage ditches. They city reserves the right to take corrective action regarding any obstruction which may impede the appropriate flow of stormwater runoff. Maintenance of public owned drainage systems located on private property within public easements shall be limited to the public owned improvements such as concrete structures, pipe systems, and improved channels in order to convey adequate runoff within the public drainage easement. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the city to maintain the free flow and conveyance of stormwater within the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-127. - Private responsibilities. 
(a)  Maintenance and operation of a private storm drainage system is the responsibility of the owner of the property. Each developer or owner of land within the city has the responsibility to provide and maintain approved stormwater runoff management facilities to ensure the adequate drainage and control of stormwater on the developer's or owner's property both during and after construction of such facilities. 
(b)  Each developer or landowner has the responsibility and duty before, during and after construction to properly operate and maintain any on-site stormwater runoff control facility. This responsibility shall remain with the owner of the property on which the facility is located. This responsibility shall be passed on to subsequent owners through appropriate covenants in deeds or other documents of conveyance. This maintenance shall include, keeping these facilities free and clear of weeds, brush and vegetation, removal of debris or any other waste material that might impede or hinder the facility's intended use, erosion repair, and removal of silt and maintenance of structural facilities. 
(c)  The city may require the owner of detention basins and associated facilities to furnish certification by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas that the detention basin has the storage capacity designated by the plan approving its construction and that all associated facilities including inlet and outlet structures are fully functional. 
(d)  Each property owner or resident adjacent to a natural drainage channel or creek not maintained by the city shall maintain the free flow character by prompt removal of debris, overgrowth or downed trees and limbs and unapproved structures. Property owners shall cooperate by overseeing their properties without encouragement of the city. In the event the city, in accordance with city codes and ordinances issues an official notice, the property owner shall comply and may request the city's assistance as outlined herein. 
(e)  If the grading of a swale is required for the conveyance of the 100-year flow, plan approval will be required to dedicate necessary easements. The maintenance of swales along property lines shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Secs. 13-128—13-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 13-141. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly release or cause to be released into the storm drainage system any discharge that is not composed entirely of uncontaminated stormwater, except as allowed in section 13-142. Common stormwater contaminants include trash, debris, concrete, yard waste, lawn chemicals, pet waste, wastewater, oil, petroleum products, cleaning products, paint products, hazardous waste, and sediment. 
(b)  Any discharge shall be prohibited by this section if the discharge is determined to be a source of pollutants to the storm drainage system. 
(c)  The existence, construction, use or maintenance of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(d)  No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic sewage or industrial waste to the storm drainage system, or allow such a connection to continue. 
(e)  No person shall knowingly destroy or interfere with BMP implemented pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-142. - Exemptions. 
The following non-stormwater discharges shall be deemed exempt and allowable unless determined to be a source of pollutants to the storm drainage system: 
(a)  Uncontaminated waterline flushing and other occasional discharges from potable water sources; 
(b)  Occasional uncontaminated discharges from landscape irrigation or lawn watering; 
(c)  Occasional discharge from the non-commercial washing of vehicles; 
(d)  Uncontaminated discharges from foundation, footing or crawl space drains, sump pumps and air conditioning condensation drains, rising ground water and springs; 
(e)  Diverted stream flows and natural riparian habitat or wetland flows; 
(f)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting activities (fire fighting activities do not include washing of trucks, run-off water from training activities, test water from fire suppression systems, and similar activities; 
(g)  Occasional discharge from non-commercial dechlorinated swimming pools. 
(h)  Occasional discharge from pavement and exterior building wash water conducted without the use of detergents or other chemicals. 
(i)  Nonstormwater discharges that are specifically listed in the TPDES Multi Sector General Permit (MSGP) or the TPDES Construction General Permit (CGP); 
(j)  Other similar occasional incidental nonstormwater discharges, unless the TCEQ develops permits or regulations addressing these discharges. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-143. - Requirements applicable to certain dischargers. 
(a)  Private drainage system maintenance. Owners of private drainage systems shall maintain the system to prevent, to the MEP, the discharge of pollutants. This maintenance shall include, but is not limited to, sediment removal, bank erosion repairs, maintenance of vegetative cover, and removal of debris from pipes and structures. 
(b)  Minimization of irrigation runoff. A discharge of irrigation water that is of sufficient quantity to cause a concentrated flow in the storm drainage system is prohibited. Irrigation systems shall be managed to reduce the discharge of water from a site. 
(c)  Cleaning of paved surfaces. The owner of any paved parking lot, street or drive shall clean the pavement, as required, to prevent the buildup and discharge of pollutants. The visible buildup of mechanical fluid, waste materials, sediment or debris is a violation of this ordinance. Paved surfaces shall be cleaned by dry sweeping, wet vacuum sweeping, collection and treatment of wash water or other methods in compliance with this article. This section does not apply to pollutants discharged from construction activities regulated by division 3 of this article. 
(d)  Maintenance of unpaved surfaces. The owner of any unpaved parking lot, street or drive shall maintain the unpaved surfaces, as required, to prevent the buildup and discharge of pollutants. The visible buildup of mechanical fluid, waste materials, sediment or debris is a violation of this ordinance. Unpaved surfaces shall be maintained by adding gravel as necessary to prevent the off-site tracking of sediment. Excessive sediment tracked onto public streets shall be removed immediately. 
(e)  Maintenance of equipment. Any leak or spill related to equipment maintenance in an outdoor, uncovered area shall be contained to prevent the potential release of pollutants. Vehicles, machinery and equipment shall be maintained to reduce leaking fluids. 
(f)  Materials storage. In addition to other requirements of this regulation, materials shall be stored to prevent the potential release of pollutants. The uncovered, outdoor storage of unsealed containers of hazardous substances is prohibited. 
(g)  Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers. Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers shall be applied in accordance with manufacturer recommendations and applicable laws. 
(h)  Prohibition on use of pesticides, fertilizers, and fungicides banned from manufacture. Use of any pesticide, herbicide or fungicide, the manufacture of which has been either voluntarily discontinued or prohibited by the EPA, or any federal, state or city regulation, is strictly prohibited. 
(i)  Maintenance of open drainage channel systems. Property owners, through which an open drainage channel passes, shall keep and maintain that part of the drainage channel free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or retard the flow of water through the drainage channel. In addition, the owner or occupant shall maintain existing privately owned structures adjacent to a drainage channel, so that these structures will not become a hazard to the use, proper function, or integrity of the drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-144. - Release reporting and cleanup. 
(a)  Any person responsible for a known or suspected release of materials, which results in or may result in an illegal discharge to the storm drainage system, shall take necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, abatement and cleanup of the release. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material, said person shall comply with state, federal, and local laws requiring reporting, cleanup, containment, and any other appropriate remedial action in response to the release. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the director no later than 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-145. - Required best management practices. 
(a)  The owner of any business activity, operation, or facility that may cause a discharge of pollutants to the storm drainage system shall implement and maintain at their own expense, BMP as necessary or required by the city to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the storm drainage system. 
(b)  Typical BMP's for the City of Cedar Hill are located and available in the most current version of the City of Cedar Hill Manual for General Design Standards for Paving, Drainage Systems, Water and Sanitary Sewer Lines, City Standard Construction Details and the North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG) Integrated Stormwater Management (iSWM) Technical Manual. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Secs. 13-146—13-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STORMWATER DISCHARGES FROM CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 13-161. - General requirements for construction sites. 
(a)  Compliance responsibility. The operator of a site upon which construction activity is occurring shall be responsible for compliance with all city, local, state and federal laws requirements and regulations including the TPDES Construction General Permit (CGP). 
(b)  Waste disposal. Solid waste, industrial waste, yard waste and any other pollutants or waste on any construction site shall be controlled through the use of BMP. Waste or recycling containers shall be provided and maintained by the operator or contractor on construction sites where there is the potential for release of waste. Waste shall be contained in such a manner as to ensure that it will not blow, leak, wash or otherwise be released from the site. 
(c)  Cleaning of vehicles and equipment. Ready-mixed concrete, or any materials resulting from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing or used in transporting or applying ready-mixed concrete or asphalt, shall be contained on construction sites for proper disposal. Release of these materials to the storm drainage system is prohibited. 
(d)  The most current version of the Design Manual for the City of Cedar Hill. Erosion and sediment control methods shall be implemented to prevent, to the MEP, sediment runoff from construction sites in conformance with the most current version of the Manual for General Design Standards for Pavement, Drainage System, and Water and Sewer Lines. 
(e)  Single-family permit. Any person who shall commence any work for which a single-family permit is required shall post a copy of the building inspections erosion control code compliance placard prior to the commencement of work and maintain erosion control BMP in accordance with the placard at all times. 
(f)  Sediment tracking. Disturbed soil and construction site entrances shall be managed to prevent sediment tracked onto public streets and shall be removed immediately. 
(g)  End of construction activities. Upon completion of construction activities on any site, the operator of the property is responsible for continued compliance with the requirements of this article. In the course of maintenance, reconstruction or any other construction activity on the site, the operator shall remove and properly dispose of temporary erosion controls once stabilization of disturbed areas has been established. 
(h)  Permanent erosion control. In the course of maintenance, reconstruction or any other construction activities on the site, erosion control shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Should the operator of the construction activities fail to complete or remove temporary erosion controls, the responsibility of removing and properly disposing of the erosion controls would then fall to the property owner 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-162. - Construction sites requiring an approved stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3). 
(a)  This section applies to construction sites excluding subdivision developments: 
(1)  Where construction activity will disturb soil or remove vegetative cover on one (1) or more acres of land during the life of the project, a SWP3 must be developed, and an approved Notice of Intent (N.O.I.) or Site Notice must be submitted to the public works director prior to receiving a building permit. 
(2)  A SWP3 must be developed and BMP implemented by the operator. 
(b)  This section applies to subdivision development where development will disturb soil or remove vegetative cover on one (1) or more acres of land during the life of the development of the project. A SWP3 for the project must be prepared, implemented, and terminated by the operator in the following manner: 
(1)  At a minimum, the area disturbed shall be assumed to include the entire platted area unless otherwise indicated on the approved construction plans. 
(2)  A SWP3 must be developed, and an approved N.O.I. for each operator must be submitted to the director. 
(3)  The preparation and implementation of the SWP3 must comply with the TCEQ construction general permit for construction sites located in the state. 
(4)  The subdivision operator bears the responsibility for implementation of the approved SWP3 for construction activity within the development. 
(5)  A notice of termination (N.O.T.) must be submitted to the city within thirty (30) days, after final stabilization and removal of temporary erosion controls or another permitted operator has assumed control over the site. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-163. - Implementation. 
(a)  A copy of the TCEQ construction site notice and NOI shall be located on a sign board and visible from the construction site entrance. 
(b)  A current copy of the SWP3 shall be maintained and updated on site at all times. 
(c)  BMP shall be installed and maintained by qualified persons and they shall be prepared to respond to specific BMP deficiencies found through inspection within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(d)  The operator shall inspect BMP at least once every fourteen (14) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours after a rainfall of one-half of an inch or more, as measured at the site or generally reported in the area. The operator shall be required to keep a log of inspection activity on site at all times in accordance with the TCEQ construction general permit. 
(e)  Any inspections performed by the owner, operator or by city personnel, may necessitate modifications to the SWP3 in order for the SWP3 or BMP to comply with the objectives of this article. The operator shall make required modifications and be completed within two (2) days of the referenced inspection, and shall be recorded in the operator's copy of the SWP3. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-164. - Requirements for utility construction. 
(a)  Utility agencies shall be responsible for compliance with the right-of-way management requirements in accordance with the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  As part of the right-of-way permit and site plans, utility agencies shall develop and implement BMP to prevent, to the MEP, the discharge of pollutants from any site within the city where utility construction is occurring. In addition, the utility agencies must re-establish vegetation and drainage as equal to or better than pre-construction conditions. The city may require specific BMP for utility construction activity. 
(c)  Utility agencies shall protect existing BMP and immediately repair or replace any BMP disturbed during utility construction. 
(d)  No redirecting of stormwater runoff is allowed unless otherwise determined by the director or his/her authorized designee. Utility agencies shall implement BMP to prevent the release of sediment from utility construction sites. Disturbed areas shall be minimized. Disturbed soil and construction site entrances shall be managed to prevent sediment tracking. Sediment tracked onto public streets shall be removed immediately. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Secs. 13-165—13-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 13-181. - Submission from the general public. 
Members of the general public may submit information regarding unauthorized discharges pertaining to this article to the city. Authorized personnel will consider these submissions as they pertain to the implementation and enforcement of this article and will provide written or verbal response to the person submitting the information. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-182. - Authorized personnel. 
The following personnel employed by the city shall have the power to issue notices of violation, fines, and implement other enforcement actions under this article: 
(1)  Authorized personnel under the supervision of the director. 
(2)  Authorized personnel under the supervision of the director of code enforcement. 
(3)  Police and fire department. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-183. - Right of entry and sampling. 
(a)  Whenever the authorized personnel has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises, any condition that constitutes a violation of this article, the authorized personnel shall have the right to enter the premises at any time to inspect and verify the complaint with all requirements of this article. 
(b)  Authorized personnel shall have the right to enter property and conduct sampling of any discharges to the storm drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-184. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever an authorized person determines that a person has violated a provision of this article, or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the enforcement person may order compliance by verbal and/or written notice of violation to the responsible person. 
(b)  The written notice of violation shall identify: 
(1)  The name of the party believed to be responsible. 
(2)  The date and location of the violation. 
(3)  A description of the violation. 
(4)  Actions that must be taken by the responsible party to remedy the violation. 
(5)  The deadline within which the required actions must be completed. 
(6)  Enforcement actions that may be taken by the city. 
(c)  Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the notice within ten (10) days. The authorized person's director will affirm, modify or rescind the notice in writing, within ten (10) days of the date of the appeal. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the director may appeal the decision to the city council by submitting a written appeal to the city within ten (10) days of the date of the date of the director's written decision. A hearing on the appeal will be scheduled before the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-185. - Action without prior notice. 
Any person who violates a prohibition or fails to meet a requirement of this article will be subject, without prior notice, to one or more of the enforcement actions outlined in section 13-186. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Sec. 13-186. - Enforcement actions. 
(a)  Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this article or fails to comply with an appeal decision of the city council will be subject to one or more of the following enforcement actions: 
(1)  Stop work order. The director may issue a stop work order to the operator and contractors on a construction site, by posting the order at the construction site and distributing the order to city departments whose decisions may affect any activity at the site. Unless express written exception is made, the stop work order shall prohibit any further construction activity at the site and shall bar any further inspection or approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site. 
(2)  Abatement of an illicit discharge connection. The director may order city representatives to terminate an illicit discharge connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). Any expense related to such abatement by city representatives shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner. 
(3)  Abatement of a violation on private property. When a property owner is not available, not able or not willing to correct a violation, the director may order city representatives to enter private property to take measures necessary to abate the violation. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow city representatives to enter upon the premises for these purposes. Any expense related to such abatement by city representatives shall be fully reimbursed by the property owner. 
(4)  Recovery of costs. Within thirty (30) days after abatement by city representatives, the director shall notify the property owner of the costs of abatement, including administrative costs, and the deadline for payment. The property owner may protest the assessment before the city council. The written protest must be received by the city managers office within ten (10) days of the date of the notification. A hearing on the matter will be scheduled before the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final. If the amount due is not paid within the protest period or within ten (10) days of the decision of the city council, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the county clerk. 
(5)  Termination or denial of utility services. After lawful notice to the customer and property owner concerning the proposed disconnection, the director shall have the authority to order the disconnection of city water, sanitary sewer and/or sanitation services. 
(b)  Criminal penalties. The violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed a municipal offense. Any person violating this article shall, upon an adjudication of guilt or a plea of no contest, be fined a minimum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to a maximum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(c)  Other legal action. Not withstanding any other remedies or procedures available to the city, if any person discharges into the storm drainage system in a manner that is contrary to the provisions of this article, the city attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 2011-444, § 1, 8-16-11)  
Chapter 14 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty for code violations, § 1-7; civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 5; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11; police, Ch. 17. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Arrest without warrant. 
Any law enforcement officer of this city or of the County of Dallas or of the state shall have the authority to arrest, without warrant, any person violating any state law or any provision of the ordinances of this city within such officer's presence or within his view. Any such officer may also arrest, without warrant, any person found in a suspicious place or under circumstances which reasonably show that such person is guilty of some felony or breach of peace, or threatens or is about to commit some offense against the state law or against this Code or other ordinance of the city. Also, when it is shown by satisfactory proof to a police officer, upon presentation of a creditable person, that a felony has been committed and that the offender is about to escape, so that there is no time in which to procure a warrant, such officer may, without warrant, pursue and arrest the accused. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1)  
Sec. 14-2. - Blocking public passageways. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to linger or loiter in any public place within the city limits in such manner as to block any public passageway in violation of an expressed order of a law enforcement officer or of an owner, proprietor, or operator of a business. 
(b)  A "public place," as used in this section, is any public road, street, or alley of the city or any store or workshop or any place in which people are assembled or to which people commonly resort for purposes of business, amusement, or other lawful purpose. 
(Code 1976, § 12-2)  
Sec. 14-3. - Penalty. 
A person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 12-3)  
Sec. 14-4. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Offense. The city council hereby declares that it shall be an offense of the Texas Penal Code and of this section if any person shall be found guilty of disorderly conduct as that offense is defined herein and pursuant to the Texas Penal Code, as amended. 
(b)  Elements of disorderly conduct. A person commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly: 
(1)  Uses abusive, indecent, profane or vulgar language in a public place, and the language by its very utterance tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(2)  Makes an offensive gesture or display in a public place, and the gesture or display tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(3)  Creates, by chemical means, a noxious and unreasonable odor in a public place; 
(4)  Abuses or threatens a person in a public place in an obviously offensive manner; 
(5)  Makes unreasonable noise in a public place or in or near a private residence that he has no right to occupy; 
(6)  Fights with another in a public place; 
(7)  Enters on the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other opening in the dwelling; 
(8)  While on the premises of a hotel or comparable establishment, for a lewd or unlawful purpose looks into a guest room not his own through a window or other opening in the room; 
(9)  Discharges a firearm in a public place other than a public road; 
(10)  Displays a firearm or other deadly weapon in a public place in a manner calculated to alarm; 
(11)  Discharges a firearm on or across a public road; or 
(12)  Exposes his anus or genitals in a public place and is reckless about whether another may be present who will be offended or alarmed by his act. 
(Ord. No. 87-945, §§ 1, 2, 12-8-87) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-945, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 8, 1987, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as § 14-4 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 14-5. - Failure to obey fire department official, police officer; resisting police officer declared unlawful; penalty. 
(a)  The city council does hereby find, determine and declare that no person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official. It is further declared that no person operating a motor vehicle on the streets, alleys, public ways, thoroughfares, private roads open to the public, park drives or other places where vehicles travel within the city shall flee from or seek to evade a police officer after having received an indication, either by the blinking of blue or red lights, the sounding of a siren or the motioning by the officer to the motorist to halt or to move to the side of the street, or disobey any other plain and unmistakable indication that the officer is attempting to stop the motorist, or for the purpose of preventing the receipt by the motorist of a traffic citation or ticket, or in an attempt to evade arrest. 
(b)  The city council does hereby find, determine and declare that it shall be unlawful for any person to resist any police officer, any member of the police department or any person duly empowered with police authority, while in the discharge or apparent discharge of such officer's duty, or in any way to interfere with or hinder such officer in the discharge of his duty. 
(c)  Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, such violation shall be liable for a fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), and each and every instance of the violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 87-947, §§ 1—3, 12-8-87) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-947, §§ 1—3, adopted Dec. 8, 1987, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as § 14-5 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 14-6. - Display of sexually explicit materials to minors prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited. A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of seventeen (17) years or where said minors are or may be invited as part of the general public, he displays a picture, photograph, book, pamphlet, newspaper or magazine, the cover or contents of which exploits, is devoted to or depicts: 
(1)  Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy; 
(2)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts; 
(3)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered; 
in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain. 
(b)  Penalty. A person who violates a provision of this section is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continues or is permitted, and each offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 89-1024, §§ 1, 2, 6-13-89) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-1024, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 13, 1989, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as § 14-6 at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 14-7. - Climbing, etc., certain designated cliffs prohibited. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be illegal and unlawful for any person or group of persons to climb, ascend or rappel any and all cliffs along Clark Road from the intersection of F.M. 1382 to Straus Road. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be illegal and unlawful for any person or group of persons to excavate, mine, remove or inspect any rocks, fossils or artifacts from the right-of-way of Clark Road from F.S. 1382 to Straus Road. 
(c)  The city manager or the chief of police of the city is hereby authorized to cause to be erected appropriate signs indicating the above designated cliffs. 
(d)  Any person or group of persons found violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 95-218, §§ 1—4, 8-8-95) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-218, §§ 1—4, adopted August 8, 1995, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 14-7 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 14-8. - Use of laser pointers. 
(a)  Definition: "Laser pointer" means any device that emits light amplified by the stimulated emission of radiation that is visible to the human eye. 
(b)  Violation: It shall be unlawful for any person to focus, point or shine a laser pointer directly or indirectly on another person or animal in such a manner as to harass, alarm, annoy, or torment said person or animal. 
(c)  Penalty: Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the city, shall be liable for the fine in an amount not to exceed the maximum allowed by allowed, and each and every instance of the violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 99-415, §§ 1, 2, 2-9-99)  
Sec. 14-9. - Prohibition of the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages in a residential area of the city is prohibited. For purposes of this section "residential area" means and includes property zoned for residential uses and any lot, tract or property used for residential purposes. Areas zoned for mixed uses shall not be considered a residential area. 
(Ord. No. 2012-495, § 1, 10-23-12; Ord. No. 2019-670, § 1, 3-26-19)  
Sec. 14-10. - Sale of alcoholic beverages prohibited near churches, schools and hospitals. 
(a)  No person may sell alcoholic beverages if the place of business is within: 
(1)  Three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or private school or public hospital; 
(2)  One thousand (1,000) feet of a public school, if the city council by resolution approves a request from the board of trustees of a school district under V.T.C.A., Education Code § 38.007; 
(3)  One thousand (1,000) feet of a private school, if the city council by resolution approves a request from the governing body of the private school. 
(b)  Subsection (a)(1) does not apply to the holder of: 
(1)  A license or permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code who also holds a food and beverage certificate issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission covering the premises that is located within three hundred (300) feet of a private school; or 
(2)  A license or permit covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53, (unaccompanied minor in package liquor store) and that is located within three hundred (300) feet of a private school. 
(c)  Subsections (a)(2) and (3) do not apply to the holder of: 
(1)  A retail on-premises consumption permit or license issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission if less than fifty (50) percent of the gross receipts for the premises is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  A retail off-premises consumption permit or license issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission if less than fifty (50) percent of the gross receipts for the premises, excluding the sale of items subject to the motor fuels tax, is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  A wholesaler's, distributor's, brewer's, distiller's and rectifier's, winery, wine bottler's or manufacturer's permit or license, or any other license or permit held by a wholesaler or manufacturer as those words are used and understood in V.T.C.A, Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 102. 
(d)  Subsection (a)(3) does not apply to the holder of: 
(1)  A license or permit issued under V.T.C.A, Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 27 (temporary and special wine and beer retailer's permit), V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 31, (Caterer's permit), or V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 72, (Temporary licenses) who is operating on the premises of a private school; or 
(2)  A license or permit covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53, and that is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of a private school. 
(e)  For purposes of this section "private school" means a private school, including a parochial school, that: (1) offers a course of instruction for students in one (1) or more grades from kindergarten through grade twelve (12); and (2) has more than one hundred (100) students enrolled and attending courses at a single location. 
(f)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold, and public or private schools shall be: (1) in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or (2) if the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. 
(g)  For any dealer who held a license or permit from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission September 1, 1983, the measurement of the distance between the place of business of the dealer and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. 
(h)  Application of distance requirements. 
(1)  If at the time an original alcoholic beverage permit or license is granted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission for a premises, the premises satisfies the requirements regarding distance from schools, churches, and other types of premises set forth in this chapter, the premises shall be deemed to satisfy the distance requirements for all subsequent renewals of the license or permit. 
(2)  On the sale or transfer of the premises or the business on the premises in which a new original license or permit is required for the premises, the premises shall be deemed to satisfy any distance requirements as if the issuance of the new original permit or license were a renewal of a previously held permit or license. This subsection does not apply to the satisfaction of the distance requirement prescribed by subsection (a)(2) for a public school, except that on the death of a permit or license holder or a person having an interest in a permit or license [this] subsection does apply to the holder's surviving spouse or child of the holder or person if the spouse or child qualifies as a successor in interest to the permit or license. Subsection (1) does not apply to the satisfaction of the distance requirement prescribed by subsection (a)(2) for a public school if the holder's permit or license has been suspended for a violation occurring after September 1, 1995, of any of the following provisions of V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code §§ 11.61(b)(1), (6)—(11), (13), (14), or (20). 
(Ord. No. 2012-496, § 1, 11-17-12)  
Sec. 14-11. - Sales of alcoholic beverages near day-care centers or child-care facility. 
(a)  This section applies only to a permit or license holder under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code chs. 25, 28, 32, 69 or 74, who does not have a food and beverage certificate. 
(b)  With the exception of subsection 14-10(a)(2), the provisions of section 14-10 relating to a public school also apply to a day-care center and a child-care facility as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A. Human Resources Code § 42.002. 
(c)  This section does not apply to a permit or license holder who sells alcoholic beverages if: 
(1)  the permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located on different stories of a multi-story building; or 
(2)  the permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located in separate buildings and either the permit or license holder or the day-care center or child-care facility is located on the second story or higher of a multi-story building. 
(d)  This section does not apply to a foster group home, foster family home, family home, agency group home, or agency home as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A. Human Resources Code § 42.002. 
(Ord. No. 2012-496, § 2, 11-17-12)  
Secs. 14-12—14-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LOUD NOISES PROHIBITED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-185, § 1, repealed art. II, §§ 14-21—14-24, in its entirety. Said ordinance further provided for the inclusion of a new art II to read as herein set out. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Code 1976 §§ 12-31—12-34. 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10; mufflers required, § 11-226. 
 
Sec. 14-21. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or allow to be made any unreasonably loud or raucous noise within the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, which may be offensive to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity within the area of audibility. 
(b)  The following acts are deemed to create an unreasonably loud or raucous noise and shall be deemed a violation of this Section, but such enumerated acts are merely an aid and amplification of the general prohibition of unreasonably loud or raucous noises in the City of Cedar Hill and are in no way an exclusive list of the types or sounds of noises prohibited by this article: 
(1)  The playing of any horn, radio, musical instrument, or other loud-speaking or noise-making device or attachment, or vocal shouting or outcry for purposes of selling anything, in a public or private place, in such a manner or volume as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. 
(2)  The playing of any horn, radio, musical instrument, or other loud-speaking or noise-making device or attachment on any premises under the ownership, management or control of a person or business operation, in such a manner or volume as to disturb the peace or to be unreasonably offensive to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the vicinity or occupants of other premises in the vicinity. 
(3)  To create, make, cause or allow to be made any means of any loud and disturbing noise which may disturb a reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the vicinity of any public or private place after 11:00 p.m. and before 6:00 a.m. 
(4)  To be operating or in control of a motor vehicle in either a public or private place within the city while playing any sound amplifier which is a part of, or connected to, the vehicle stereo system or any other similar device in the motor vehicle, in such a manner that when operated, it is audible at a distance of thirty (30) feet from the source or causes a reasonable person of normal sensitivity to be aware of the vibration accompanying the sound at a distance of thirty (30) feet from the source. 
(5)  The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent of continuing noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person of normal sensitivity within the area of audibility. 
(6)  Any noise or sound of such a character, intensity and duration which shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person of normal sensitivity within the area of audibility. 
(Ord. No. 2003-185, § 1, 12-16-03)  
Sec. 14-22. - Events, acts or activities not prohibited. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to sounds produced by or emanating from the following types of events, acts or activities: 
(1)  The lawful operation of aircraft, trains or legally registered motor vehicles operating on public roadways; provided that such vehicles are equipped with all noise-suppression devices required by Texas Law. 
(2)  Equipment used exclusively in the maintenance of or repairs of buildings or grounds provided that such equipment is rated at not more than fifteen (15) horsepower. 
(3)  Construction equipment operating between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(4)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound and the performance of emergency work. 
(5)  The operation of farm equipment. 
(6)  Parades, fairs or similar outdoor entertainment, provided that a permit for such activity has been granted by the city for not more than ten (10) days. 
(7)  Lawfully operating athletic events on public property or on the grounds of private schools, religious institutions or similar non-profit institutions. 
(8)  Reasonable or ordinary noise of children at play in parks and other public places. 
(9)  The reasonable use of automobile signals or horns in accordance with state law as set forth in the Texas Transportation Code and as amended from time to time. 
(10)  The reasonable ringing of church bells. 
(Ord. No. 2003-185, § 1, 12-16-03)  
Sec. 14-23. - Punishment. 
An offense under this article shall, upon conviction, be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each and every day such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate, punishable offense. 
(Ord. No. 2003-185, § 1, 12-16-03)  
Secs. 14-24—14-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WEAPONS 
 
Sec. 14-41. - Discharge of firearms prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any rifle, shotgun, pistol or gun of any caliber or size which is discharged by the use of gun powder or other explosives and/or a detonating cap, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 12-25.1; Ord. No. 79-512, § 1, 1-23-79)  
Sec. 14-42. - Unlawful to permit, etc., discharge of firearms on land. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner or occupier of land within the corporate limits of the city to permit, authorize, or otherwise allow any person to discharge any rifle, shotgun, pistol or gun of any caliber or size which is discharged by the use of gun powder or other explosives and/or a detonating cap, within the corporate limits of the city and upon such owner's or occupier's property or premises. 
(Code 1976, § 12-25.2; Ord. No. 79-512, § 2, 1-23-79)  
Sec. 14-43. - Unlawful to permit, etc., discharge, etc., within one thousand feet of residence, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner or occupier of land within the corporate limits of the city to permit, authorize, or otherwise allow any person to discharge an air rifle or gun, pellet rifle or gun, BB rifle or gun, or to launch any missile or projectile within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residential, manufacturing, or commercial structure. 
(Code 1976, § 12-25.3; Ord. No. 79-512, § 3, 1-23-79)  
Sec. 14-44. - Unlawful to discharge or launch bullet, pellet, BB, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage any property, public or private, within the corporate limits of the city by the discharge or launching of any bullet, pellet, BB, missile, explosive device, or other projectile. 
(Code 1976, § 12-25.4; Ord. No. 79-512, § 4, 1-23-79)  
Sec. 14-45. - Exceptions. 
This article shall be subject to the following exceptions only, and shall not apply to any: 
(1)  Law enforcement officer in the discharge of his official duties; and 
(2)  Person operating a rifle, shotgun, pistol or gun at a gun range or gun club which has been specifically sanctioned and approved by and under the authority of the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 12-25.5; Ord. No. 79-512, § 5, 1-23-79)  
Secs. 14-46—14-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LIBRARY MATERIALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 88-993, adopted Oct. 11, 1988, amended this Code but did not specify the manner of inclusion. Sections 1—3 of the ordinance have been included as Art. IV to this chapter, §§ 14-61—14-63, at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Library board, § 2-141 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-61. - Offenses relative to library materials—Failure to obtain pursuant to library rules. 
Every person, or parent or guardian of a child who is under the age of seventeen (17) years, who shall take or borrow from the Zula Bryant Wylie Library of Cedar Hill, Texas, any book, pamphlet, periodical, audio or visual recording, work of art or other property except in accordance with the rules of said library shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 88-993, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 93-156, § 1, 6-22-93)  
Sec. 14-62. - Same—Failure to return after mailing of notice. 
(a)  Every person, or parent or guardian of a child under the age of seventeen (17) years, who shall take or borrow from the Zula Bryant Wylie Library any book, pamphlet, periodical, audio or visual recording, work of art or other property and thereafter neglect, refuse or fail to return the same within thirty (30) days after the date of mailing by the library of a notice, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to his or her address noted on the current library card shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, plus each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(b)  The introduction into evidence of the original or a true and correct copy of the library "book card" assigned to such property, bearing the due date for return of such property and bearing a library card number which was recorded on the "book card" when the property was checked out, is prima facie evidence that the person to whom said library card number is assigned, according to the records of said library, did borrow such property. 
(c)  The introduction into evidence of a copy of a written notice by the library that any library property is overdue, together with evidence that such notice was deposited in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to a person, is prima facie evidence that the person has knowledge that such property is overdue. 
(d)  The terms "book card" and "library card number" as used herein shall be given the following definitions: 
(1)  Book card means the identifying card assigned to an item of property by the library staff for control purposes. 
(2)  Library card number means the identifying number of the card issued to each patron of the library authorizing such person to check out library materials. 
(Ord. No. 88-993, § 2, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 93-156, § 2, 6-22-93)  
Sec. 14-63. - Same—Mutilating, marking, destroying, etc. 
Every person, or parent or guardian of a child who is under the age of seventeen (17) years who shall destroy or injure, in whole or in part, library materials by mutilating, marking, tearing or otherwise defacing such library materials shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punished separately hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 88-993, § 3, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 93-156, § 3, 6-22-93)  
Sec. 14-64. - Library fees. 
(a)  Book and audio tape late fees. Any person who does not return a book or audio tape by the designated return date shall pay a late charge of twenty cents ($0.20) a day per book or tape. Reminder notices shall be sent out to the patron detailing books and audio tapes that have not been returned. The total fine amount shall not exceed the total cost of the item. Complete failure to return books or audio tapes to the library may constitute a misdemeanor as defined in section 14-62. 
(b)  Video cassette late fees. Any person who does not return a video cassette by the designated due date shall pay a late charge of one dollar ($1.00) per day per video cassette. Reminder notices shall be sent out to the patron detailing the video cassettes that have not been returned. The total fine amount shall not exceed twenty dollars ($20.00). Complete failure to return video cassettes to the library may constitute a misdemeanor as defined in section 14-62. 
(c)  Inter-library loan. In order to defray the cost of postage involved with the inter-library loan program, the library will charge one dollar and twenty-five cents ($1.25) per book for inter-library loans. 
(d)  Nonresidents user fees. Nonresidents of the State of Texas wishing to use the Zula Bryant Wylie Library may receive full library privileges after paying a twenty dollar ($20.00) annual fee. 
(Ord. No. 95-239, §§ 1—4, 9-26-95; Ord. No. 2009-379, § 1, 2-10-09)  
Secs. 14-65—14-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CURFEW HOURS FOR MINORS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-501, § 1, adopted March 26, 2013, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 14-81—14-85, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 14-81. - Definitions. 
In this [article]: 
Curfew hours means: 
(1)  11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
(2)  12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
Minor means any person the age of seventeen (17) years. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent; or 
(2)  At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian in writing to have the care and custody of a minor. Such written authorization must: 
a.  State the name, address and telephone number of the person authorized to have custody of the minor; 
b.  State the specific dates and hours that custody is authorized; 
c.  Provide the name, address and telephone number of the natural parent, adoptive parent or step parent; and 
d.  Be signed by such parent. 
Privately owned place means any abandoned/vacant building, structure, or property that is normally not open to the public and may be accessed without owner's permission, which includes, but is not limited to the following premises: houses, garages, barns, buildings, warehouses, storage rooms or facilities, fields, and other properties that are fenced or not. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. No. 2013-501, § 2, 3-26-13; Ord. No. 2016-579, § 1, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2016-585, § 1, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 2019-665, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 14-82. - Offenses. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or privately-owned place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(b)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or privately-owned place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(c)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. 2013-501, § 2, 3-26-13; Ord. No. 2016-579, § 1, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2016-585, § 1, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 2019-665, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 14-83. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 14-82 that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a school, the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a school, the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(9)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A, Family Code ch. 31. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection 14-82(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Ord. No. 2013-501, § 2, 3-26-13; Ord. No. 2016-579, § 1, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2016-585, § 1, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 2019-665, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 14-84. - Enforcement. 
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in section 14-83 is present. 
(Ord. No. 2013-501, § 2, 3-26-13; Ord. No. 2016-579, § 1, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2016-585, § 1, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 2019-665, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Sec. 14-85. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  When required by V.T.C.A, Family Code § 51.08, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates subsection 14-82(a) of this section and shall refer the minor to juvenile court. 
(Ord. No. 2013-501, § 2, 3-26-13; Ord. No. 2016-579, § 1, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2016-585, § 1, 5-24-16; Ord. No. 2019-665, § 1, 2-26-19)  
Secs. 14-86—14-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - REGULATION OF SMOKING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-13, adopted Feb. 8, 2000, did not specifically amend the Code, hence, inclusion as art VI, §§ 14-101—14-107 was at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 14-101. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms when used in this article shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Administrative area: Shall mean that part of any place or establishment not generally accessible to the public, including but not limited to individual offices, stock rooms, meeting rooms and employee lounges. 
Air barrier: A system that creates an air curtain to prevent the drift or penetration of tobacco smoke from a smoking area to a nonsmoking area not allowing drift or penetration from the ceiling down to twenty-four (24) inches above the floor. 
Air purification system: An electrically powered hospital grade, hepa media filter that will clean all of the air in a designated smoking area every fifteen (15) minutes as follows: not less than ninety-five (95) percent of three-tenths (0.3) micron particulates efficiency including dust, smoke, pollen, mold spores, bacteria, tobacco smoke, viruses and allergens and not less than ninety-five (95) percent removal of gases, vapors, volatile organic compounds (V.O.C.) and odors and contains an air barrier system or other barrier system if required by a licensed professional engineer, to prevent air from the smoking area from being drawn across the nonsmoking area. 
Billiard hall: Shall mean a place of amusement whose chief purpose is providing the use of billiard/pool tables to the public for a fee. 
Bingo parlor: Shall mean a facility regulated under V.C.S., Article 179b-"Bingo Enabling Act". 
Bus: Shall mean every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten (10) passengers and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. 
Eating establishment: Shall mean any place where food is served for on-premises consumption and which is accessible by the public or a substantial group of the public. 
Employee: Shall mean any person who is employed by any employer for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
Employer: Shall mean any person who employs the services of an individual person or any person in control of the workplace. 
Enclosed: Shall mean closed in by a roof and walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. 
Major renovation: Changing the amount of floor space in a building by one third ( 1/3 ) or changing the value of a building by one-third ( 1/3 ). 
Motion picture theatre: Shall mean any theater engaged in the business of exhibiting motion pictures to the public. 
Net floor area: Shall mean the total floor area of the interior of an eating establishment, excluding the kitchen, restores, storage areas and offices. 
Physical barrier: A barrier that will form an effective membrane continuous from outside wall to outside wall, from a smoke barrier to a smoke barrier, from floor to floor or roof above, or a combination thereof, including continuity through all concealed spaces, such as above suspended ceilings, interstitial structural and mechanical spaces. Transfer grilles, louvers and similar openings shall not be used in these partitions. Self-closing, tight fitting doors are permitted in such barriers. 
Public business: Shall mean any deliberation between a quorum of members of any board, commission, department, committee or agency within the executive or legislative department of the State of Texas, or the City Council or any Board or Commission of the City of Cedar Hill at which any public business or public policy is discussed or considered or at which any formal action is taken. 
Retail or service establishment: Shall mean any establishment which sells goods or services to the general public, except eating establishments and establishments regulated by Section 1.04 of this article. 
Smoking: Shall mean the combustion of any cigar, cigarette, pipe or similar article using any form of tobacco or other combustible substance in any form. 
Tobacco product: Shall mean a cigarette, cheroot, stogie, cigar, snuff, smoking tobacco, chewing tobacco and any article or product made of tobacco or a tobacco substitute. 
Tobacco shop: Shall mean a retail establishment whose annual gross revenues from the sale of tobacco products and smoking accessories are at least fifty percent (50%). 
Ventilation system: A HVAC system designed by a licensed professional engineer to meet the requirements of this chapter and all other requirements of the city's building code. A ventilation system must provide an air change every fifteen (15) minutes; exhaust the air to the exterior of the building and the air from the smoking area cannot be drawn across the nonsmoking area; and has an air barrier system, if required by a licensed professional engineer, to prevent air from the smoking area from being drawn across the nonsmoking area. 
Workplace: Shall mean any enclosed area of a structure, or portion thereof, intended for occupancy by employees who provide primarily clerical, professional or business services of a business entity, or which provide primarily clerical, professional or business services to other business entities or to the public at that location. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1.01, 2-8-00)  
Sec. 14-102. - Smoking prohibited public places. 
(a)  Prohibited places. A person commits an offense if he possesses a burning tobacco product or smokes a tobacco product within: 
(1)  A public primary or secondary school; 
(2)  An elevator in buildings generally used by and open to the public, including elevators in office buildings, hotels and multi-family dwellings; 
(3)  A library; 
(4)  A museum; 
(5)  Health care facilities and hospitals; 
(6)  A transit system bus; 
(7)  A room or enclosed place of public assembly in which public business is conducted when the public business requires or provides an opportunity for direct participation or observation by the general public; 
(8)  Indoor or outdoor service lines in which more than one (1) person is giving or receiving goods or services of any kind; 
(9)  Retail or service establishments; 
(10)  Public rest rooms; 
(11)  Every publicly or privately owned theater, auditorium or other enclosed facility which is open to the public for the primary purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, musical recital, athletic event or any other performance or event; 
(12)  Any portion of any publicly or privately owned room, building or other enclosed place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, which has been designated by the owner, manager, operator or other person having control of such area, as a nonsmoking area; 
(13)  Any portion of any publicly or privately owned unenclosed area to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, which has been designated by the owner, manager, operator or other person having control of such area, as a nonsmoking area; 
(14)  Any seating area of any publicly or privately owned outdoor athletic facility; 
(15)  Any designated seating area of any publicly or privately owned outdoor theater or amphitheater; 
(b)  Exceptions: 
(1)  It is an exception to subsections (a)(1), (a)(3), (a)(4), (a)(5), (a)(9), and (a)(11) that the smoking or possession occurred in an administrative area. 
(2)  It is an exception to subsections (a)(5), (a)(9) and (a)(11) that the smoking or possession occurred within an area designated by the owner, manager or operator of the place or establishment as a smoking area as provided in subsection (d). 
(3)  It is an exception to subsection (a)(5) that the smoking or possession occurred in a patient room where smoking was agreeable to all patients assigned to the room and the administrator of the facility; provided that a sign was present on each door leading into the room which stated: "SMOKING IS PERMITTED IN THIS ROOM"; or 
(4)  It is an exception to subsection (a) that the smoking or possession was by a person as part of his participation in an authorized theatrical performance. 
(c)  Defenses: 
(1)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the conveyance or public place within which the offense occurred or did not have prominently displayed a reasonably sized notice that smoking was prohibited. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under this section that facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials were not located within the conveyance or within twenty (20) feet of the public entrances to the place or establishment. 
(3)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections 14-102(a)(14) and (a)(15) that the offense occurred in an open concourse designated as a smoking area by the owner, operator or person in control of the outdoor athletic facility, theater or amphitheater. Such open areas shall not be subject to the ventilation requirements of subsection 14-102(d)(4). 
(d)  Designated smoking area: 
(1)  The owner, manager or operator of a retail or service establishment may designate a public smoking area in such establishment, provided that the area shall be located so as to prevent the exposure to customers of the establishment to secondhand smoke. 
(2)  The administrator of a hospital or health care facility may designate a public smoking area within such facility, provided that the area shall be located so as to prevent the exposure to patients and the general public to secondhand smoke. 
(3)  The owner, manager or operator of a theater or auditorium may designate a public smoking room within such facility, provided that the room is enclosed and located so as to prevent the exposure to the general public within the facility to secondhand smoke. 
(4)  All designated smoking rooms and areas shall be equipped with an air purification system or ventilation systems in compliance with subsection 14-103(e)(1). 
(5)  All designated smoking rooms and areas shall be subject to the approval of the city. 
(6)  A person commits an offense if he designates or maintains a smoking area or room in violation of this subsection. 
(e)  Eating establishments: An eating establishment within a use governed by this section shall be governed by section 14-103. 
(f)  Exemption: Tobacco shops are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1.02, 2-8-00)  
Sec. 14-103. - Regulation of smoking, eating establishments, bars, night clubs, adult entertainment establishments, billiard halls, bingo parlors and bowling centers. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he or she smokes tobacco or possesses a burning tobacco product in an eating establishment, bar, night club, adult entertainment establishment, billiard hall, bingo parlor or bowling center. 
(b)  An owner, manager or operator of an eating establishment, bar, nightclub, adult entertainment establishment, billiard hall, bingo parlor or bowling center commits an offense if he or she allows smoking of a tobacco product. 
(c)  Exceptions: 
(1)  It is an exception to subsection (a) that the smoking or possession occurred in an area designated as a smoking area by the owner, manager or operator of the establishment, and such area is in conformance with this article, and such area is marked as a smoking area. 
(2)  It is an exception to subsection (a) that the smoking or possession occurred in an area regulated by and in conformance with section 14-106 of this article. 
(3)  It is an exception to subsections (a) and (b) that the eating establishment, bar, night club, adult entertainment establishment, billiard hall or bingo parlor does not allow or employ persons under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(d)  Defenses: 
(1)  It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) that the establishment did not have prominently displayed a reasonably sized notice that smoking was prohibited. 
(2)  It is a defense to a prosecution under subsection (a) that the facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials were not located within twenty (20) feet and outside of the public entrances of the establishment. 
(e)  (1)  All restaurants shall be nonsmoking however a designated smoking area can be furnished provided the designated smoking area complies with the following: 
a.  Be equipped with an air purification system (defined herein) or must have a separate ventilation system (defined herein). 
b.  Not allow the air from the smoking area to be drawn across the nonsmoking area. 
c.  A designated smoking area shall be situated so as to minimize the impact of smoke upon pathways and other common areas. 
(2)  Subsection (1) does not apply to any existing restaurant. However any restaurant which undertakes a major renovation or a change in ownership after the effective date of this ordinance shall comply with subsection (1). 
(3)  A designated smoking area in an existing restaurant which undertakes a major renovation after the effective date of this section must: 
a.  Be equipped with air purification system (defined herein) or must have a separate ventilation system (defined herein). 
b.  Not allow the air from the smoking area to be drawn across the nonsmoking area. 
c.  A designated smoking area shall be situated so as to minimize the impact of smoke upon pathways and other common areas. 
(f)  The owner, manager or operator of an eating establishment, bar, night club, adult entertainment establishment, billiard hall, bingo parlor or bowling center commits an offense if he or she designates or maintains a smoking area in violation of this section. 
(g)  (1)  An eating establishment, bar night club, adult entertainment establishment, billiard hall, bingo parlor or bowling center, which does not meet the requirement of subsection (e)(1), shall post a sign at all public entrances stating: "No Smoking—City Ordinance." 
(2)  The owner or manager of an establishment governed by this subsection commits an offense if he or she fails to post and maintain the required signs. 
(3)  All children's playgrounds associated with eating establishments shall be nonsmoking. All doors and gates leading to such play areas shall be posted: "No Smoking—City Ordinance." 
(4)  An eating establishment which provides a smoking area must post a sign at all public entrances stating: "Smoking In Designated Areas Only." 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1.03, 2-8-00)  
Sec. 14-104. - Posting of signs, placing of receptacles. 
(a)  Signs: 
(1)  A place or conveyance regulated by section 14-102; that elects to be totally nonsmoking, shall have signs conspicuously posted at all entrances which state: "No Smoking—City Ordinance." 
(2)  If a place or conveyance regulated by section 14-102, has a designated smoking area, such signs may also state: "Except In Designated Areas." 
(3)  A designated smoking area shall have signs conspicuously posted in the area which state: "Smoking In This Area Only." 
(4)  Establishments exempt under subsection 14-103(c)(3), which do not provide a nonsmoking area, shall have signs conspicuously posted at all entrances which state: "We Do Not Have A Nonsmoking Area." 
(b)  Receptacles: A place, establishment or conveyance regulated by sections 14-102 or 14-103, which is partially or totally nonsmoking, shall have facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials located within twenty (20) feet of all entrances and within all designated smoking areas. 
(c)  Offenses: 
(1)  The owner, manager or operator of a place, conveyance or establishment commits an offense if he fails to post signs and provide extinguishment facilities as required by this section. 
(2)  The owner, manager or operator of a place, conveyance or establishment commits an offense if he places or maintains facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials in public areas other than as provided for in subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1.04, 2-8-00)  
Sec. 14-105. - Regulation of smoking—Workplace. 
(a)  An employer who owns, occupies, or controls a workplace may: 
(1)  Designate the workplace or portions thereof as nonsmoking areas; 
(2)  Have and implement a written policy on smoking which conforms to this chapter; 
(3)  Make the policy available for inspection by employees and communicate said policy to all employees at least three (3) weeks prior to its adoption; 
(4)  Prominently display reasonably sized signs that smoking is prohibited; and 
(5)  Provide facilities in sufficient numbers in such locations as to be readily accessible for the extinguishment of smoking materials. 
(6)  Not discharge, retaliate or discriminate against an employee who: 
a.  Files a complaint or causes a proceeding to be instituted under or related to this article; or 
b.  Testifies or will testify in a proceeding instituted under this article; or 
c.  Exercises on his own behalf or the behalf of others any right afforded by this article. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he smokes a cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, or pipe or possesses a burning tobacco, weed, or other plant product in any portion of the workplace which has been designated as a nonsmoking area or if he violates any other provisions of any employer's written smoking policy adopted, implemented, and maintained in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1.05, 2-8-00)  
Sec. 14-106. - Structural modifications not required. 
Except as provided in subsection 14-102(d)(4) and section 14-103, nothing in this article shall require the owner, operator, manager or other persons in control of any building, facility, room, establishment or structure to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications to comply with the terms and conditions of this article. The posting of signs or the equipping of any area with facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials shall not be construed to be structural or other physical modifications. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1.06, 2-8-00)  
Sec. 14-107. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Any owner or manager of a business, facility, room, structure or other establishment subject to sections 14-102, 14-104 and 14-105 may apply for an exemption or modification to any provision of this article due to unusual circumstances or conditions. Such exemption shall be granted by the city council, only if the evidence presented by the applicant for exemption either that: 
(1)  The applicant cannot comply with the provisions of this article for which an exemption is requested without incurring expenses for structural or other physical modifications, other than posting signs, to buildings and structures; or 
(2)  Due to such unusual circumstances, the failure to comply with the provision for which the exemption is requested will not result in a danger to health or annoyance, inconvenience or discomfort. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1.07, 2-8-00)  
ARTICLE VII. - RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR CERTAIN SEX OFFENDERS 
 
Sec. 14-108. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, words, and the derivations thereof shall have the meanings given herein. 
Day care center. Any facility providing care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for thirteen (13) or more children for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
Minor. A minor is a person younger than seventeen (17) years of age. 
Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. 
Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person routinely abides, resides or lodges for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or non-consecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 2006-305, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 14-109. - Offenses. 
For each person required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender Database (the "database") because of a violation involving a victim who was less than seventeen (17) years of age, it is unlawful for that person to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of any premises where children commonly gather, which, for purposes of this article, shall be a public park or playground, private or public school, public swimming pool, day care center, public recreation center, or public library. For the purposes of this article, planted street medians are not public parks. 
(Ord. No. 2006-305, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 14-110. - Evidentiary matters. 
(a)  It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to a person if that person's record appears on the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than seventeen (17) years of age at the time of the reported offense. 
(b)  For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, or, in the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather. 
(c)  A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the City of Cedar Hill. The city shall review the map at least annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the Cedar Hill Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 2006-305, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 14-111. - Culpable mental state not required. 
Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-305, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 14-112. - Affirmative defenses. 
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that any of the following conditions apply: 
(1)  The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas, prior to the date of the adoption of this article. 
(2)  The person required to register on the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult. 
(3)  The person required to register on the database is a minor. 
(4)  The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within one thousand (1,000) feet of the permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on the database was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas. 
(5)  The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person who was erroneously listed on the database. 
(Ord. No. 2006-305, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Sec. 14-113. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article or fails to comply with the requirements of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by law. Each day the said violation is committed or continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 2006-305, § 1, 9-26-06)  
ARTICLE VIII. - SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES AND LIQUID NICOTINE TO MINORS PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 14-114. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Electronic cigarette or E-cigarette shall mean any electronically or battery powered device designed, manufactured or intended to simulate the smoking of tobacco, cigarettes, pipes or cigars by providing a vapor derived from liquid nicotine and/or any other substance or substances which is inhaled by a user thereof. The term includes such devices, regardless of the details of the product design, appearance or marketed name, generally manufactured to resemble cigarettes, cigars, pipes or other smoking devices. 
Liquid nicotine shall mean any liquid product composed of either in whole or in part of nicotine, propylene glycol and/or other similar substances manufactured for use with an e-cigarette to be converted into a vapor for inhaling. 
Minor shall mean any person less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
Person shall mean any natural person, individual, corporation, limited liability company, unincorporated association, proprietorship, firm, partnership, joint venture or any other entity or business of any kind. 
Photographic identification shall mean a valid state, district, national or equivalent government driver's license, identification card, military identification or passport, which contains a physical description and photograph consistent with the person's appearance, and the person's date of birth confirming an age of at least eighteen (18) years. 
Possess, possessing or possession shall mean the actual care, custody, control or management. Self-service merchandising means, in the context of the retail sale of electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine or similar substances, the open display, including, without limitation, the use of an open display unit of electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes, liquid nicotine or similar substances, whether packaged or otherwise, for direct retail customer access and handling prior to purchase without the intervention of assistance from the retailer or the retailer's owner, employee, agent, servant or representative. 
Self-service merchandising shall mean, in the context of the retail sale of electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine, the open display, including, without limitation, the use of an open display unit of electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine, whether packaged or otherwise, for direct retail customer access and handling prior to purchase without the intervention of assistance of the retailer or the retailer's owner, employee, agent, servant or representative. 
(Ord. No. 2014-538, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Sec. 14-115. - Sale or distribution of e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine to minors prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person sells, gives, transfers or otherwise causes to be sold, given or transferred an e-cigarette or liquid nicotine to a minor or to another person who intends to deliver it to a minor. 
(b)  If an offense under this section occurs in connection with a sale or delivery of an e-cigarette or liquid nicotine at a business by an employee of the business, the employee who committed the offense shall be subject to prosecution in addition to the business. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) that at the time of the sale or delivery, the minor presented to the person an apparently valid photographic identification showing that the minor was at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(d)  It is not a defense under this section that the minor purchased the e-cigarette and/or liquid nicotine from a vending machine or other self-merchandising machine or mechanism. 
(Ord. No. 2014-538, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Sec. 14-116. - Possession of e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine by minors prohibited. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if the minor purchases, accepts, possesses or attempts to purchase, accept or possess an e-cigarette or liquid nicotine. 
(b)  A minor commits an offense if the minor falsely represents himself or herself to be of eighteen (18) years of age or older for the purpose of purchasing, accepting or receiving an e-cigarette or liquid nicotine. 
(c)  It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section if at the time of the purchase, acceptance or possession, the minor: 
(1)  Was in the presence of an adult parent, guardian or spouse, or other adult to whom the minor has been entrusted by a court; or 
(2)  Was acting in the course and scope of the minor's employment by a person or entity in the business of being a distributor, wholesaler or retailer of e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine, and the purchase, acceptance or possession of the e-cigarette and/or liquid nicotine was part of the duties of such employment; or 
(3)  The minor was participating in an inspection, test or investigation in conjunction with local law enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 2014-538, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Sec. 14-117. - Vendor assisted sales required; self-service merchandising prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Offers e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine for sale in a manner that permits a customer direct access to the e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine; or 
(2)  Offers for sale or displays for sale e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine by means of self-service merchandising; or 
(3)  Installs or maintains an open display unit containing e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) if: 
(1)  The facility or business is not open to minors at any time; or 
(2)  The facility or business is a premises for which a person holds a package store permit issued under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code; or 
(3)  The open display unit is located in an area that is inaccessible to customers. 
(c)  A violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated by the city by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided by law, and the city may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement. 
(Ord. No. 2014-538, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Sec. 14-118. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of, any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation is committed shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2014-538, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Secs. 14-119—14-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - LOITERING 
 
Sec. 14-131. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the term "loiter" or "loitering" means to remain, stay, delay, or to linger in one place, public or private, with an apprent harmful purpose, such as to: 
(1)  Establish control over an identifiable area; 
(2)  Obstruct or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
(3)  Intimidate others from exiting or entering an establishment or area; or 
(4)  Conceal illegal activities. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, the term "any place, public or private," shall include, but not be limited to, all places commonly known as being distinctively public, such as public streets, public restrooms, sidewalks, parks, municipal airport, alleys and buildings; all places privately owned but open to the public generally such as shopping centers, transportation terminals, retail stores, movie theaters, office buildings, and restaurants; and, all places distinctively private, such as homes or private residences and apartment houses. 
(c)  For purposes of this article, the term "surrounding area" means that area easily and immediately accessible to the person under observation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-443, § 1, 7-26-11)  
Sec. 14-132. - Loitering prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in, on or around any place, public or private, when such loitering is accompanied by suspicious activity, or is under circumstances that afford probably cause for alarm or concern for the safety and well-being of persons or for the security of property in the surrounding area. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to refuse to leave or move on when requested to do so by the owner, manager, proprietor, or lessee of any place, public or private, under circumstances that warrant reasonable alarm for the safety of persons or property within the surrounding area. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to refuse to leave or move on when so requested by a peace officer, provided the peace officer has exercised his discretion reasonably under the circumstances in order to preserve or promote public peace and order. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person to loiter in, on or around any place, public or private, where "No Loitering" signs are posted. 
(Ord. No. 2011-443, § 1, 7-26-11)  
ARTICLE X. - PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN SOLICITATION ACTIVITIES 
 
Sec. 14-133. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aggressive or intimidating means: 
(a)  To approach or speak to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to believe that the person is being threatened with: 
(1)  Imminent bodily injury; or 
(2)  The commission of a criminal act upon the person or another person, or upon property in the person's immediate possession; or 
(b)  To persist in soliciting after the person solicited has given a negative response; or 
(c)  To block, either individually or as part of a group of persons, the passage of a solicited person; or 
(d)  At any time immediately before, during or after a solicitation, touching the solicited person without that person's consent; or 
(e)  Following behind, alongside or ahead of the person solicited during or after a solicitation; or 
(f)  Directing profane or abusive language at the person solicited at any time immediately before, during or after the solicitation; or 
(g)  Immediately before, during or after the solicitation, making any statement other than the solicitation request or acting in any manner which, in light of the circumstances taken as a whole, such as darkness, would cause a reasonable person to feel harassed, intimidated or compelled to contribute. 
Automated teller machine or ATM means a machine, other than a telephone that is capable of being operated by a customer of a financial institution, by which the customer may communicate to the financial institution a request to withdraw a benefit for the customer, or for another person, directly from the customer's account or line of credit, the use of which may or may not involve the personnel of a financial institution. 
Exterior public pay telephone means any coin or credit card reader telephone that is installed or located anywhere on a premises except exclusively in the interior of a building located on the premises and which is accessible and available for use by a member of the general public. 
Public transportation stop means an area officially marked and designated as a place to wait for a bus, light rail vehicle, taxicab, or any other public transportation vehicle that is operated for fare-paying passengers. 
Self-service car wash means a structure available to the general public at which a vehicle may be manually washed by its owner or operator with equipment that is activated by the deposit of money, including credit cards or ATM cards. 
Self-service fuel pump means a fuel pump open to the general public from which a vehicle may be filled with gasoline or other fuel directly by the owner or operator of the vehicle without the aid of an employee or attendant of the premises at which the fuel pump is located. 
Solicitation means, for purposes of this article only, to ask, beg or plead, whether orally or in written or printed manner, or with an object, for the purpose of receiving contributions, alms, charity, or gifts of items of value for oneself or another person, where the person being solicited receives nothing, or receives something of little or no monetary value, in exchange for a donation, including, but not limited to music, singing or other street performance. 
Solicitation-free zone means an area or structure designated in this article which provides any service, retail sales or entertainment for the general public, including the parking area thereof. 
Sunrise means the time of day published on the weather page of the Dallas Morning News as the time for sunrise on a particular day. 
Sunset means the time of day published on the weather page of the Dallas Morning News as the time for sunset on a particular day. 
(Ord. No. 2014-539, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Sec. 14-134. - Offenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he or she conducts a solicitation in an aggressive or intimidating manner. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he or she conducts a solicitation in any outdoor area in the city limits of Cedar Hill after sunset and before sunrise on any day of the week. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the solicitation: 
(1)  Consists exclusively of passive, nonverbal acts; or 
(2)  Was being conducted on private property with the advance written permission of the owner, manager or other person in lawful control of the property. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he or she conducts a solicitation within a solicitation-free zone designated and described in this article. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the solicitation is conducted on private property with the advance written permission of the owner, manager or other person in lawful control of the property. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if he or she conducts a solicitation within thirty (30) feet of: 
(1)  An automated teller machine; 
(2)  A bank, credit union or other financial institution; 
(3)  An exterior public pay telephone; 
(4)  A self-service car wash; 
(5)  A self-service fuel pump; 
(6)  A public transportation stop; 
(7)  An outdoor dining area of a restaurant, eatery, café, bar or other fixed food establishment. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if he or she conducts a solicitation on private property when requested leave or move by the owner, manager, or proprietor of the property, or by any other person lawfully in control of the property. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if he or she conducts a solicitation on private property or area where no solicitation signs are posted. 
(Ord. No. 2014-539, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Sec. 14-135. - Measurement. 
For the purpose of section 14-134(d), measurement will be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening objects or structures, from the nearest point at which a solicitation is conducted to whichever is applicable of the following: 
(1)  The nearest entrance or exit of a facility in which an automated teller machine is enclosed or, if the machine is not enclosed in a facility, to the nearest part of the automated teller machine; 
(2)  The nearest entrance or exit of a bank, credit union, or other financial institution; 
(3)  The nearest part of an exterior public pay telephone; 
(4)  The nearest part of a structure of a self-service car wash; 
(5)  The nearest part of a self-service fuel pump; 
(6)  The nearest point of any sign or marking designating an area as a public transportation stop; or 
(7)  The nearest part of any table in an outdoor dining area of a restaurant, eatery, café, bar or other fixed food establishment or, if the outdoor dining area is contained within a covered patio, the nearest part of that patio. 
(Ord. No. 2014-539, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Sec. 14-136. - Solicitation-free zone. 
The roads and area within the boundaries described herein and depicted in Exhibit "A"* [] hereto is designated as a solicitation-free zone: 
South of Pleasant Run Rd. from the East Frontage Road of US Hwy 67 West to the West Frontage Road of US Hwy 67. 
West of the West Frontage Road of US Hwy 67 from Pleasant Run Rd. north to Antone St. 
South of Antone St. from the West Frontage Road to the east residential property line of 428 Antone St. South of the southern residential property line of Antone St. to the east residential property line of Bentle Branch Dr. 
East of the eastern residential property line of Bentle Branch from the southern residential property line of Antone St. to Pleasant Run Rd. 
South of Pleasant Run Rd. from the east residential property line of Bentle Branch Dr. to N. Cedar Hill Rd. 
East of N. Cedar Hill from Pleasant Run Rd. to Main St. 
East of Main St. from Cedar Hill Rd. to Belt Line Rd. 
South and East of Belt Line Rd. from Main St. to S. Broad St. 
East of S. Broad St. from Belt Line Rd. to Texas St. 
North of Texas St. from S. Broad St. to the West Frontage Rd. of US Hwy 67. 
West of the West Frontage Rd. of US Hwy 67 from Texas St. to Belt Line Rd. 
South of Belt Line Rd. between the East Frontage Rd. for US Hwy 67 and South Clark Rd. to the southern commercial property line of 126 S. Hwy 67 and 108 W. Belt Line Rd. 
South of Belt Line Rd. to Kenya St. between Clark Rd. and the eastern commercial property lines of S. Clark Rd. and the southern commercial property lines of E. Belt Line Rd. between Clark Rd. and Highland Dr. 
North of Belt Line Rd. from the West Frontage Rd. of US Hwy 67 to FM 1382. 
North of FM 1382 from Belt Line Rd. to N. Cannady Dr. 
West of N. Cannaday Dr. from Belt Line Rd. to the residential property line south and west of Lovern St. 
South and west of the southern residential property line of Lovern St. and Springtime from Cannady Dr. to the East Frontage Rd. of US Hwy 67. 
West of the East Frontage Rd. of US Hwy 67 from the southern residential property line of Springtime north to Pleasant Run Rd. 
(Ord. No. 2014-539, § 1, 6-10-14) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
*A copy of Exhibit A can be found in the city offices. 
 
Sec. 14-137. - Penalty. 
An offense under this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 2014-539, § 1, 6-10-14)  
Secs. 14-138—14-145. - Reserved.  
Chapter 15 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-493, §§ 1, 2, adopted October 9, 2012, repealed the former Ch. 15, §§ 15-1—15-3, 15-21—15-28, 15-46—15-51, 15-71—15-86, 15-97, 15-98, and enacted a new Ch. 15 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from §§ 1-4, 1-42—1-48, 13-1—13-3, 13-11—13-16 of the 1976 Code; Ord. No. 76-419, §§ 1—3, 4-13-76; Ord. No. 82-628, §§ 1—6, 4-13-82; Ord. No. 85-764, § 1, 3-12-85; Ord. No. 85-818, § 1, 10-22-85; Ord. No. 89-1018, § I(1)—(14), IV, 3-28-89; Ord. No. 90-019, §§ 1—3, 6-12-90; Ord. No. 91-072, §§ 1, 2, 4-9-91; Ord. No. 91-073, §§ 1, 2, 4-9-91. 
Charter reference— Provisions relating to parks and playgrounds, art. IV, § 20. 
Cross reference— Swimming pool code, § 4-301 et seq.; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11; planning, Ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19; subdivision regulations, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Authority of home rule cities to acquire land for parks, V.A.C.S. art. 1175(15); city parks, V.A.C.S. art. 6080 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage: Any beverage containing more than one-half (½) of one (1) percent of alcohol by volume. 
All Sports Association: An association consisting of various sports associations within the city. 
Amplified sound: Music or speech projected or transmitted by artificial means including, but not limited to, amplifiers, loudspeakers or any similar devices. 
Applicant: A person who has filed a written application for use of a park for a specific purpose. 
Assembly: A group or gathering of persons for the purpose of deliberations, legislations, worship or entertainment. 
Board: The park board. 
City: The City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
Community-sponsored not-for-profit organization: A non-profit organization existing or operating within the city that has received recognition as a "department affiliate" by both the board and the city council. 
Concession stand: A facility at a park where food or drink is offered to the public. 
Department: The City of Cedar Hill Parks and Recreation Department. 
Director: The director of the department or his/her authorized representative. 
Event: An organized activity, gathering or parade that requires closure of a park area to the general public, that effectively precludes normal use of a park area, or that requires dedication of city resources beyond those normally associated with a park area. 
Facility use agreement: A written agreement between the city and one or more persons allowing use of city facilities for specified purposes including, but not limited to league games, practices and post season tournaments. 
Motor vehicle: Any wheeled device of conveyance propelled by motor or engine, including without limitation, any automobile, motorcycle, motor bike, or trailer of any kind, size, or description. The term does not include vehicles owned by the city or operated on the city's behalf. 
Parade: The assembly of thirty (30) or more persons whose gathering is for the common design and purpose of traveling or marching in procession from one location to another location and whose route includes a portion of a park. 
Park: Any land held, used, owned, leased, maintained or acquired by the city for use as a public park, trail, recreation or playground area, and any building or facility thereon, whether or not such areas have been formally dedicated to such purpose. 
Parking area: Any portion of any park or any park road or drive designated by the director for the parking of motor vehicles. 
Park street: A road that was designed to carry motor vehicles, was constructed entirely within the property lines of a park, and that serves primarily the park within which it is located. 
Permit: Written permission from the director to carry out a specified activity in a park. 
Person: Any individual, legal entity, partnership, association, corporation or other organization. 
Reimbursable cost: Any costs incurred by the city in the staging of an event or activity, including, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Utility services provided to the event, including all of the costs of installation, maintenance and connection; 
(2)  Food services inspection; 
(3)  Repair, maintenance and removal of facilities in the event of a failure by the applicant; 
(4)  Repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, and other public property; 
(5)  Park staff support; 
(6)  Police protection; 
(7)  Fire protection; 
(8)  Emergency medical service; 
(9)  Garbage disposal and cleanup; 
(10)  Traffic control; 
(11)  Equipment, including but not limited to bleachers, sound equipment, tents, tables and chairs; and 
(12)  Other direct city costs associated with an event. 
Sidewalk: That portion of a park street intended for the use of pedestrians that is located between the curb lines or lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
ARTICLE II. - PARK BOARD 
 
Sec. 15-2. - Created. 
There is hereby created a park board. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-3. - Members. 
Members of the board shall be appointed by a majority of the city council, and the board shall consist of nine (9) voting members. Ex-officio, non-voting members, may also be appointed by the city council. An individual must be a resident of Cedar Hill in order to be eligible for appointment to the board as either a voting member or ex-officio member. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12; Ord. No. 2013-511, § 1, 7-23-13)  
Sec. 15-4. - Term of members. 
The term of office of members of the board shall be two (2) years from the date of their appointment. Members may be re-appointed for additional terms. Each member shall serve on the board until removed by the city council or until expiration of the member's term, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-5. - Officers and duties. 
(a)  Officers enumerated. The board shall elect annually the following officers: 
(1)  Chairman; and 
(2)  Vice-chairman. 
(b)  Duties described. 
(1)  Chairman: The chairman shall preside at all meetings, shall appoint standing committee members and shall perform all other duties as usually pertain to his/her office, or as may be instructed by the board or city council. 
(2)  Vice-chairman: It shall be the duty of the vice-chairman to perform the duties of the chairman in his/her absence. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-6. - Compensation. 
Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-7. - Powers and duties. 
The board shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council in matters pertaining to parks and recreation, and shall: 
(1)  Become familiar with the location and current condition of the parks system; 
(2)  Utilize a master plan for the purpose of recommending sites to be purchased and used as city parks; improvements to existing park property, structures, facilities, athletic areas or other improvements on parks; and removal of parks from the city's park system for purposes that protect the interest of the public; 
(3)  Recommend rules and regulations governing the use of facilities including those related to youth sports associations, as necessary; 
(4)  Conduct appeal hearings and make final decisions in disputes that are appealed to the board from decisions of the board of the All Sports Association, in accordance with applicable facility use agreements, bylaws, rules and regulations and other pertinent city regulations; 
(5)  Decide whether to approve All Sports Association bylaws, rules and regulations; 
(6)  Perform other duties as the city council may prescribe; and 
(7)  Establish goals and standards for the board's governance and for the performance of its duties, as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-8. - Removal from board; vacancies. 
Members of the board shall be subject to removal from office by the city council for any lawful cause deemed sufficient for their removal in the interest of the public. Any vacancy in the membership of the board may be filled by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-9. - Meetings. 
(1)  The board will meet the third Wednesday of each month as necessary and at such other times as needed, or by written request sent to the chairman or vice-chairman by three (3) members of the board. 
(2)  Notice of meetings shall be posted to the extent required by law, and shall be held at the Government Center unless otherwise specified. 
(3)  A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum. The absence of any member from any meeting shall be noted in the minutes of the meeting. The director shall submit to the city council upon request information related to the board. 
(4)  The birector shall attend board meetings, post notice of meetings and record minutes in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-10. - Subcommittees. 
(1)  The board, by majority vote at any regular or special meeting, may appoint members to subcommittees to serve the purposes of the board. 
(2)  Subcommittees shall be terminated in the same manner as they are appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
ARTICLE III. - PARK REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 15-11. - Park hours and park closings. 
(1)  Parks shall be closed between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 5:30 a.m. except as otherwise authorized by the director. 
(2)  The director may temporarily close or limit the use of any section or part of any park at any time if the director finds it reasonably necessary to take such action for the purpose of hosting events and activities; for the protection of public health and safety; or for park maintenance. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or be present in any closed area unless authorized by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-12. - Fires. 
(1)  Unless authorized in writing by the director and the fire department, no person shall start or maintain, in any park, any outdoor fire except for cooking fires, which shall be started and maintained only in a fire pit, outdoor fireplace, city installed barbecue pit or grill, or individually owned gas grills or portable camp stoves. 
(2)  No person starting or maintaining any fire in a park shall leave the fire unattended. 
(3)  Any person who has started a fire within a park shall not leave the premises without first completely extinguishing the fire. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-13. - Motor vehicle operation within a park. 
(1)  The maximum lawful prima facie speed limit in all parks shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to: 
(a)  Drive or operate any motor vehicle within a park except on park streets, roadways designated for traffic, or designated parking areas; 
(b)  Drive, use, operate, park or stop any motor vehicle at any place in a park in such a manner or condition as to endanger or interfere with the lawful traffic or use of a park street or parking area; or 
(c)  Stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in a park, except in designated parking areas; or to fail to park the entire motor vehicle within the limit lines of a designated parking stall, where such lines have been provided. 
(3)  If a motor vehicle is parked or left in violation of this section, and the owner or operator of the motor vehicle cannot immediately be found to move such vehicle, the police department of the city may remove or impound the vehicle in accordance with applicable laws. 
(4)  If a motor vehicle is found unattended or unoccupied in a park in violation of any provision of this article, the fact that such vehicle is unattended or unoccupied by any person shall be prima facie evidence that the owner unlawfully stopped, placed or parked such vehicle. The records of the state highway department or the county highway license department showing the name of the person to whom state highway license plates were issued shall constitute prima facie evidence of ownership by the person therein named. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-14. - Sports leagues, associations, and organizations. 
All Sports Association member organizations may enter into facility use agreements for use of park facilities for team tryouts, practices, games or post season tournaments. It is prohibited for any sports league, sports association, or sports organization of any kind, including any member of the All Sports Association, to use any park facility for team tryouts, practices, games or post season tournaments, unless the organization has executed a facility use agreement with the city and is in full compliance with such agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-15. - Permit required; exemptions. 
A person wishing to hold an event in a park must first obtain a permit from the director. 
A person must also obtain a permit from the director in order to engage in any of the following activities in a park: 
(1)  An exhibit, music event, play, or motion picture; 
(2)  Any assembly or parade; 
(3)  Use of amplified sound equipment; 
(4)  Sale of food, drinks or goods; 
(5)  Park use between 11:30 p.m. and 5:30 a.m.; and 
(6)  Cutting or removal of any trees. 
The holder of a permit issued pursuant to this section must keep a copy of the permit in the area where the event or activity is conducted, and must produce the permit upon demand of any authorized representative of the city. 
At the discretion of the director, persons who have entered into a facility use agreement with the city may be exempted from the requirements of this section with respect to any events or activities conducted pursuant to and in compliance with the terms of such agreement. 
The requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements of any other applicable law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-16. - Additional prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do any of the following in a park: 
(a)  Swim, wade, or use or operate a boat, in any lake, stream or pond located in any park; except that model boats or radio-controlled sport boats which are incapable of carrying occupants may be used in water bodies located in parks; 
(b)  Place or permit to be placed trash, garbage, debris or other waste materials not accumulated during the course of normal park activities; 
(c)  Consume, sell or possess alcoholic beverages; 
(d)  Possess any animal, or allow any animal to enter or remain, in any area of a park where posted signs state that such an animal is prohibited; 
(e)  Cut, break, deface or in any way injure trees, shrubs, plants, grass, turf, fountains, seats, structures, improvements, ornaments, monuments or any other property of any kind; 
(f)  Construct or erect any building or structure of any kind, whether permanent or temporary, without the express, prior written consent of the director; except that small, pop-up shade structures may be used in parks without prior permission; 
(g)  Enter onto or remain in any park with an unrestrained dog except in areas or on paths or trails expressly designated as dog off leash areas by posted park signs, rules or regulations. Without limitation, use of a leash or restraining device greater than 6'-0? long shall be considered a lack of restraint; 
(h)  Abandon or leave a domestic animal or pet unattended; 
(i)  Capture, attempt to capture, hunt, molest, injure, trap, or administer or set out any trap or harmful substance for, any wild or domesticated animal, or remove or possess the young, eggs or nest of any animal, without a permit from the director; except that any person is permitted to fish for and remove from the lakes, ponds and streams, any fish as allowed by state law (including all licensing requirements); 
(j)  Camp overnight except in a designated area with a permit; 
(k)  Ride a horse or other animal except in areas or on paths or trails expressly designated as equestrian areas by posted park signs, rules or regulations; 
(l)  Sell merchandise, food or beverages without a permit from the director; 
(m)  Cause unreasonably loud or raucous noise; 
(n)  Possess a glass container; 
(o)  Hit golf balls; 
(p)  Engage in any activity other than tennis on tennis courts, or enter a tennis court without wearing tennis shoes; or 
(q)  Explore, extract or conduct any other activity relating to exploitation of oil, gas or other minerals. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-17. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in municipal court shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. Each and every day a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
A person who holds a permit, but who fails to comply with any requirement or condition of that permit, engages in activities that exceed the scope of the permit, or damages city property or facilities while acting pursuant to the permit, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and, in addition to being subject to the above penalty, shall make restitution to the city for all damages incurred by the city as a result of the person's violation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-18. - Reward for information on vandalism in parks. 
(1)  The city does hereby offer a reward in the amount of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to any person providing information which leads directly to the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of the crime of vandalism when such vandalism has occurred in a park. Such reward shall be considered a standing offer to any person providing such information and shall be paid from the general fund of the city. 
(2)  Only one (1) reward shall be paid in connection with each conviction or group of related convictions, as determined by the director in the exercise of his/her discretion, and such reward may be split among multiple informants. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-19. - Enforcement of article. 
The department, as well as the city's code enforcement department, fire department, and police department shall be responsible for the enforcement of all codes and ordinances regulating the conduct and use of parks. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
ARTICLE IV. - PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITY USE, FEES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 15-20. - Facility use; fees. 
(1)  The director is authorized to set and charge fees for use of park facilities and for department programs. The director may submit a proposed schedule of fees to the park board and city council for input and approval as part of the city's annual budget process, and the city council may require the director to adjust facility use fees at any time. Such fees may be charged to help offset some or all of the maintenance and operational costs associated with the facilities and resources used. The director may evaluate fees from time to time and revise them as necessary to reflect changes in costs and/or competition. Nonresidents may be required to pay a higher fee due to the fact that they are not assessed city ad valorem taxes. 
(2)  The director is authorized to add department programs, increase participation numbers for existing programs, and omit programs as necessary in the director's discretion to meet the needs of the community and maintain appropriate cost recovery. 
(3)  The city may, at its discretion, sponsor, subsidize, or reduce or eliminate fees for special events or activities that further the city's mission, including without limitation events or activities that are highly attended by Cedar Hill residents or that promote tourism. Such financial support of special events may be addressed during the permitting process and/or the city's budget process. 
(4)  Non-sponsored events or activities will be required to pay fees that cover all measurable reimbursable costs associated with them. The department, utilizing normal and customary methods, will determine the amount of reimbursable costs associated with an event or activity. The director is authorized to charge additional fees for commercial and "for profit" events. The amount of such additional fees may be determined as a percentage of gross revenues, as a rental amount, or by any other method deemed appropriate by the director. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-21. - Priority use. 
(1)  Subject to permits granted by the director, facility use agreements entered by the city, and the provisions of this chapter, park facilities shall be available to anyone on a first-come, first-served basis. 
(2)  Residents of Cedar Hill may be given priority in the use of parks, including through preferential treatment in fees and the permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
ARTICLE V. - PERMITTING PROCESS 
 
Sec. 15-22. - Application. 
A person desiring to hold an event or engage in activity for which a permit is required by this chapter shall apply for an event permit by filing with the department a written application. The director may require that applications be submitted using a form developed by the city. Otherwise, an application must generally contain the following information, subject to appropriate adjustment by the director depending on the nature of the proposed event or activity: 
(a)  Name, home address and telephone number; office address and telephone number; date of birth; and driver's license number of the applicant, the promoter, and of any other persons responsible for the conduct of the event or activity. 
(b)  Detailed plans related to the event or activity should address each of the following items: 
(1)  Facilities—A set of plans and specifications relating to all temporary facilities to be constructed or utilized for the event or activity; 
(2)  Fire protection—A plan for prevention of fires and for adequate protection of persons and property in the event of a fire, including, without limitation, adequate exits, fire extinguishers, adequate access for fire trucks and emergency vehicles; 
(3)  Concessions—A plan to provide food and beverages, a health permit, and proof of insurance from the concession operator listing the city as an additional insured; 
(4)  Emergency medical service—A plan to provide adequate emergency medical services at the event or activity; 
(5)  Parking—A plan to provide adequate parking for the event or activity, including proof of consent by any private landowners whose property will be used for parking; 
(6)  Police protection—A plan providing for adequate safety, security, traffic and crowd control in connection with the event or activity. All public safety services shall be provided by Cedar Hill Police and Fire personnel. Crowd management requires a minimum of two (2) officers per five hundred (500) participants; 
(7)  Promotional—If applicable, a plan to promote, market and advertise the event or activity; 
(8)  Sanitation plan—A plan to insure that the highest standards of cleanliness and sanitation are maintained at the event or activity, including adequate restroom facilities, and a plan to clean and stock public restrooms, police and maintain litter-free grounds, empty refuse containers frequently so as to prevent overflow, contain all on-site waste, and provide proper containers for recycling if available; 
(9)  Estimated number of persons participating; 
(10)  Estimated number of spectators; 
(11)  Proof of insurance with the city listed as an additional insured; 
(12)  Proof of vaccinations if event includes use of animals; and 
(13)  Any other information reasonably requested by the director. 
An application must be filed sufficiently in advance to allow for reasonable staff planning and approval. Generally, an application must be filed at least thirty (30) days in advance of the event or activity for which a permit is sought in order to be considered timely. Failure to timely file an application is sufficient grounds for denial of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-23. - Approval, denial and revocation of event permit. 
City staff shall determine whether the application and plans meet city safety and other goals. Criteria used by the city for assessing applications may include, without limitation, the following: 
(a)  Any scheduling conflicts with city sponsored programs, events, or other park uses; 
(b)  The extent to which the event or other activity would restrict the public use of city owned or leased facilities; 
(c)  The extent to which the event or other activity would provide a positive public service and meet a legitimate public need; 
(d)  Any public safety issues created by the event or activity; and 
(e)  Any involvement or endorsement of commercial enterprise(s). 
The director may require the applicant to modify an application in order to assist the director in reaching a decision on the application. 
If the director determines that issuance of a requested permit is appropriate and in the best interests of the public, the director may issue the permit. If the applicant fails to provide viable plans and sufficient assurances to satisfy the director that the event or activity will be carried out in a manner that is in the best interests of the public, the application may be denied. The decision to grant or deny a permit is at the discretion of the director, subject to the appeal provisions herein. 
The director may require the applicant to satisfy certain conditions before issuing a permit, or the director may issue a permit subject to stated conditions. Appropriate conditions include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Compliance with other applicable laws and ordinances; 
(b)  Advance payment of reimbursable costs and/or any applicable fees; 
(c)  For commercial or "for-profit" activities, payment of a percentage of gross revenues and/or rents as deemed appropriate by the director; 
(d)  Execution of an indemnification agreement in favor of the city; 
(e)  Restrictions on fires, fireworks, amplified sound, dancing, sports, use of animals, equipment or motor vehicles, the number of persons to be present, the location of any bandstand or stage, or any other use which appears likely to create a risk of unreasonable harm to the use and enjoyment of a park; 
(f)  A requirement that the applicant post a reasonable deposit or security for the repair of any damage to park property or the cost of cleanup, or both in addition to any cost for city services paid in advance of the event; 
(g)  A requirement that the applicant furnish additional sanitary and refuse facilities that may be necessary, based on the use or activity for which the permit is being sought; and 
(h)  Any other safeguard required for protection of the public interest. 
If, after issuing a permit, the director becomes aware of new or additional information that demonstrates the event or activity is not in the best interests of the public, the director may revoke the permit. Without limitation, the director has authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule, ordinance, or law, or upon the violation of any condition or restriction under which the permit was issued. If the director finds that an applicant falsified any information related to a permit application, the director may revoke the permit and deem any fees (including deposits and bonds) paid by the applicant forfeited. 
Permits are not transferable without written consent of the director. An applicant shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were stated in the permit. Issuance of a permit pursuant to this article does not waive the requirements of any other ordinance or law. The city, by issuing a permit pursuant to this article, assumes no liability or responsibility whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-24. - Appeal of denial or revocation of event permit. 
If the director denies a permit application or revokes a permit, the director shall notify the applicant in writing of the director's decision and of the right to appeal. Any appeal must be taken within three (3) days by written notice of appeal to the deputy city manager. The deputy city manager will present the appeal to the city council at its next regular meeting, or, if appropriate, at a special meeting. The city council shall consider all the available evidence in support of or against the action appealed and render a decision either sustaining or reversing the denial or revocation. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-25. - Interference with permitted use of park areas. 
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the exclusive use of and access to park facilities of any other person who holds a permit or facility use agreement that entitles such person to exclusive use of those park facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Sec. 15-26. - Simple facility reservations. 
The director may, at his/her discretion, waive any requirement of this article except for the provisions relating to appeal. In particular, for any event or other activity for which a permit is required, but which, in the director's judgment, imposes minimal burdens on the city and the public, the director may grant a permit utilizing any reasonable reservation process, without requiring compliance with the other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
ARTICLE VI. - NAMING OF PARKS 
 
Sec. 15-27. - Naming of parks. 
The board will be responsible for recommending names for parks. 
(1)  The board shall be responsible, with the assistance of the department, for research, study and recommendation of a proposed name to the city council. 
(2)  The recommended name will be communicated to the city council for its consideration and approval. 
(3)  A park name may be changed for cause at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
Secs. 15-28—15-32. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - NO PRIVATE RIGHT OF ACTION 
 
Sec. 15-33. - No private right of action. 
Nothing in this chapter creates a private right of action. 
(Ord. No. 2012-493, § 2, 10-9-12)  
ARTICLE VIII. - YOUTH PROGRAM STANDARDS OF CARE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2020-700 , § 1, adopted May 26, 2020, amended Art. VIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VIII, §§ 15-34—15-38, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2013-507, adopted June 11, 2013; Ord. No. 2016-584, adopted May 24, 2016; Ord. No. 2017-616, adopted April 25, 2017; Ord. No. 2018-643, § 1, adopted May 22, 2018. 
 
Sec. 15-34. - Definitions. 
The following definitions apply to this article, in addition to the definitions outlined in article I, section 15-1. 
Camp director: The youth program camp director, a full-time, professional employee of Cedar Hill Action Team or Dogwood Canyon Audubon Center or other organization, not less than twenty-one (21) years of age with a minimum two (2) years of experience planning and implementing recreational, youth activities. 
Counselor(s): Those individuals hired and employed by the City or Cedar Hill Action Team and/or the City of Cedar Hill who are assigned responsibility for managing, administering, or implementing some portion of the Youth Program. 
Department: The Cedar Hill Parks and Recreation Department. 
Parent(s): One (1) or both Parents or other adult with legal custody and authority to enroll a child or children in the youth program. 
Participant: A youth whose parent(s) have completed all required registration procedures and who is eligible for the youth program. 
Recreation center manager: The full-time department employee or his/her designated representative, who is responsible for the management of the recreation center including personnel, programs, space allocation and overseeing management, administration and implementation of the youth program. 
Site: Dogwood Canyon Audubon Center located at 1206 West F.M., Cedar Hill, TX 75104; Alan E. Sims Cedar Hill Recreation Center, 310 E. Parkerville Road, Cedar Hill, TX 75104 
Special needs: any of various difficulties, such as a physical, emotional, behavioral, or learning disability or impairment, that causes an individual to require additional or specialized services or accommodations. 
Staff: The person(s) authorized to attend and assist with the youth program. 
Youth: A child aged five (5) to thirteen (13) years. 
Youth program: The city children's camp and after-school children's care recreation program. 
Youth program manual: The notebook of policies, procedures, required forms, and organizational and programming information relevant to the youth program. 
(Ord. No. 2018-643, § 1, 5-22-18; Ord. No. 2019-676, § 1, 5-28-19; Ord. No. 2020-700 , § 1, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 15-35. - Purpose. 
(1)  This article shall define the standard of care for the city's youth program. 
(2)  This article allows the city to operate the Youth Program without adopting the state-prescribed day care standards of care and licensing requirements. 
(3)  The city declares its Youth Program is not required to be and will not be licensed by the state, and the youth program will not be advertised as a child-care facility or program in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-643, § 1, 5-22-18; Ord. No. 2019-676, § 1, 5-28-19; Ord. No. 2020-700 , § 1, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 15-36. - Administration. 
(1)  The governing body of the youth program is the city council. Implementation of the youth program standards of care is the responsibility of the parks and recreation department director and the department employees. These standards of care will apply to the youth program. The program site will have available, for public and staff review, a current copy of the youth program standards of care. Parents of participants will be provided a current copy of the youth program standards of care during the youth program registration process. Criminal background checks will be conducted on prospective youth program staff in the same manner in which the city conducts criminal background checks on all city employees. No person is allowed to be hired as staff for the youth program if the person fails to satisfy the general city background check standards. 
(2)  Before a participant may be enrolled, a Parent must sign registration forms that contain: 
a.  Name, address, home telephone number of the participant; 
b.  Name, address and telephone number of both parents who may need to be contacted during youth program hours; 
c.  Alternate emergency contact information; 
d.  The names, telephone numbers and driver's license numbers of people to whom the participant may be released; 
e.  A statement of the participant's special problems or needs, including allergies; 
f.  Emergency medical authorization; 
g.  Proof of residency; and 
h.  A liability release that encompasses all personal injury, including death, and property damage resulting from participation in the youth program. 
(3)  A monthly inspection report will be initiated by the camp director of each youth program to confirm adherence to the youth program standards of care. Inspection reports will be sent to the recreation center manager for review and kept on record for at least two (2) years. The recreation center manager will review the report and establish deadlines and criteria for compliance with the youth program standards of care. The recreation center manager will make visual inspections of the youth program no less than twice during each youth program period. 
(4)  Complaints regarding enforcement of the youth program standards of care will be directed to the camp director. The camp director will be responsible to take the necessary steps to resolve the problems. Complaints not involving threats to life safety, regarding enforcement of the youth program standards of care and their resolution, will be recorded by the recreation center manager. Complaints involving life safety as related to enforcement of the youth program standards of care will be addressed by the recreation center manager and the complaint and resolution will be noted. 
(5)  The recreation superintendent or designee will make an annual report to the park board on the overall status of the youth program and their compliance with the youth program standards of care. 
(Ord. No. 2018-643, § 1, 5-22-18; Ord. No. 2019-676, § 1, 5-28-19; Ord. No. 2020-700 , § 1, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 15-37. - Standards of care. 
(a)  Staff-participant ratio. 
(1)  The standard ratio of participants to counselors will be no more than twenty (20) to one (1). In the event a counselor is unable to report to the site, a replacement will be assigned; and 
(2)  Each participant shall have a youth program employee who is responsible for him or her and who is aware of the participant's habits, interests, and any special problems as identified by the participant's parent during the registration process. 
(b)  Discipline. 
(1)  Youth program employees will implement discipline and guidance in a consistent manner based on the best interests of participants; 
(2)  There shall be no cruel, harsh, or physically administered punishment or treatment; 
(3)  Youth program employees may use brief, supervised separation from the group if necessary; 
(4)  As necessary, youth program employees will initiate discipline reports to the parent(s) of participants. Parents will be asked to sign discipline reports to indicate they have been advised about specific problems or incidents; 
(5)  A sufficient number and/or severe nature of discipline reports as detailed in the youth program manual may result in participant being suspended from the youth program; and 
(6)  In instances where there is a danger to participants or staff, the offending participant will be removed from the site as soon as possible. 
(c)  Programming. 
(1)  Youth program employees will attempt to provide activities for each group according to the participants' ages and appropriate to participants' health, safety, and well-being. The activities will be flexible and attempt to promote the participants' emotional, social, and mental growth; 
(2)  Youth program employees will attempt to provide youth programs that include: 
a.  Alternating active and passive activities; 
b.  Opportunity for individual and group activities; and 
c.  Outdoor time at frequent intervals if weather permits. 
(3)  Youth program employees will be attentive and considerate of the safety of participants on field trips and during any transportation provided by the Youth Program; 
(4)  During trips, youth program employees supervising participants must have immediate access to emergency medical forms and emergency contact information for each participant; 
(5)  Youth program employees must have a written list of the participants in the group and must check the roll frequently; and 
(6)  Youth program employees must have first aid supplies and a guide to first aid and emergency care available on field trips. 
(d)  Communication. 
(1)  The site will have a telephone to allow the site to be contacted by department personnel and the site will have access to a telephone for use in contacting the city or making emergency calls; and 
(2)  The camp director will post the following telephone numbers adjacent to a telephone accessible to all youth program employees at the site: 
a.  City ambulance or emergency medical services; 
b.  Recreation center manager; 
c.  City police department; 
d.  City fire department; 
e.  City Government Center; 
f.  City parks and recreation department; 
g.  Numbers at which parents may be reached; and 
h.  The telephone number for the site itself. 
(e)  Transportation. 
(1)  Before a participant may be transported to and from youth program activities, an authorization form, completed by the parent of the participant, must be filed with the camp director; 
(2)  First aid supplies and a first aid and emergency care guide will be available in all youth program vehicles that transport children; and 
(3)  All youth program vehicles used for transporting participants for field trips and other activities offered as part of the program during typical program hours must have available a 6-BC portable fire extinguisher which will be installed in the passenger compartment of the vehicle and must be accessible to the adult occupants. 
(f)  Safety. 
(1)  Youth program employees will inspect the site daily to detect sanitation and safety concerns that might affect the health and safety of the participants; 
(2)  Buildings, grounds, and equipment on the site will be inspected, cleaned, repaired, and maintained as needed to protect the health and safety of the participants; 
(3)  Youth program employees must have first aid supplies and a guide to first aid and emergency care readily available at the site, during transportation to an off-site activity, and for the duration of any off-site activity; 
(4)  Youth program air conditioners, electric fans, and heaters must be mounted out of the reach of participants or have safeguards that keep participants from being injured; and 
(5)  Youth program porches and platforms more than thirty (30) inches above the ground must be equipped with railings participants can reach. 
(g)  Fire. 
(1)  In case of fire, danger of fire, explosion, or other emergency, the first priority of youth program employees is to evacuate the participants to a designated safe area; 
(2)  The site will have an annual fire inspection by the local fire department, and the resulting report will detail any safety concerns observed. The report will be forwarded to the director who will review and establish deadlines and criteria for compliance. Information from this report will be included in the director's annual report to the park board; 
(3)  The site must have at least one (1) fire extinguisher approved by the fire marshal readily available to all youth program employees. The fire extinguisher is to be inspected quarterly, and a quarterly report will be forwarded to the recreation center manager who will keep the report on file for a minimum of two (2) years. All program employees will be trained in the proper use of fire extinguishers; and 
(4)  Fire drills will be initiated at the Site during each weekly, program period. 
(h)  Illness or injury. 
(1)  A participant who is considered to be a health or safety concern to other participants or employees will not be admitted to the youth program; 
(2)  Illnesses and injuries will be handled in a manner to protect the health of all participants and employees; 
(3)  Youth program employees will follow plans to provide emergency care for injured participants with symptoms of an acute illness as specified in the youth program manual; and 
(4)  Youth program employees will follow the recommendation of the Texas Department of Health concerning the admission or re-admission of any participant after a communicable disease. 
(i)  Medication. 
(1)  Youth program employees will not administer medication, but may dispense them only if: 
a.  Staff will not dispense medication to any child in camp. Staff will alert children on when to take medication as directed by the directions on the original prescription bottle. 
b.  Prescription medications are in the original containers labeled with the child's name, a date, directions, and the physician's name. 
c.  Non-prescription medications are labeled with the child's name and the date the medication was brought to the program. Non-prescription medication must be in the original container. Youth program employees will not dispense any medication. 
d.  Youth program employees must ensure medications are inaccessible to participants or, if it is necessary to keep medications in the refrigerator (when available). Medications will be kept separate from food. 
(j)  Toilet facilities. 
(1)  The site will have toilets located and equipped so participants can use them independently and youth program staff can supervise as needed; 
(2)  An appropriate and adequate number of toilets and lavatories will be provided. 
(k)  Sanitation. 
(1)  The site must have adequate light, ventilation, and heat; 
(2)  The youth program must have an adequate supply of water meeting the standards of the Texas Department of Health for drinking water and ensure that it will be supplied to the participants in a safe and sanitary manner; and 
(3)  Youth program employees must properly dispose of garbage and debris from the program area daily. 
(l)  Special needs. 
(1)  Every reasonable accommodation will be made to address special needs participants. 
(2)  For health and safety reasons, special needs participants must provide a personal attendant for assistance in feeding, changing of clothes, and using the restroom. 
(Ord. No. 2018-643, § 1, 5-22-18; Ord. No. 2019-676, § 1, 5-28-19; Ord. No. 2020-700 , § 1, 5-26-20)  
Sec. 15-38. - Youth program staff. 
Staff qualifications and responsibilities: 
(1)  Camp director qualifications: 
a.  Will be a full-time, professional employee of the contract instructor not less than twenty-one (21) years of age; 
b.  Must have two (2) years' experience planning and implementing youth recreational activities; 
c.  Must pass a background investigation including testing for illegal substances; 
d.  Must be CPR/AED certified; and 
e.  Must be certified in first aid. 
(2)  Camp director responsibilities: 
a.  Administers the daily operations of the youth program in compliance with the youth program standards of care; 
b.  Recommends for hire, supervises, and evaluates counselors; 
c.  Plans, implements, and evaluates the daily activities of youth program; and 
d.  Investigates allegations or concerns regarding suspected child abuse and will report suspected child abuse or neglect immediately to the recreation center manager or other authority in accordance with the Texas Family Code. 
(3)  Counselor qualifications: 
a.  Part-time or temporary employees of the contract instructor; 
b.  Will be age seventeen (17) or older; however, each site will have at least one (1) counselor eighteen (18) years or older present at all times; 
c.  Must pass a background investigation including testing for illegal substances; 
d.  Must be CPR/AED certified; 
(4)  Counselor responsibilities: 
a.  Be able to consistently exhibit competence, good judgment, and self-control when working with participants; 
b.  Relate to participants with courtesy, respect, tolerance, and patience; 
c.  Provide participants with an environment in which they can feel safe, enjoy wholesome recreation activities, and participate in appropriate social opportunities with their peers; 
d.  Be responsible to know and follow all city and departmental standards, policies and procedures that apply to the youth program; and 
e.  Ensure that participants are released only to a parent or person on record as being authorized by the parent for pickup. All youth program sites will have a copy of the department approved plan to verify the identity of a person authorized to pick up a participant. 
(5)  Training and orientation: 
a.  The contractor will provide training and orientation to Counselors in working with participants and for specific job responsibilities. Each counselor will be provided with a youth program manual specific to the youth program; 
b.  Counselors will be trained in appropriate procedures to handle emergencies; 
c.  Counselors will receive training in pertinent city, and youth program policies and procedures; and 
d.  Youth program employees will be required to sign an acknowledgment that they received the required training and are expected to conduct activities in accordance with training and the youth program standards of care. 
(Ord. No. 2018-643, § 1, 5-22-18; Ord. No. 2019-676, § 1, 5-28-19; Ord. No. 2020-700 , § 1, 5-26-20)  
Chapter 16 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Provisions relating to planning and zoning, art. IV, § 27; provisions relating to annexation and deannexation of territory, art. II, § 2. 
Cross reference— Board of development, § 2-101 et seq.; capital improvement board, § 2-121 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7; natural resources, Ch. 13; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; public utilities, Ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19; subdivision regulations, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Municipal annexation, V.A.C.S. art 970a; municipal boundaries and annexation, art. 971 et seq.; zoning authority of home rule cities, V.A.C.S. arts. 1011a et seq., 1175(26). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Filing fee for voluntary annexation—Petition. 
(a)  Required. Any person desirous of filing a petition for voluntary annexation shall, upon presentation of such petition to the city secretary, pay to the city a fee to be set in such amount as the city council may from time to time determine. 
(b)  Delivered to city secretary. At the time of the presentation of a petition for voluntary annexation to the city secretary, the fee required by this section shall also be delivered to the city secretary at city hall. 
(c)  Nonpayment authorizes refusal. The payment of the fee required by this section shall be a prerequisite to any affirmative consideration of the petition for voluntary annexation by the city council, and the nonpayment of any such fee shall be grounds for refusal of such petition. 
(d)  Instances of refund. If a filing fee is paid simultaneously with the filing of a petition for voluntary annexation with the city secretary and thereafter the city council refuses or denies such petition, for whatever reason, then, in that event, the fee paid herein shall be refunded to the person responsible for the initial payment of such fee. 
(Ord. No. 83-652, §§ 1, 3—5, 2-8-83)  
Sec. 16-2. - Establishing regulations for the maintenance of any public right-of-way. 
(a)  Regulations for the maintenance of rights-of-ways. All landowners, lessors, lessees and residents of any property bordering, adjoining or contiguous to a public right-of-way shall maintain all surface areas within the right-of-way, including sidewalks and curbs, in a clean, safe and efficient manner. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, removal of trash and debris, trimming trees so as not to prevent safe and unobstructed pedestrian and vehicle travel, and keeping all grass and weeds trimmed or mowed to a height not to exceed twelve (12) inches. An exception to these requirements will be granted to lots with rear frontage on streets and highways separated by a wall or fence. 
(b)  Wildflower exception. To ensure the environmental sanctity and beauty of the wildflowers in the city, the mowing is prohibited from April 1 to July 15 annually in designated areas until the wildflowers have seeded out. Signs are posted in these designated areas during the prohibited time. The following is a schedule of prohibited mowing areas: 
PROHIBITED MOWING AREAS 
	Street 	From 	To 
1. 	Wintergreen 	U.S. 67 	Joe Wilson 
2. 	Joe Wilson 	Wintergreen 	North Cedar Hill Road 
3. 	North Cedar Hill Road 	Joe Wilson 	Belt Line 
4. 	Strauss 	F.M. 1382 	Main 
5. 	Belt Line Road 	Mansfield Road 	West City Limit 
6. 	Mansfield Road 	1000 Belt Line Road 	Anderson Road 
7. 	Robin Road 	Mansfield Road 	Summit Place 
8. 	Duncanville Road 	South City Limits 	Belt-line Road 
9. 	Texas Plume 	Mt. Lebanon Road 	Cemetery 
10. 	Mt. Lebanon Road 	West U.S. 67 	Dallas County Line 
11. 	Parkerville Road 	Duncanville Road 	800 Parkerville Road 
12. 	Gulf Colorado 	Right-of-way 	
	Santa Fe RR 	Wintergreen Road 	Belt Line 
13. 	Anderson Road 	Mansfield Road 	Dead End 
14. 	North Roberts Road 	East side of a portion of the 200 block and 300 block 	Wildflower 
 
(c)  Notice of violation. In the event any landowner, lessor, lessee or resident of any property bordering, adjoining or contiguous to a public right-of-way property fails to comply with the provisions of this section, the city's enforcement authority or designee shall provide official notice that such person or entity will have a minimum of seven (7) days to bring the property into compliance. If the landowner, lessor, lessee or resident fails to comply with the provisions of this section within the time period prescribed in the notice, they shall be considered to be in violation of this section and subject to the penalty and fine set forth herein. The notice shall be in writing and may be served on the landowner, lessor, lessee or resident by personal delivery, or by delivery through the United States mail to the last known address of the landowner, lessor, lessee or resident. If the address of the landowner, lessor, lessee or resident is unknown, then the notice may be served by posting same on the front door of the dwelling or establishment or by posting the notice on a sign in the front yard. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other entity who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to fine in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each and every instance of the violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable by separate fines for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 86-841, §§ 1, 2, 2-25-86; Ord. No. 96-267, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 98-366, § 1, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 98-400, § 1, 11-10-98; Ord. No. 2016-587, §§ 1, 3, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 2016-589, §§ 2, 3, 8-23-16; Ord. No. 2018-660, §§ 1, 2, 12-11-18)  
Sec. 16-3. - Comprehensive plan adopted. 
(a)  The comprehensive plan, including the future land use plan, thoroughfare plan, and all the maps, which are attached hereto and incorporated herein for all purposes is hereby adopted by the city council. 
(b)  This plan is intended to constitute the comprehensive or master plan of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, for all matters to long range guidance relative to zoning decisions, land subdivision, thoroughfare construction, and growth management. 
(Ord. No. 99-418, §§ 1, 2, 3-23-99)  
Secs. 16-4—16-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ENVIRONMENTAL IMPROVEMENT AND BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Attendance of board, commission members at meetings, etc., § 2-1; board of development generally, § 2-101 et seq.; capital improvement board, § 2-121 et seq. 
 
Sec. 16-21. - Creation; composition; addition of members. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a citizens group to be known as the Cedar Hill Environmental Improvement and Beautification Commission which shall consist of thirteen (13) members to be appointed as follows: 
(1)  Six (6) members to be appointed by the city council at large for a term of two (2) years, and 
(2)  Seven (7) members to be appointed by the city council for a term of one (1) year. 
In addition thereto, the director of parks and recreation and the manager of the city chamber of commerce shall be ex officio advisory members to the commission without the right to vote. Unless otherwise provided, all dealings by members or employees shall be through the director of parks and recreation or chamber manager respectively. 
(b)  Terms of appointment for members of the commission created by this article shall be effective from the date appointment is made by the city council and for the length of the appointed term and until a successor has been qualified. Commission vacancies shall be filled in the same manner and for the same purpose as the original appointment and shall be for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(c)  Upon written request of the commission or upon its own initiative, the city council may increase the membership of the commission to a larger number. 
(Ord. No. 85-761, §§ 1, 4, 2-20-85)  
Sec. 16-22. - Quorum. 
Seven (7) members of the commission created by this article shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business. 
(Ord. No. 85-761, § 1, 2-20-85)  
Sec. 16-23. - Officers. 
Officers of the commission created by this article are to be elected annually by the voting membership, and shall include a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary-recorder. 
(Ord. No. 85-761, § 1, 2-20-85)  
Sec. 16-24. - Compensation. 
Members of the commission created by this article shall serve without financial remuneration or compensation. 
(Ord. No. 85-761, § 1, 2-20-85)  
Sec. 16-25. - Meetings; removal of members for nonattendance. 
(a)  Attendance by members at all meetings of the commission created by this article is encouraged. Should a member fail to attend two (2) consecutive meetings without prior notification of such inattendance, that member's appointment shall be considered terminated and written notice by the secretary-recorder shall be given to the city council of the vacancy so that another appointment can be made. 
(b)  The commission shall meet at least every three (3) months, or more often as may be desired, upon the call of the chairman at such time and place as is necessary for the proper conduct of business. The time and place of regular meetings shall be determined by the membership. 
(Ord. No. 85-761, § 1, 2-20-85)  
Sec. 16-26. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  The purpose and objectives of the commission created by this article shall be to formulate and recommend to the city council ways and means to improve and enhance the environmental quality of life and the aesthetic beauty of the city; to conduct studies of existing conditions and problems; to request, encourage and make known the efforts of others toward finding solutions to problems of environmental conditions; to seek out and encourage the interest and efforts of individual citizens; and to determine means and ways for total community involvement in the accomplishment of such purpose and objectives. 
(b)  To accomplish such purpose and objectives, the commission shall have the authority to establish committees whose membership and chairmen thereof shall be appointed by the chairman with approval of the commission; to undertake programs to accomplish the objectives stated herein; and to seek assistance as may be needed in the undertaking of such programs of community betterment; provided, however, that the commission shall not incur any liability or expense on behalf of the city without prior approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 85-761, § 2, 2-20-85)  
Sec. 16-27. - Scope of duties. 
(a)  The scope of the undertaking of the commission created by this article shall be city-wide and shall encompass, among other things, problems of littering, deteriorating and run-down structures, unsightly and unkept vacant properties, and litter and rubbish conditions. Particular emphasis, but not to the exclusion of other areas, shall be given to the present littered condition of the city alleyways and utility easements. 
(b)  Along with efforts to improve and enhance the environmental quality of life, the commission shall also seek ways to improve the aesthetic beauty of the city such as with appropriate plantings, rest areas, and other such methods. A long range plan and schedule for the improvement of the aesthetic beauty of the community may be desirable. 
(c)  The commission shall annually prepare and submit to the city council, both orally and in printed form, a comprehensive report of the past year's activities and accomplishments and a proposal and goals for the coming year. 
(Ord. No. 85-761, § 3, 2-20-85)  
Secs. 16-28—16-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Attendance of board, commission members at meetings, etc., § 2-1; board of development generally, § 2-101 et seq. 
State Law reference— Zoning commissions, V.A.C.S. art. 1011f. 
 
Sec. 16-41. - Creation; membership; terms; removal; compensation. 
There is hereby created and established for the city a planning and zoning commission, which shall be composed of seven (7) members. The members shall be resident citizens, taxpayers, and qualified voters of the city, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the governing body. All expired terms shall be filled for the term of two (2) years in the same manner as provided for the original appointments. Members of the commission may be removed by the mayor, with the consent of the council, after public hearing and for cause assigned in writing. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1976, § 14-1)  
Sec. 16-42. - Officers; personnel; rules, etc. 
The planning and zoning commission shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from its membership, and shall have power to employ such qualified persons as may be necessary for the proper conduct and undertakings of the commission, and to pay for their services and such other necessary expenses; provided that, the cost of such services and expenses shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the governing body for the use of the commission. It shall also have the power to make rules, regulations, and bylaws for its own government, which shall conform as nearly as possible with those governing the city council, and the same shall be subject to approval by the city council. Such bylaws shall include, among other items, provisions for: 
(1)  Regular and special meetings, open to the public; 
(2)  Records of its proceedings, to be open for inspection by the public; 
(3)  Reporting to the governing body and the public, from time to time annually; 
(4)  The holding of public hearings on its recommendations. 
(Code 1976, § 14-2)  
Sec. 16-43. - Powers and duties. 
The planning and zoning commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to make and recommend for adoption a master plan, as a whole or in parts, for the future development and redevelopment of the municipality and its environs, and shall have power and it shall be its duty to prepare a comprehensive plan and ordinance for zoning the city in accordance with article 1011a to 1011j of the Revised Civil Statutes, as amended. The commission shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or state law. 
(Code 1976, § 14-3)  
Chapter 17 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty for code violation, § 1-7; alarm systems, Ch. 2.5; permits for fire and other alarm systems, § 2.5-5; civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 5; emergency ambulance service, s; 6-71 et seq.; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11; municipal court, Ch. 12; offenses, Ch. 14. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 17-1—17-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESERVE FORCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Police reserve force, V.A.C.S. art. 998a. 
 
Sec. 17-16. - Established. 
There is hereby established a reserve police force of the city. Members of the police reserve force established hereby shall be appointed at the discretion of the chief of police and shall serve as peace officers during the actual discharge of official duties. It shall be composed of personnel who have volunteered to join the organization and whose applications for membership have been accepted and who have complied with all of the rules, regulations, qualifications and standards provided for the conduct and control of the members thereof. It shall be composed of not more than fifty (50) members, and shall be a separate and distinct organization from the police department of the city, but it shall be headed by the chief of police. 
(Code 1976, § 1-22.1; Ord. No. 79-528, § 1, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-17. - Regulation by chief of police. 
Members of the police reserve shall be under the authority, control, and command of the chief of police, subject to all the provisions of the city charter, this Code and the laws of the state and the United States. The following regulations, in addition to those promulgated by the chief of police, shall govern the activity of the police reserve members: 
(1)  No person shall act as a member of the police reserve force until he has been approved by the chief of police. Upon approval, he shall be issued a certificate designating him as an official member of the police reserve and shall thereafter be empowered, when authorized by the chief of police, to perform all of the functions authorized by law to be performed by a police officer when discharging official duties under the control and direction of the chief of police. 
(2)  Members of the police reserve force shall serve at the discretion of the chief of police and may be called into service at any time the chief of police considers it necessary to have additional officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law. 
(3)  The city council may provide hospital and medical assistance to a member of the police reserve force who sustains injury in the course of performing official duties in the same manner as provided for regular full-time police officers. 
(4)  The chief of police shall make such allowances for uniform compensation of the members of the police reserve force as shall from time to time be necessary, giving due consideration to the actual time served by the various members of the police reserve force while training for, or in the performance of, official duties. 
(5)  Reserve police officers shall be eligible for death benefits as established by the laws of the state. 
(6)  Police reserve officers shall meet the minimum physical, mental, educational, and moral standards established by the commission on law enforcement officer standards and education, and such additional standards as shall be established by the chief of police. The chief of police is authorized and directed to provide the full assistance, advice and counsel of the police department in assisting reserve police officers to meet such standards. 
(Code 1976, § 1-22.2; Ord. No. 79-528, § 2, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-18. - Selection of members; list of eligibles. 
A list of eligibles accompanied by a complete set of fingerprints or supplemented immediately by fingerprinting by the police division, which fingerprints shall be checked by the identification bureau as to any criminal record of such person. The application shall state the place of residence of the applicant. Each applicant shall be an actual resident of Dallas County or Ellis County, and shall furnish satisfactory proof of good character, temperate habits, freedom from communicable diseases and having physical ability to perform the duties of the position for which he seeks appointment. He shall furnish three (3) references and attach letters of recommendation from such references to the application. The application shall be on the form prescribed by the chief of police. All names upon the list of eligibles shall subscribe to an oath that he will observe and obey the constitution of the United States and the constitution of the state, and all laws of this nation, this state and this city and that he will carry out the duties of the members of the police reserve force of this city to the best of his ability. 
(Code 1976, § 1-22.3; Ord. No. 79-528, § 3, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-19. - Duties. 
The duties of the police reserve force, subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the chief of police, shall be to assist the regular members of the police department of the city in the enforcement of law and the maintenance of peace and order when directed by the chief of police. The chief may by order establish rules and regulations to govern the police reserve force, to fix specific duties of its members and provide for the maintenance of discipline. He may change such orders from time to time and he may command members carrying out their orders. The chief may prescribe other duties than those mentioned herein to be performed by the police reserve force not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1976, § 1-22.4; Ord. No. 79-528, § 4, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-20. - Identification; membership termination. 
An identification card or such other insignia or evidence of identity as the chief may prescribe shall be given to each member of the police reserve force who must carry the card or other identification at all times while on duty and he must surrender them upon the termination of his membership. All commissions shall expire automatically at midnight on the thirty-first day of December of any year. A renewal of any commission for any next ensuing year may be had by filing an application by any holder of any commission. Such application shall consist of a postcard properly filled out by the applicant giving full name and address and giving the number of his existing commission. The application shall be filed with the chief of police. If application for renewal is not presented on or before January thirty-first of the year for which renewal is sought, then anyone desiring the commission as a member of the police reserve shall make application as in the first instance where an applicant did not hold a commission. 
(Code 1976, § 1-22.5; Ord. No. 79-528, § 5, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-21. - Removal of member; resignation. 
Membership of any person may be terminated by the chief police at any time for any cause deemed sufficient by the chief of police and any member may resign from the police reserve at any time but it shall be the duty of such member to notify the chief of his resignation and surrender his insignia or identification card. 
(Code 1976, § 1-22.6; Ord. No. 79-528, § 6, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-22. - Reduction or expansion. 
The chief of police may by order diminish or expand the police reserve as exigency may require within the limits hereinbefore established. 
(Code 1976, § 1-22.7; Ord. No. 79-528, § 7, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-23. - Power and authority. 
The police reserve force shall exercise all authority granted them by law, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Power of arrest. A member of the police reserve force shall have the following powers of arrest and none others: 
a.  He may arrest for a public offense committed in his presence. 
b.  He may arrest a person who had in fact committed a felony not in his presence. 
c.  When a felony has in fact been committed, he may make an arrest when he has reasonable cause for believing the person arrested to have committed it. 
d.  He may lend physical aid to any regular member of the police department in making any lawful arrest when authorized by the chief of police or requested by any regular member of the police department of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 1-22.8; Ord. No. 79-528, § 8, 8-14-79; Ord. No. 93-157, § 1, 6-22-93)  
Sec. 17-24. - Summary dismissal. 
In addition to the penalties provided by law, any violation of law under color of the performance of his duties as a member of the police reserve force, and any breach of the rules and regulations established by the chief of police, shall be subject any member to summary expulsion and the fact thereof may be published at the order of the chief. 
(Code 1976, § 1-22.9; Ord. No. 79-528, § 9, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-25. - Chief of police prescribes uniforms and badges. 
The chief of police shall prescribe the uniforms and badges for the members of the police reserve force and direct the manner in which the same shall be worn. 
(Code 1976, § 1-22.10; Ord. No. 79-528, § 10, 8-14-79)  
Sec. 17-26. - False impersonation of members; penalty. 
It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances for any person to wear, carry or display a police reserve force identification card or otherwise deceitfully represent himself to be connected with the police reserve force, unless he is in fact a member in good standing. 
(Code 1976, § 1-22.11; Ord. No. 79-528, § 11, 8-14-79)  
Chapter 18 - PUBLIC UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Provisions relating to public utilities, art. IV, § 15 et seq. 
Cross reference— Capital improvement board, § 2-121 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; trench safety program, § 4-311 et seq.; civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7; natural resources, Ch. 13; parks and recreation Ch. 15; planning, Ch. 16; subdivisions, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference— Authority of home rule cities regarding public utilities, V.A.C.S. art. 1175(11)—(14), (29)—(31), (33). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-1017, § 1, adopted Mar. 14, 1989, repealed the former provisions of this chapter pertaining to water and sewers which comprised Arts. I—V, §§ 18-16—18-18, 18-61—18-63, 18-76, 18-91—18-100, 18-121—18-143 and 18-161—18-182. Section 2 of the ordinance adopted similar new provisions to be included as Arts. I—VI, §§ 18.1—18.51. To facilitate codification and reference, such provisions have been included herein as Art. II, Divs. 1—6, §§ 18-16—18-66, at the discretion of the editor. See also the editor's note to Art. III of this chapter. The former water and sewers provisions derived from the following sections of the city's 1976 Code; 15-1—15-11, 15-11.5, 15-12—15-17, 15-17.5, 15-18, 15-18.5, 15-19, 15-20, 15-50.1—15-50.21, 15-50.201—15-50.203, 15-53, 15-61—15-69 and 15-71, as amended. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of amendments. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-16. - Definitions. 
In this article, the following definitions apply: 
Applicant means a person who makes application to receive a service from the department. 
Backflow prevention device means a device including, but not limited to, reduced pressure devices, double-check valves and vacuum breakers approved by the city and used to prevent water of unknown quality in private plumbing facilities from flowing back into the water system. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a wastewater drainage system which receives wastewater from pipes within a building and conveys it to the building lateral which begins two (2) feet outside the inner face of the building wall or foundation. 
Building lateral means the conduit or pipe extending from the building drain to the wastewater service line at the property or other lawful place of disposal. 
Building water line means the water line on private premises which acts as the main water service to the premises. 
Capital recovery fee means a charge or assessment imposed by the city to provide funding or to recoup the costs of general water and wastewater system capital improvements necessitated by and attributed to new growth and development, but not for the costs of on-site or off-site facilities which are the direct responsibility of the developer. 
City plan commission means the city plan and zoning commission. 
Closed sprinkler system means a fire protection system with automatic waterflow sprinklers from which no water may be taken manually except from the test cock. 
Corner lot means a lot which abuts upon not more than one (1) pair of intersecting public streets within a larger platted subdivision. 
Cross connection means any physical connection or arrangement of pipes or devices between two (2) otherwise separate water supply systems, one (1) of which contains potable water and the other water of unknown or questionable quality, whereby water may flow from one (1) system to the other, the direction of flow depending upon pressure differential between the two (2) systems. 
Customer means a person who: 
(1)  Has an account in his name with the department for a service; 
(2)  Has made application for a service, and the service has been provided or made available by the department at the location specified in the application; or 
(3)  Uses, receives or benefits from service, even though no account for service may exist or no application for service may have been made. 
Department means the utilities department of the city. 
Developer means the owner or agent of the owner platting, replatting or otherwise developing lots or tracts of property for further sale, lease, development or redevelopment for residential, commercial or industrial uses. 
Director means the director of the department or his authorized assistants and representatives. 
Fire protection system means any configuration of pipes connected to a sprinkler system or other fire protection device on private premises which, when connected to the water system, is used to extinguish fires. 
General service means service to premises that are not residential service premises. 
Individual owner means an owner requesting extension of an existing water or wastewater main to property which is or will be used in the operation of his own residence or in the operation of a business not requiring larger than one-inch water service connection, which property will not be further sold or leased in connection with its intended function. 
Obstruct means to: 
(1)  Make passage impossible or unreasonably inconvenient or hazardous; or 
(2)  Interfere or cause interference with a specific activity in order to prevent the activity from starting, continuing or concluding. 
Off-site main means a water or wastewater main lying totally outside of the tract of land to be subdivided and developed for resale, lease or further development. 
On-site main means a water or wastewater main which lies within a subdivision or along one (1) or more sides of a subdivision and is intended to primarily serve that subdivision. 
Owner means the legal fee title holder of record of property. 
Oversize main means a main which exceeds the minimum size of main necessary to serve a particular subdivision, as determined by the city manager, in order to allow the main to serve other property as well as the subdivision. 
Permittee means a person granted a permit under this article. 
Premises or property means real property and includes improvements. 
Pro rata means a proportion of the total cost of water or wastewater extensions or replacements necessary to serve an individual owner's property, based upon the total front footage to be served. This proportion represents the charge to the individual owner or the refund for extending or replacing the main, the amount of which charge or refund is provided in this article. 
Residential service means service to premises that are single-family or duplex dwelling units, or other premises containing dwelling units for which each unit is individually metered. 
Satisfactory credit history with the department means that service has not been cut off within the past twelve (12) months for nonpayment of charges, nor has payment for service been delinquent more than once in the past twelve (12) months. 
Service means all service provided for the use and benefit of persons inside and outside the city through the operations and facilities of the department including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Supply of treated water; 
(2)  Wastewater collection, treatment and disposal; 
(3)  Building and extension of service mains; 
(4)  Providing of meters and service connections to property; 
(5)  Discontinuance, restoration or repair of service; 
(6)  Extension or replacement of service mains for which pro rata or other assessments are charged; 
(7)  Collections of rates or fees for service; and 
(8)  Other department activities for the benefit of the general public authorized under this article. 
Service line means the pipe or conduit which extends from the water or wastewater main and which connects with the meter or the building lateral to provide a water or wastewater service connection. 
Side main means a water or wastewater main that lies along one (1) or more sides of a subdivision and is capable of serving property adjacent to or near the subdivision for which the extension was made. 
Standard size wastewater main means a wastewater main not less than eight (8) inches in diameter. 
Standard size water main means: 
(1)  A water main not less than eight (8) inches in diameter but also of a size adequate to meet the hydraulic capacity of the water system; and 
(2)  A short water main as approved by the director which is not less than six (6) inches in diameter, adequately supported by mains not less than eight (8) inches in diameter, but also of a size adequate to meet the hydraulic capacity of the water system. 
Wastewater means water-carried waste. 
Wastewater main means a conduit or pipe of the wastewater system which conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes, or a combination of both, and into which storm surface water, groundwater or unpolluted wastes are not intentionally admitted. 
Wastewater system means all treatment plants, mains, pumps, interceptors, lift stations, connections, meters, sludge storage facilities, appurtenances and other facilities of the city, or facilities located in the city but owned by others, which are employed in the collection, treatment and disposal of wastewater. 
Water main means a conduit or pipe of the water system which conveys water. 
Water system means all treatment plants, mains, pumps, meters, connections, supply reservoirs, storage tanks, appurtenances and other facilities of the city, or facilities located in the city but owned by others, which are employed in the purification, transportation and supply of treated and untreated water. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. I, § 18.1), 3-14-89) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-3.  
Sec. 18-17. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Authority. The city manager is authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Civil jurisdiction. This article may be enforced by civil court action as provided by state and federal law. 
(c)  Offenses. A person who violates the provisions of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation continues. 
(d)  Penalty. Each offense under sections 18-42, 18-47(b), 18-50(b) and 18-56(a)(3) is punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Every other offense under this article is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(e)  Culpability. A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this article if the person: 
(1)  Commits or assists in the commission of a violation; or 
(2)  Is a customer, owner, tenant, permittee or other person in control of the premises determined to be the source of a violation. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. I, § 18.2), 3-14-89) 
Cross reference— General penalty; continuing violations, § 1-7 et seq.  
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATIONS, DEPOSITS, METERS, COLLECTIONS 
 
Sec. 18-18. - Application for service; contents. 
(a)  Application required. Before any service shall be supplied to any person or any premises by the department, the owner or occupant of the property shall make the proper written application for such services with the department. The application must be made on forms provided by the department. 
(b)  Contents of application. If such application is for service to a residence, the name of the head of the family in control of such premises shall be given, and if the service other than a residence, the name or names of the persons in control of the premises or of the business conducted therein shall be given. All applications for services to office buildings must be signed by the owner or agent. 
(c)  Contract. The application constitutes a contract to pay the city, for the use and benefit of the department, all charges for service including pro rata and capital recovery fee charges and to abide by all provisions of this article, the provisions of this Code and other local, state and federal laws relating to the service. 
(d)  Telephone application. An application for service may be requested by telephone, but for persons of whom a security deposit is required, a written application must also be signed and returned to the city manager within fifteen (15) days after service is initially requested by telephone. The city manager is authorized to provide service in the interim, but if the written application is not signed and returned within the period required, service will be discontinued until the written application is signed and returned. 
(e)  Accurate information. An applicant shall furnish proper identification and correct information when applying for service. If information is not furnished or is false, the application may be denied and service, where provided, may be discontinued. A person commits an offense if he knowingly makes a false statement on an application for service under this article. 
(f)  Use without application. A person who occupies premises and uses service without making application is responsible for all water used from the date of the last meter reading previous to that person occupying the premises. If the person is a tenant and the owner of the premises has failed to give the notice required in section 18-29, then the owner is jointly and severally responsible with the tenant for the charges. 
(g)  Omission of proper information from application. Any consumer who shall discontinue the place of business or move from his residence and leave a bill for water service or any other services due the department, and shall make application for service at some other address, either under his own name or under a different name, without stating to the department the old address and name under which service was received at the address where there is a bill due, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. II, § 18.3), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-19. - Security deposits; exemptions. 
(a)  Form of security. Unless exempted under subsection (f), a security deposit shall be made at the time of application for service by all customers. Residential customers shall be required to make cash security deposits. For nonresidential customers, the security deposit shall be in one (1) of the following forms: 
(1)  Cash; 
(2)  Guaranty bond; 
(3)  Letter of credit drawn on a state or federally chartered lending institution. 
(b)  Amount. The city manager shall establish the amount of a security deposit in accordance with section 18-32. 
(c)  Failure to provide security. The city manager may refuse or discontinue service if a person fails to: 
(1)  Make a required security deposit with his application; or 
(2)  Increase the amount of his security deposit after being notified that an increase is required. 
(d)  Form of noncash security. A customer must submit a noncash security deposit on a form provided or approved by the city manager. 
(e)  Hardship cases. In cases of hardship, the city manager may allow residential service customers to make cash deposits in installments. 
(f)  Exemptions from security deposit requirement. Security deposits will not be required for service to or for the following: 
(1)  City departments; 
(2)  Cedar Hill Independent School District; 
(3)  State of Texas; and 
(4)  Dallas County and Ellis County. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. II, § 18.4), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-20. - Use of security deposits. 
(a)  Accounting requirements. The department shall keep: 
(1)  Accurate records of all security deposits including, but not limited to, the depositor's name, amounts deposited and deposits refunded; and 
(2)  Separate accounts of all security deposits. 
(b)  Administration of deposits. The department shall administer cash security deposits in accordance with the following rules: 
(1)  A deposit will be applied toward payment of the final bill amount due the city when a service account is closed or becomes inactive due to delinquency, transfer of ownership or other reasons. A deposit made to secure service to premises may be transferred to any other premises within the city where service is provided in the depositor's name. 
(2)  A deposit, less amounts due for service, will be returned to the customer when service is discontinued, unless the deposit is transferred to another address at the request of the customer. 
(3)  Deposits may be invested or used for capital improvements, but sufficient cash shall be accounted for and kept on hand to meet the normally anticipated level of refunds. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. II, § 18.5), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-21. - Security deposit refunds. 
(a)  Refund requirements. The department may refund a security deposit to the customer when the customer meets all of the following conditions: 
(1)  The customer has been receiving service for twelve (12) continuous months; 
(2)  The customer has acquired a satisfactory credit history with the department; 
(3)  The customer has not made payment during the past twelve (12) months with a check returned due to insufficient funds; and 
(4)  The customer has no delinquent bills outstanding. 
(b)  Refusal to refund. Notwithstanding subsection (a), the department may refuse to refund a security deposit where the city manager determines from the circumstances of a customer's account that there is a substantial risk of financial loss to the department. Factors the city manager will consider in evaluating the risk include: 
(1)  The usage pattern and payment history of the customer; 
(2)  If the service is to a business or to rental property, the general economic conditions in the city for such a business or property. 
(c)  New security deposit required. The department may require a new security deposit from a customer after a refund has been made to the customer in accordance with the following rules: 
(1)  A new security deposit will be required in the event the customer's credit history is no longer satisfactory; 
(2)  The refund requirements of subsection (a) will apply, except that the period specified in subsections (a)(1) and (2) shall be twenty-four (24) months. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. II, § 18.6), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-22. - Payments of fees for services; delinquency of charges; discontinuance or refusal of service; notice of discontinuance. 
(a)  When charges delinquent, bill items. Except where otherwise provided by written contract between the customer and the city, charges for services furnished become delinquent if payment is not received in the utility billing office at 502 Cedar Street, Cedar Hill, Texas on or before the due date, which is fifteen (15) days after the bill is rendered. After the due date, the customer must pay a delinquent charge of five (5) percent of the unpaid balance, which includes water charges, sewer service, sanitation, sales tax and other related fees. The department shall send a monthly billing indicating: 
(1)  The service date and the due date; 
(2)  The amount due for services rendered (including all previous delinquent charges, if any, still due and owing), if the bill is paid by the due date; and 
(3)  The delinquent charge due if the customer fails to pay the bill by the due date. 
(b)  Authority to waive delinquent charges. The charges for delinquent payment may be waived if the customer can show good cause for the delinquency. The decision to waive the requirements of subsection (a) rests solely with the city manager. 
(c)  Bill not received. Failure to receive a bill from the department does not relieve a customer or other person liable for charges under this article from liability for payment for service. 
(d)  Authority to discontinue service. The city manager may refuse application for service, discontinue service or refuse to restore service to: 
(1)  A customer who fails to pay any charges due under this article within seven (7) days after the sending of notice of discontinuance; 
(2)  A customer who violates any provision of sections 18-24, 18-30 or divisions 3 through 6 of this article or the plumbing code; 
(3)  A person making application for service to property at an address, if the person has delinquent charges outstanding at another address; 
(4)  A customer who fails to pay the required security deposit or who pays said deposit with a check which is returned for insufficient funds; or 
(5)  A customer at any premises if the city manager determines that a substantial waste of water or a health hazard is occurring as a result of leaking, damaged, open or disconnected private laterals, pipes or drains on the premises. 
(e)  Cutting and plugging connections. The city manager's authority to discontinue service includes the right to cut and plug water or wastewater connections to private property. The costs of cutting and plugging connections will be charged to the customer in addition to the delinquent charges due. 
(f)  Restoration of service. Discontinued service will not be restored until the customer, owner or some other person either pays all charges due (including the charges to restore service or connections), makes arrangements for payment satisfactory to the city manager or, where applicable, ceases violation of the particular Code provision in question. The decision to restore service while delinquent charges or Code violations still exist rests solely with the city manager. 
(g)  Notice of discontinuance. The city manager must notify a customer in the following manner before discontinuing service under subsection (d): 
(1)  The city manager or the director must send the customer at least seven (7) days' advance written notice of pending discontinuance. 
(2)  The notice must provide a statement of reasons for cutoff and a statement of delinquent charges due, where applicable. The notice must also provide a time, place and means by which the customer may cure the delinquency or violation or dispute the validity of the reasons for discontinuance. 
(3)  The notice may be served either in person or by mail. 
(4)  Additionally, in cases of master-metered apartments or condominiums, the city manager or the director must cause a notice of pending discontinuance to be posted on the door of each dwelling unit known to be occupied and in a conspicuous place within the property manager's office or the common areas of the premises. 
(h)  Exceptions to notice requirement. Subsection (g) does not apply to discontinuance of service resulting from a violation of this article if the city manager determines that immediate discontinuance is necessary to prevent an imminent threat or occurrence of: 
(1)  Harm to the health or safety of persons; 
(2)  Damage to city or private property; or 
(3)  Contamination of the system. 
(i)  Customer's request to discontinue. Upon a customer's written request, the department may discontinue service to the customer. Upon receipt of the request, the department may remove the water meter and service connections. However, the customer is liable for all charges incurred prior to removal of the meter. Where service is furnished through more than one (1) meter, the customer may request discontinuance of one (1) or more meters and thereafter be billed on the basis of the remaining meter or meters. 
(j)  Cumulative remedies. Enforcement of this section does not waive any additional remedies, civil or criminal, available to the city under law. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. II, § 18.7), 3-14-89; Ord. No. 92-137, § 1, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2000-51, § 1, 12-12-00)  
Sec. 18-23. - New application for premises with delinquent charges. 
(a)  When new application not accepted. Where service has been discontinued, refused or posted for discontinuance at a premises due to nonpayment of delinquent charges or a violation of this Code, a new application will not be accepted from another person to resume service in the same place, under the same or another name, so long as the previous customer continues to occupy or own the premises as his residence or place of business until: 
(1)  All delinquent charges are paid; 
(2)  Arrangements for payment satisfactory to the city manager are made; or 
(3)  The violation is abated. 
(b)  Avoidance. This section also applies to premises where service is furnished to a tenant and the premises are transferred to a person after notice of discontinuance for the purpose of avoiding payment of charges or avoiding enforcement of this section. 
(c)  Service to a tenant. If services are furnished by the customer or anyone to a tenant, it shall be considered additional service to the customer or applicant; the provisions of this article apply in the same manner as if the service were provided solely to the customer or applicant. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. II, § 18.8), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-24. - Meters required; meters to be read monthly; estimated charge; water leakage. 
(a)  Meters generally. Unless otherwise provided in this article, a customer shall receive water service only when measured through a meter. All water meters furnished by the department shall at all times remain the property of the city. The director shall determine the size, type, quantity and location of meters and connections to meters to be installed. Each meter shall be read, when possible, once a month and a bill rendered accordingly. 
(b)  Estimated bill, circumstances. The quantity of water delivered to a premises will be estimated under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The meter reader is unable to procure a reading of the meter because access to the meter is obstructed or made hazardous by an animal or otherwise; 
(2)  The meter does not properly function or the equipment used to read the meter does not properly function; 
(3)  Adverse weather or an act of God prevents the reading of the meter; 
(4)  No meter is in place at the premises; 
(5)  For some other reason, a meter reading is not available to the billing section of the department at the time of preparing a bill to the customer. 
(c)  Basis for estimates. An estimate shall be based on past consumption experience at the premises adjusted for seasonal variations, or if there is no past experience, then upon consumption of the same class of customers under similar conditions. If a customer demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city manager that an estimated bill is excessive, then the department shall render a bill based on a revised estimate or on an actual meter reading where possible. 
(d)  Meter inspection. When any customer or consumer of water is of the opinion that the meter through which the water is supplied is incorrect for any reason, he may make application to the department to have the meter examined and tested. No charge will be made for the first meter change or meter test requested by a customer at a single service connection within any twelve-month period. For each additional meter change or meter test requested by a customer within a twelve-month period that does not result in a finding that the meter over-registered in excess of one and one-half (1½) percent, the city manager shall charge the customer a fee as provided in section 18-33(a). 
(e)  Meter reading verification. If the customer contends that a discrepancy appears in a bill or meter reading, the director will inspect the meter and verify the reading. Such inspection is free, if the director verifies a gross discrepancy or a customer requests not more than one (1) verification during any six-month period. Otherwise, a charge shall be made in accordance with section 18-33(c). 
(f)  Water leakage. When a customer experiences a substantial increase in his water or wastewater usage from a hidden water leak, the department will adjust the amount up to one-half the total amount of the largest bill in the previous three (3) months. The department will adjust a bill only if a customer presents a plumber's statement or a written statement prepared by the customer which indicates: 
(1)  The water leak was not reasonably detectable from the surface; 
(2)  The leak has been repaired; and 
(3)  The type of repairs made. 
The director may request additional information before determining if a water leak was reasonably detectable based upon the facts presented. A customer may receive only one (1) adjustment during a twelve-month period, unless the city manager determines that extenuating circumstances justify allowing additional adjustments. 
(g)  Pressure test. If a customer is of the opinion that a leak exists on customer premises, the customer may request the director to make an inspection and pressure test for the purpose of determining if a leak exists. Such inspection and pressure check is free, unless the customer requests more than one (1) such inspection or pressure check in any twelve-month period. Otherwise, a charge shall be made in accordance with section 18-33(d). 
(h)  Return of meters. All water meters furnished to customers are the property of the city and will be returned immediately upon request of the director. Failure to return a meter when requested constitutes grounds for discontinuance or refusal of service. 
(i)  Maintenance of meters. The department is responsible for maintenance, inspection and repair of all water meters rendered unserviceable through normal wear and tear. When replacements, repairs or adjustments of any meter are made necessary by any act, neglect or carelessness of the customer, owner or occupant of any premises, any such expense caused to the department shall be charged against and collected from the customer or owner of the premises, and if not paid, service shall be discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. II, § 18.9), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-25. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-399, adopted Nov. 10, 1998, repealed § 18-25 in its entirety. Formerly, § 18-25 pertained to backflow prevention devices and derived from § 2(Art. II, § 18.10) of Ord. No. 89-1017, adopted March 14, 1989.  
Sec. 18-26. - Joint owners or users; liability for charges; transfer of accounts. 
(a)  Benefits in general. Service is deemed to benefit: 
(1)  The occupants of the premises served; 
(2)  The owners of the premises served; and 
(3)  The property served. 
(b)  Personal liability. The customer in whose name the account for service exists has the primary personal liability for service rendered under this article. Nevertheless, where service is provided to a tenant or occupant in a single-family residence, or to more than one (1) tenant or occupant through a master meter or single service connection, if the customer in whose name the account exists fails, refuses or is unable to pay charges due, the other owners and occupants will remain jointly and severally liable for the unpaid delinquent charges. The city manager may refuse service or discontinue service in the same manner provided for in section 18-22 until all delinquent charges are paid. 
(c)  Transfer of accounts. Where a person liable for delinquent charges at one (1) address is found to have an account in his name at another address, the delinquent amounts due at the previous address may be transferred to the account at the new address and service discontinued at the new address until the delinquent amounts are paid. 
(d)  Charges constitute a lien. When delinquent charges remain unpaid and the procedures of section 18-27 are followed, those delinquent charges shall constitute a lien against the property served. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. II, § 18.11), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-27. - Water lien procedure. 
(a)  Authority. The city is authorized, in accordance with the provisions of article 1175(11) of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes, to perfect the lien upon property which occurs as provided in section 18-26, for the purpose of securing the payment of delinquent charges incurred as a result of service to the property. The lien may include reasonable costs associated with filing the lien and collection of the delinquent charges. 
(b)  Perfected lien. The lien may be perfected only when charges incurred by a customer for service become delinquent and when the city manager determines that other means for fully collecting the delinquency are inadequate or unavailable. 
(c)  Form of the lien. Upon request of the city manager, the form of the lien must be prepared by the city attorney. The form must contain: 
(1)  A statement indicating the purpose of the lien; 
(2)  The address of the property which is the subject of the lien, where the address is ascertainable; 
(3)  A complete legal description of the property which is the subject of the lien; 
(4)  The amount of delinquent charges incurred upon the property as of the date of execution of the lien; and 
(5)  The costs associated with filing the lien and collecting the delinquent charges. 
(d)  Execution and recording. The lien must be: 
(1)  Executed by the city manager and acknowledged by a notary public of the State of Texas; 
(2)  Approved as to form by the city attorney; and 
(3)  Filed in the deed or lien records of the county in which the property is located. 
(e)  Additional charges; correction lien. Should additional delinquent charges be incurred subsequent to the date of the original lien's execution, a correction lien may be executed and filed, in the form provided above, fixing the additional delinquent charges. The correction lien, when filed of record, shall relate back to the date of recording of the original lien and shall become a part of the original lien. 
(f)  Suit to foreclose. The city attorney, at the request of the city manager, shall file suit to judicially foreclose the lien in a state court of competent jurisdiction. The suit may not be filed earlier than sixty (60) days after the recording date of the lien. 
(g)  Release of lien. Upon certification by the city manager that all delinquent charges which existed against the property have been fully paid, the city manager is authorized to execute a release of the lien. The release shall be prepared and approved as to form by the city attorney and shall be duly acknowledged. After execution, the city manager must immediately file the release in the deed or lien records of the county in which the property is located. 
(h)  Cumulative remedies. This section is cumulative of any other remedies, methods of collection or security available to the city manager or the city under the Charter and ordinances of the city or under state law. This section does not affect the city manager's authority to refuse or to furnish service when delinquent charges exist. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. II, § 18.12), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-28. - Notice of water lien. 
(a)  Form of notice. Prior to recording of the water lien, the city manager shall send notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that a lien will be fixed on the property in accordance with law. The notice must provide a time, place and means by which the charges causing the lien may be paid. The notice must be sent to: 
(1)  The customer is whose name the account for service to the property exists; and 
(2)  The last-known record owner of the property according to the tax rolls of the city, if the customer is not the owner. 
(b)  Absence of receipt of notice. Absence of receipt of notice does not affect the enforceability of a lien perfected under section 18-27. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. II, § 18.13), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-29. - Notice of vacancy or transfer of property. 
(a)  When notice given. The customer or the owner of property served must notify the department within three (3) calendar days after the occurrence of: 
(1)  Any change in ownership, whether by sale, foreclosure, business reorganization or otherwise; or 
(2)  Any occupancy of previously vacant property; or 
(3)  Any total vacancy in the property served; or 
(4)  Any change of place of residence or business. 
(b)  Failure to notify. Failure to give notice in accordance with subsection (a) shall render the owner and the customer, if he is not the owner, jointly and severally liable for all charges due against the property. Upon receipt of notice under subsections (a)(1) or (a)(3), the city manager shall prepare a final bill for the account. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. II, § 18.14), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-30. - Use of water without permission. 
(a)  Use without consent. A person commits an offense if, where water is furnished to any premises, the person knowingly takes water from any faucet or water connection on the premises without first securing the consent of, and making arrangements with, the owner of the premises or the customer in whose name the account exists. This section does not apply to a person employed by the city who is engaged in work of an emergency nature in his official capacity as a city employee. 
(b)  Use without written application. A person commits an offense if he knowingly diverts or uses water from any part of the water system without making written application and without receiving the city manager's consent to use a service. Absence of an account for service on file with the department constitutes prima facie proof of the lack of the city manager's consent to use a service. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. II, § 18.15), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-31. - City manager's authority to contract; rates as consideration. 
(a)  General contract authority. The city manager is authorized to provide service without the necessity of city council approval except for: 
(1)  A contract for noninterruptable water or wastewater service which is for a fixed term of longer than three (3) years; 
(2)  A contract by which the city receives water or wastewater service; 
(3)  A wholesale service contract involving another utility or governmental entity; and 
(4)  Any service contract otherwise required by state law, city Charter or other provisions of this article to be approved by city council. 
(b)  Consideration. The consideration received by the city for a service contract must be based on the rates prescribed in ordinances enacted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. II, § 18.16), 3-14-89)  
DIVISION 3. - FEES, CHARGES, RATES 
 
Sec. 18-32. - Security deposit amounts. 
(a)  Minimum deposits. The amount of a security deposit shall be determined by the city manager as follows: 
(1)  For residential and business customers with meter size of one (1) inch and below, the standard deposit for a water or sewer account shall be: 
a.  For a 5/8 -inch or ¾-inch meter .....$40.00 
b.  For a 1-inch meter .....50.00 
(2)  For customers with meter size above one (1) inch, an amount is required sufficient to cover two (2) times the average monthly bill in the past twelve (12) months for the location served. If information to determine the total bill for the prior twelve (12) months is unavailable or inapplicable, the deposit shall be two (2) times an average monthly bill estimated by the city manager. 
(b)  Additional deposits. When and if it is found that the deposit required and collected according to the above schedule is not sufficient to cover two (2) times the average monthly bill, the city manager may require an additional deposit. If the city manager determines that there is substantial risk of financial loss; as evidenced by the customer's service being discontinued for nonpayment of charges more than once in any twelve-month period, the city manager may require an additional security deposit not to exceed three (3) times the average monthly bill at the location served. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. III, § 18.17), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-33. - Fees for inspection and testing of meters. 
(a)  Meter inspections. Meter inspections in excess of the number provided free in accordance with section 18-24(d) shall be charged to the customer according to the following schedule: 
(1)  For a 5/8 -inch to ¾-inch meter .....$15.00 
(2)  For a 1-inch meter .....25.00 
(3)  For a 1½-inch meter .....35.00 
(4)  For a 2-inch meter .....50.00 
(5)  For meters larger than 3 inches .....Fee based on actual cost 
(b)  Meter replacement fees. A customer with an existing one-inch service and a five-eighths-inch or three-fourths-inch meter who requests that the meter be increased to one (1) inch shall pay a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Any other customer requesting an increase in meter size, up to but not greater than the size of the existing service, shall pay a connection charge for the requested size meter in accordance with section 18-36(a) and (c). 
(c)  Inspection fee for meter reading verification. Meter reading verifications in excess of the number provided free in accordance with section 18-24(e) shall be charged to the customer for a fee of four dollars and fifty cents ($4.50) per inspection. 
(d)  Fee for pressure test. Inspections and pressure tests, for purposes of determining if a leak exists on customer premises, in excess of the number provided free in accordance with section 18-24(g) shall be charged to the customer for a fee of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) per inspection or test. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. III, § 18.18), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-34. - Rates for treated water and wastewater service. 
Rates for water and wastewater service shall continue as at present until changed by motion or resolution of the council. The council, by motion or resolution, shall have power to charge water and wastewater rates. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. III, § 18.19), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-35. - Service connection charges. 
(a)  Water service installation and connection charge. The department shall charge for the installation of all water service connections at the following rates: 
(1)  Charges for service installation including the connection of up to fifty (50) feet of service line: 
Connection SizeFee   
¾-inch .....$ 300.00 
1-inch .....480.00 
1½-inch .....780.00 
2-inch .....1,700.00 
(2)  Charges for service installation when water connection exists and the following are: 
Connection Size 	Box Furnished 	Box Not Furnished 
¾-inch 	$108.00 	$150.00 
1-inch 	228.00 	270.00 
1½-inch 	375.00 	500.00 
2-inch 	1,075.00 	1,275.00 
 
(b)  Installation of longer service lines. If any of the service connections in subsection (a) above installed by the department require more than fifty (50) feet of service line, the department shall charge five dollars ($5.00) per linear foot for all service line installed in excess of fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  Installation of large connections. The director will furnish an estimate of cost to an applicant for a service connection larger than two (2) inches in diameter. The charge will be based on material prices and labor costs which prevail at the time the service is required. The applicant must pay the estimated cost before the director will install the connection. 
(d)  Wastewater service installation and connection fees. Except as provided in subsection (e), the city shall charge the following rates for the installation or connection of residential wastewater service lines: 
(1)  For a four-inch sewer tap, a fee of three hundred seventy-five dollars ($375.00) shall be assessed for a normal tap 
(2)  For a six-inch sewer tap, a fee of six hundred twenty-five dollars ($625.00) shall be assessed for a normal tap 
(3)  Street bores for service lines shall be charged twenty dollars ($20.00) per linear foot. 
(e)  Special wastewater connections. The connection charges for the following applications will be based according to material prices and labor rates which prevail at the time the service is requested, as determined by the city manager: 
(1)  The applicant is a commercial or industrial concern; 
(2)  Wastewater service to the premises requires a deep cut connection; 
(3)  The service will be connected to a wastewater main located in an easement; or 
(4)  A customer requests an additional wastewater service line or relocation of an existing wastewater service line. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. III, § 18.20), 3-14-89; Ord. No. 2000-25, § 1, 5-23-00; Ord. No. 2001-68, § 1, 6-12-01)  
Sec. 18-36. - Fees for street cuts. 
In the event any street, highway or roadway must have an open cut for the purpose of performing any of the services hereunder, a fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a partial cut or five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a full cut will be charged for the replacement of such open cut by the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. III, § 18.21), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-37. - Charges for use of fire hydrants. 
(a)  A person or business requesting use of water from a fire hydrant pursuant to section 18-50 shall pay a deposit set by the water department based upon cost of backflow assembly testing, assemblage costs, material costs as per market conditions, etc. 
(b)  A person or business using water from a fire hydrant meter will be billed at the volume charge for water service as established by ordinance. 
(c)  Meters not returned to City Hall on the dates required by section 18-50(a)(2)a. shall be assessed a charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per day. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. III, § 18.22), 3-14-89; Ord. No. 96-279, § 2, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 99-438, § 2, 7-13-99)  
Sec. 18-38. - Rates for pro rata charges. 
(a)  Standard rate. When a person owning benefited property is charged in accordance with sections 18-57 or 18-58, the following front foot rates will be applied as the pro rata: 
(1)  Seven dollars and seventy-five cents ($7.75) per front foot of the lot or tract of land to which water service connections are made available, where the lot or tract benefits by the enhanced value due to an extension; and 
(2)  Nine dollars and twenty-five cents ($9.25) per front foot of the lot of tract of land to which wastewater service connections are made available, where the lot or tract benefits by the enhanced value due to an extension. 
(b)  Adjustment. The city council may adjust the pro rata rate as prescribed in section 18-58(e). 
(c)  Special rates. The city council may establish special rates and forms of pro rata according to specific circumstances to assure that the pro rata amounts do not exceed the benefits received. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. III, § 18.23), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-39. - Standard cost tables for oversize or off-site facilities. 
(a)  Reimbursement rates, water and wastewater. A standard cost table may be used, when adopted by city council, to calculate refunds for oversize and off-site water and wastewater mains and appurtenances. 
(b)  Costs not in standard cost tables. Reimbursements for costs not included in the standard cost tables in this section will be based on the actual bid price of the installation. The actual reimbursement will be subject to approval by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. III, § 18.24), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-40. - Miscellaneous charges and provisions; rates where no charge specified. 
(a)  Temporary discontinuance charge. The charge for discontinuing service temporarily at the request of the customer or his agent is four dollars ($4.00), except that the city manager may waive this charge where the necessity for turning water off is created by an emergency. 
(b)  Returned check charge. Upon the return of any check to the city for any reason, a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be assessed for each such returned check and shall be paid by the person, firm or corporation presenting such check or by the customer for whom the check was written. 
(c)  Where no charge specified. When charges for a service are not specified in this article, the city manager shall establish charges which are based on the cost of performing the services including, but not limited to, such services as the moving of meter locations, repair to damaged facilities, field location of mains, fire hydrant relocation, installation of traffic lids on meter boxes, replacement of a meter with a meter larger than one (1) inch, water and wastewater main abandonments, installation and removal of temporary service and abandonment of manholes. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. III, § 18.25), 3-14-89)  
DIVISION 4. - WATER AND WASTEWATER 
 
Sec. 18-41. - Control of and access to systems; interference with access generally. 
(a)  Systems as city property. All parts of the water and wastewater systems are the property of the city. The city manager shall maintain and control each system and keep detailed records concerning all aspects of the systems' operations. 
(b)  Access. Only a person who is authorized by the city manager pursuant to section 18-45 will have access to the water and wastewater systems for operation, construction, maintenance, repair and other service-related purposes. 
(c)  Obstruction of authorized persons. A person commits an offense if he knowingly obstructs a person authorized in accordance with section 18-45 from: 
(1)  Gaining access to a part of the water or wastewater systems for purposes of operation, inspection, construction, maintenance or repair; or 
(2)  Performing actual operation, inspection, construction, maintenance or repair of a part of the water or wastewater systems. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.26), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-42. - Emergency authority. 
(a)  Purpose and scope. The purpose of this section is to establish the city's policy in the event of shortages or delivery limitations in the city's water supply. This section applies to: 
(1)  All persons and premises within the city using water from the water system; and 
(2)  All retail customers who live in unincorporated areas within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction and are served by the water system. 
(b)  Emergency water management plan. The city manager shall promulgate and submit an emergency water management plan to the city council for approval, the guidelines of which should include: 
(1)  The conditions under which a particular stage of emergency will be implemented or terminated; and 
(2)  Provisions defining specific events that will trigger an emergency. 
(c)  Authority. The city manager is authorized to implement measures prescribed when required by this section and by the emergency water management plan approved by the city council. The city manager is authorized to enforce the measures implemented and to promulgate regulations, not in conflict with this section or state and federal laws, in aid of enforcement. 
(d)  Implementation of emergency order. The city manager may order that the appropriate stage of emergency response, as detailed in the emergency water management plan, be implemented. To be effective, the order must be: 
(1)  Made by public announcement; and 
(2)  Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within twenty-four (24) hours after the public announcement, which order becomes immediately effective upon publication. 
(e)  Duration of order; change; extension. The order can be made effective for up to, but not more than, sixty (60) days from the date of publication. The city manager may upgrade or downgrade the stage of emergency when the conditions triggering that stage occur. Any change in the order must be made in the same manner prescribed in subsection (d) for implementing an emergency order. The city council may, upon the recommendation of the city manager, extend the duration of the emergency order for additional time periods, not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days each. The city manager shall terminate the order in the manner prescribed in subsection (d) for implementing an emergency order when the city manager determines that the conditions creating the emergency no longer exist. 
(f)  Violation of section. A person commits an offense if he knowingly makes, causes or permits a use of water contrary to the measures implemented by the city manager as prescribed in the emergency water management plan. For purposes of this subsection, it is presumed that a person has knowingly made, caused or permitted a use of water contrary to the measures implemented if the mandatory measures have been formally ordered consistent with the terms of subsection (d), and: 
(1)  The manner of use has been prohibited by the emergency water management plan; or 
(2)  The amount of water used exceeds that allowed by the emergency water management plan. 
(g)  Authority under other laws. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the mayor, the city council or the city manager to seek emergency relief under the provisions of any state or federal disaster relief act. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.27), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-43. - Adequacy of supply. 
(a)  City supply must be adequate. Under no circumstances shall water be furnished by the city to any applicant or customer unless the supply of the city is adequate. In cases of emergency, priority of users of the city's water supply shall be determined by the city manager, subject to the requirements of state law and section 18-42. 
(b)  Revisions. The city council may, from time to time, upon recommendation of the city manager, make revisions in the emergency water management plan approved under section 18-42(b) if prudent conservation requires the revisions. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.28), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-44. - Temporary discontinuance for construction, maintenance or emergency reasons. 
(a)  Reasons for temporary discontinuance. The city manager is authorized to temporarily discontinue service to premises for the following reasons: 
(1)  When a main break or other failure in the water or wastewater systems could injure persons, private or city property, or other parts of the systems; 
(2)  To perform routine maintenance or repair to any part of the water or wastewater systems; 
(3)  To perform emergency maintenance or repair to any part of the water or wastewater systems; 
(4)  In other cases of emergency, when necessary to protect the general health, safety or welfare of persons; or 
(5)  To make a connection to a newly constructed or relocated water or wastewater main. 
(b)  Responsibilities upon temporary discontinuance. In all cases of temporary discontinuance, the city manager must restore service as soon as is practical and must take all reasonable steps necessary to protect the public health and safety under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.29), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-45. - Authorized employees; right of access of employees for inspection and maintenance; access of contractors. 
(a)  Authorized employees. The city manager shall designate those individuals who are employed by the department and authorized to carry a credential of the department. No person other than an authorized employee shall have or use any credential of the department. An employee must surrender credentials to the city manager upon termination of employment or at the request of the city manager. 
(b)  Right to access. An authorized employee shall carry a credential when dealing with the general public. Upon presentation of the credential, an authorized employee shall have free access, at reasonable hours, to private premises receiving service for the purpose of reading or inspecting a water meter, a backflow prevention device or for other service-related activities. Only an authorized employee may have free access to parts of the water and wastewater systems for purposes of operation, construction, repair or maintenance. 
(c)  Access by nonauthorized persons. A person commits an offense if he is not an authorized employee under this section and he knowingly: 
(1)  Uses a department credential to obtain access to private property or to a part of the water or wastewater systems; or 
(2)  Falsely represents, by other than the display of a credential, that he is an authorized employee of the department to obtain access to private property or to a part of the water or wastewater systems. 
(d)  Private contractors. A person performing construction or repair work for the department pursuant to a contract with the city, or an authorized private development contract, has a right of access to those parts of the water or wastewater systems as is reasonably necessary to fulfill performance of the contract; provided that no person shall have the right under this subsection to open or operate any valve in these systems. Access is subject to the express directions of the city manager, the terms of the contract documents and all requirements of this Code concerning permits. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.30), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-46. - Service connections. 
(a)  Maintaining service connections. The department is authorized to maintain service connections from the mains in public rights-of-way to building laterals or building water lines on premises pursuant to the following rules: 
(1)  The city is responsible for maintenance of a service connection from the main to the meter in the case of water service, and from the main to the property line in the case of wastewater service. 
(2)  The city will maintain a service connection at its original size as long as the customer continues use of a service. 
(3)  The city's obligation to continue maintenance of a service connection ceases when the customer abandons use of a service. 
(4)  The city will remove, at the property owner's expense, a service connection made in violation of this Code. 
(5)  The city manager is authorized to charge a fee in accordance with section 18-35 to an applicant or property owner for installation of a service connection. 
(b)  Connection permits. The following rules govern the issuance of a service connection permit: 
(1)  The plumber must submit a copy of the plumbing permit, obtained from the city's building inspection division, with the connection permit application. The connection permit application must specify: 
a.  The address of the work; 
b.  The name of the applicant; 
c.  The name of the property owner; and 
d.  The names of other plumbing subcontractors employed to do the work. 
(2)  The city manager may revoke a permit at any time before work is completed and connection is made if he determines that the terms and conditions of the permit are being violated, and no interested party will have a claim for damages or refunds as a result of revocation. 
(3)  A connection permit must be issued in the name of the applicant and the property owner. A permit is nontransferable and expires six (6) months from the date of issuance. The city will refund permit fees in the event of failure to connect within the term of the permit. 
(4)  The city will refuse to provide service for any person or persons employing a plumber to make any alterations or extensions of the water or wastewater pipes on his premises who shall not first have secured the necessary permit to make such changes. 
(c)  New buildings to be connected with wastewater system. No person, firm or corporation shall construct or erect a new building or buildings for residential, commercial or manufacturing purposes unless such new building or buildings, when completed and prior to occupation, shall tie in to the sewer system of the city and use the same when occupied. This division shall be construed to apply to the construction and erection of a building and buildings on property lying within the jurisdiction of the city, described as lots, tracts or parcels of land lying and being along either or both sides of alleyways, streets or easements wherein there is, at the time of such new construction and erection of a building or buildings hereinabove described, an existing sewer line, branch or lateral of the sewer line in the system in the city and where the new construction is within two hundred (200) feet of the sewer line. 
(d)  Existing buildings to be connected with wastewater system. The following rules apply to existing buildings: 
(1)  Existing businesses shall be required to tie in to the sewer system of the city where a wastewater main is located within two hundred (200) feet of the existing building. 
(2)  When an existing residential dwelling fronts on or has access to a wastewater main which abuts the property in a right-of-way or easement, the owner must either: 
a.  Connect to the wastewater main; or 
b.  Pay the minimum monthly charge for wastewater service for the applicable customer classification. 
(e)  Construction and installation rules. The following rules govern construction and installation of service connections: 
(1)  A building lateral, building water line, drain and other private plumbing must be constructed in strict accordance with the provisions of the city's plumbing and building codes. The city manager may, as a condition of the connection permit, impose additional construction requirements not in conflict with the plumbing and building codes, this article or other applicable state or federal laws and regulations in order to protect the system from damage or contamination, to facilitate connection, or where extraordinary circumstances may require. 
(2)  A building lateral and building water line must be laid up to the property line and the end left exposed. The permittee or his agent shall provide a ditch safe for entry in accordance with state and federal safety standards. A building lateral and building water line must be stubbed out to meet the service line, both as to horizontal location and vertical depth. Location of the service line will be furnished upon request or upon issuance of a connection permit, but the permittee or his agent is responsible for uncovering and confirming the location of the service line before construction of the building lateral or building water line. 
(3)  All service connections must be made only by persons authorized by the city manager, and the private plumbing must meet the construction requirements of the plumbing code. Any ditch dug for the purpose of installing a connection must be backfilled by the permittee or his agent upon completion of the construction. 
(f)  Nuisance. Every commode, wastewater drain, privy or other wastewater receptacle used on premises which is neither connected to the wastewater system nor to a septic tank or receptacle approved under this Code is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a public health hazard. 
(g)  Enforcement authority. The city manager is authorized to promulgate regulations not in conflict with this Code, the city Charter or state laws and regulations to aid in implementing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.31), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-47. - Cross connections; location of water and sewer mains. 
(a)  Cross connection prohibited. A person shall not make or permit a cross connection between a system of piping supplied by the water system and the following sources of supply, unless properly protected by an approved backflow prevention device: 
(1)  A public or private source of primary supply other than the water system; or 
(2)  Any secondary supply known or suspected to be unsafe for drinking water including, but not limited to, shallow wells, reused industrial supplies, raw surface water or swimming pools. 
(b)  Nuisance. A person commits an offense if he makes or permits a cross connection in violation of subsection (a). The making of a cross connection in violation of subsection (a) is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a public health hazard. 
(c)  Proximity of water and wastewater mains. The city manager shall regulate the relative proximity of water mains to wastewater mains, both existing and under construction, in accordance with the regulations of the city and the Design Criteria for Public Sewerage Systems and the Rules and Regulations for Public Water Supply of the State Department of Health, in order to prevent contamination of the water system. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.32), 3-14-89) 
Cross reference— Control program for cross connections, § 18-220 et seq.  
Sec. 18-48. - Fire protection systems. 
(a)  Application required. A person shall not connect a fire protection system to the water system until application is made to the director and then approved by the director and the fire marshal of the city. 
(b)  General requirements. A fire protection system is subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The fire marshal shall not permit a fire protection system without an approved meter or detector check device with a bypass, except for a closed sprinkler system having an automatic waterflow fire alarm system approved by the fire marshal. 
(2)  A fire protection service line must be no larger than one (1) size smaller than the water main serving the fire protection system, unless the fire marshal approves a size-on-size connection in writing; provided that in every case, the water system must be capable of providing, at the point of delivery, the delivery rate specified by the fire marshal for the customer's fire protection system. 
(3)  A fire protection service line must not be larger than eight (8) inches without the fire marshal's written approval, except a six-inch line supplied in two (2) directions by an eight-inch or larger line may have a six-inch fire service. 
(4)  A fire protection system must conform to the standards and regulations promulgated by the city inspector and other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(c)  Installation of service connections. The city will inspect the installation and perform the maintenance of the necessary meters and service lines connecting the fire protection system to the water system. The cost of installation will be at the sole expense of the customer. 
(d)  Grounds for discontinuance. The city manager may discontinue treated water service to a fire protection system if: 
(1)  The city manager discovers an unauthorized connection has been made; 
(2)  Water has been used from a fire protection system for a purpose other than extinguishing a fire; 
(3)  A fire protection system has been installed or used without a meter, where a meter is required; 
(4)  A waste of water is permitted from a fire protection system through pipes or fixtures; or 
(5)  Charges for service are delinquent under section 18-22. 
(e)  Restoration of service. Upon discontinuance under subsection (d)(3), the city manager shall not restore the service until the customer remedies the problem causing discontinuance or makes application for the kind and size of meter prescribed by the city manager for the particular system. The meter will be installed at the customer's expense. 
(f)  Availability of service. Availability of treated water will depend upon water main sizes and normal operating pressures in the area where the applicant's property is located. 
(g)  Nonconforming systems. Any person modifying, changing or adding to his premises or his existing fire protection system must at that time come into compliance with the requirements of this section, if his fire protection system did not previously conform to the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.33), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-49. - Reserve water supply for boilers. 
Where city water is used to supply a boiler, the owner should provide a tank of sufficient capacity to afford a supply of at least twelve (12) hours, into which tank the service pipe will be discharged. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.34), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-50. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Permission to use. Fire hydrants are to be opened only by authorized employees of the city's fire, water and sewer and street departments. Any other person or business that wishes to use a fire hydrant shall obtain written permission from the department of public works under the following conditions: 
(1)  A person or business requesting use of a fire hydrant shall make written application for a permit, place a deposit (to be determined by the cost of the assembly) to secure the return of the fire hydrant/backflow assembly, and pay all water use fees as adopted by the city. 
(2)  The permittee shall use a water meter furnished by the water department whenever discharging water from a fire hydrant. 
(3)  The permittee shall use a backflow preventer that is attached to the meter and is furnished by the water department. 
(4)  The permittee shall bring the meter/backflow assembly to the water department either on or between the tenth and the fifteenth of each month for reading by utility billing at city hall. If the fifteenth is on a weekend or holiday, the meter shall be brought to utility billing at city hall on the next business day. 
(5)  The permittee shall keep the permit tag and backflow test tag attached to the fire hydrant meter assembly at all times. 
(6)  The permittee shall only use an approved spanner wrench and replace all caps on the outlets when not in use. 
(b)  Improper use. Failure to abide by the conditions of subsection (a) is sufficient cause to retain the deposit, prohibit the further use of a fire hydrant and to refuse to grant subsequent permits for use of a fire hydrant. 
(1)  A person or business commits an offense if they knowingly: 
a.  Use water from a fire hydrant without a permit from the water department/public works department; 
b.  Tamper with the fire hydrant meter or the backflow assembly in any way including the removal of the backflow preventer at anytime; or 
c.  Violate any terms and/or conditions of a permit granted under this section. 
(2)  [Reserved.] 
(c)  Exceptions. This section does not apply to: 
(1)  A city employee engaged in work in his official capacity, or 
(2)  A person or business using water from a fire hydrant for a public works department construction project under section 18-54. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.35), 3-14-89; Ord. No. 96-279, § 1, 6-11-96; Ord. No. 97-330, § 1, 8-26-97; Ord. No. 99-438, § 1, 7-13-99)  
Sec. 18-51. - Private water mains or systems. 
(a)  Mains are property of city. Water and wastewater mains, pipes and appurtenances laid in streets, alleys, or other public rights-of-way within the city immediately become property of the city upon their acceptance, except for mains, pipes and appurtenances laid within the city by governmental entities pursuant to a license granted by the city. Water and wastewater mains, pipes and appurtenances laid within the city and connected to the water or wastewater systems must be constructed under department supervision and in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city manager. 
(b)  Nonconforming mains. The city manager may refuse application for service to premises inside or outside of the city if, upon examination, the mains, private water lines or laterals, valves, appurtenances, fire hydrants or other equipment serving the premises are of such quality, size or installation as will not comply with the general standards and specifications of the department. 
(c)  Substandard laterals or water lines. The city manager may require the customer, as a precondition of continued service, to replace or repair private plumbing found to be in a substandard condition according to the plumbing code, if the substandard plumbing may cause: 
(1)  A hazard to public health; 
(2)  Damage or contamination to the water or wastewater systems; 
(3)  A substantial waste of water; or 
(4)  Introduction of extraneous water into the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.36), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-52. - Wastewater indemnity agreements. 
(a)  Grounds for denial of wastewater service. Wastewater service to premises inside or outside the city must be denied if: 
(1)  The premises are subject to frequent severe flooding; 
(2)  The wastewater main serving the premises surcharges or overflows due to infiltration of groundwater from the premises; or 
(3)  The premises are subject to being flooded by a surcharged wastewater main due to the elevation of the premises in relation to the actual or proposed wastewater main. 
(b)  Indemnity agreement. Notwithstanding subsection (a), the city manager may provide wastewater service where these conditions exist if the owner agrees in writing to defend and indemnify the city and save it whole and harmless against all damages, costs and expenses caused by the surcharging, backflow or overflow of the wastewater main serving the premises. 
(c)  Effect of agreement. The indemnity agreement, when executed by the owner, constitutes a covenant running with the land binding upon the owner, his heirs, successors and assigns. The agreement must be approved as to form by the city attorney and must be filed in the deed records of the county in which the premises is located. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.37), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-53. - Exposing meters or hydrants to damage; notice of work affecting systems; moving meters or hydrants. 
(a)  Exposure to damage. A person shall not build a driveway, sidewalk or other improvement that: 
(1)  Exposes a meter, fire hydrant, air valve, tap, pressure recording instrument, cleanout or other appurtenance to damage from vehicular traffic; or 
(2)  Causes obstruction of access to a meter, fire hydrant, air valve, tap, pressure recording instrument, cleanout or other appurtenance for operation, repair, inspection or maintenance purposes. 
(b)  Notice of work affecting systems. A person who does work of any nature on a street, alley or sidewalk within the city must notify the director at least ten (10) days in advance of the removal, raising or lowering of any part of the water or wastewater systems that may interfere with the work. Where the director is not notified, damage to any part of the systems resulting from the work will be charged against the person or his agents performing the work. 
(c)  Request to move appurtenance. The owner or occupant of premises adversely affected by the location of a meter, fire hydrant, air valve, tap, pressure recording instrument or other appurtenance may make written application to the director to have the device moved under the following conditions: 
(1)  The director may approve the application if he determines that the move will not interfere with normal department operations and will not cause damage to the water or wastewater systems. 
(2)  Upon approval of the application, the director will furnish the applicant an estimate of costs to move the device. The applicant shall bear all estimated moving costs. 
(3)  Upon deposit of the estimated costs by the applicant, the department will make the agreed-to change in location. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.38), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-54. - Water used for construction work. 
(a)  When water is free. The director may furnish water free of charge to: 
(1)  A contractor or other person performing construction work for the department; or 
(2)  A licensed plumber performing a pressure test of a private plumbing system, which test has been authorized in advance by the director. 
(b)  Other construction work. For any construction work other than that described in subsection (a), the charge for water used will be in accordance with the rates specified in section 18-34, and will be charged against the person using the water. 
(c)  Conditions when charged. If water to be used for construction is subject to charge, the water must not be turned on until all applicable preuse charges are paid. Water service may be discontinued or application refused in the same manner as provided under section 18-22. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.39), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-55. - Liability for damages. 
(a)  City not liable. The city, the department, the director or the city manager will not be liable for personal injury, death or property damage resulting from: 
(1)  Faulty or defective private plumbing, or private plumbing not meeting the provisions of this Code; 
(2)  Defects, damage or failure of a part of the wastewater system; 
(3)  Defects, damage or failure of a part of the water system directly used for fire protection; 
(4)  Defects, damage or failure, of which the city had no actual or constructive notice, of a part of the water system not directly used for fire protection; 
(5)  Interruption or discontinuance of service, including the revocation of permits; or 
(6)  Any condition or state not caused by the city of treated or untreated water supplied to premises, including soluble or insoluble substances that may mix with the water. 
(b)  State and federal law immunity. The provisions of this section are subject to the applicable state or federal laws concerning governmental immunity and its waiver. This section must not be construed to either restrict or expand the applicability of those laws. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.40), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-56. - Tampering with or damaging systems; unlawful use of water; prima facie evidence. 
(a)  Tampering with or damaging system. A person commits an offense if, without the written permission of the city manager, he knowingly: 
(1)  Damages or destroys part of the water or wastewater systems; 
(2)  Tampers with part of the water or wastewater systems; or 
(3)  Damages, destroys or tampers with a fire hydrant within the city. 
(b)  Certain conditions creating prima facie evidence of tampering. For purposes of this section, it is prima facie evidence that a person has tampered under subsections (a)(2) or (a)(3) if the person is a customer, owner or person or person in control of the premises, and: 
(1)  Water is prevented from passing through a meter used or furnished by the department to supply water to the premises; 
(2)  A meter used or furnished by the department is prevented from correctly registering the quantity of water supplied to the premises; 
(3)  Water is diverted or bypassed by the use of a device, from or around a pipe, main, meter, hydrant or other connection of the department; 
(4)  A meter or service connection of the department used for service to premises is removed; or 
(5)  Wastewater is prevented or diverted from flowing from premises into the wastewater system. 
(c)  Prima facie evidence of knowledge. The existence on premises of a device used for any of the unlawful purposes stated in this section shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge of the unlawful purpose on the part of the customer, owner or person in control of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. IV, § 18.41), 3-14-89)  
DIVISION 4.5. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-233, §§ 1—15, adopted September 26, 1995, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, the editor has treated the provisions of said ordinance as superseding the provisions of former Div. 4.5, §§ 18-56.1—18-56.8, which derived from Ord. No. 90-014, adopted March 27, 1990, and pertained to industrial wastewater. New provisions pertaining to that subject can be found in Art. IV of this chapter. 
 
Secs. 18-56.1—18-56.8. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - DEVELOPMENT AND SYSTEM EXTENSIONS 
 
Sec. 18-57. - Authority to make capital improvements. 
(a)  Authority. The department is authorized to: 
(1)  Extend water and wastewater mains to permit connections to persons seeking service; and 
(2)  Replace water and wastewater mains which are substandard in size or condition. 
The city manager is authorized to make rules and regulations, not in conflict with this article or other laws, regarding the extension of mains by or for developers to serve newly created or redeveloped subdivisions or resubdivisions. Unless approved by the city manager, all mains shall conform to the minimum size specified in the definition of standard size water and wastewater mains. 
(b)  Private service replacements. If the city manager determines it necessary to replace or relocate a building water line or building lateral incidental to the extension, relocation or replacement of a main under this division because of the size or location of the main extension, relocation or replacement, the city manager is authorized to: 
(1)  Require the property owner to perform the private work at the owner's expense; or 
(2)  Cause the private work to be done in accordance with article 1110g of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes, which article is hereby adopted as the procedure for this subsection in all respects as it applies to the city. 
(c)  Applicability. This section applies to extensions of water or wastewater mains made at the request of an individual owner desiring service to his property. 
(d)  The fifty-foot rule. The city will extent a water or wastewater main, at the request of an individual owner applying for service, a distance of not greater than fifty (50) feet upon the payment of pro rata calculated under section 18-58 and other applicable charges under this article. In calculating the fifty-foot limitation to permit an extension, the following distances will be excluded: 
(1)  Street intersection distances; 
(2)  Property frontage for which pro rata has already been paid or credited under this division. 
(e)  No obligation to extend. The city is not obligated to make a main extension or to replace substandard mains if: 
(1)  Funds to pay for the extension are not available to the city; 
(2)  The city manager determines, for engineering or financial reasons, that an extension or replacement is not practical; or 
(3)  The individual owner or developer requesting the extension fails to abide by the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. V, § 18.42), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-58. - Pro rata payments. 
(a)  Pro rata authorized. Pro rata may be charged for the extension of a water or wastewater main authorized under section 18-57 to: 
(1)  The property benefited by the extension; and 
(2)  The individual owner of benefited property. 
(b)  Manner of charge. Pro rata may be charged by: 
(1)  Individual extension contract, for an extension under section 18-57 or for a requested connection to an existing main for which pro rata is due and has never been paid; or 
(2)  Special assessment pursuant to article 1110c of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes. 
(c)  Miscellaneous rules. Pro rata will be governed by the following additional rules: 
(1)  Pro rata will be charged at the rate prescribed in section 18-39, and payment shall be made in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. 
(2)  The front foot rates prescribed in section 18-39 apply to: 
a.  Property platted into the usual rectangular lots or tracts of land with depths and frontages as allowed by the platting regulations of the city; and 
b.  An unplatted tract of land which abuts on and benefits from water or wastewater extensions as provided in article 1110c of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes. 
(3)  An individual owner who separately develops an unsubdivided lot or tract, or a lot or tract that is part of a larger subdivision, will be charged pro rata under this section if the developed property is not for further sale or lease but is to be used as: 
a.  His own residence; or 
b.  His own business, if not larger than a one-inch water service connection is required for the business; otherwise, the person must comply with the provisions of this division governing developers. 
(4)  Pro rata is not due from the owner of a lot within a subdivision where in-place mains were installed at the developer's expense. 
(5)  Notwithstanding subsection (c)(3), if a lot or tract of land charged pro rata is later subdivided, resubdivided or otherwise redeveloped, the provisions of this division governing developers will then apply. 
(6)  A lot or tract of land, including a corner lot, which abuts on two (2) or more public streets will be charged pro rata for each frontage, if the property will be or is used in a manner such that service will actually be used from the mains in those streets; otherwise, pro rata will be charged based only upon the frontage where the connection is made to the main. 
(7)  Where a lot or tract is irregular in size or shape, pro rata will be based upon the lesser of: 
a.  The average dimension of the front and the back of the lot or tract; or 
b.  An equivalent rectangular lot or tract using one (1) front foot for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of area. 
(8)  Where an undivided tract of land which is not a part of an approved subdivision fronts an existing permanent water or wastewater main or is to be served by a requested extension of a permanent water or wastewater main, the owner may define a lot by meets and bounds, according to the standard minimum requirements in the zoning ordinance, and the pro rata payment shall be based on that portion of the undivided tract only. Only one (1) connection may be made to either the water or wastewater main to serve the same undivided tract. When a single residential building permit is requested, the pro rata charge assessed shall not exceed the charge calculated for a lot with two hundred eight (208) feet of frontage. 
(9)  Property owners who file in writing a request for an extension of service will be assessed on the basis of pro rata rates applicable on the date the director received the written request, unless the city council is otherwise required to adjust the rates under subsection (d). 
(d)  Adjustment of rates. If the city council determines in an assessment under subsection (b)(2) that the front foot rate for pro rata prescribed in section 18-39 exceeds the special benefit to a lot or tract by its enhanced value, or that the manner of assessment creates an inequality or injustice as to similarly situated lot or tracts, the city council, in order to ensure substantial equality of benefits received and burdens imposed, will: 
(1)  Adjust the prescribed front foot rate; or 
(2)  Determine another method of apportioning the charges. 
(e)  Manner of payment. Pro rata shall be paid in a lump sum unless an installment agreement is approved by the city manager. Where paid in installments, a mechanic's lien contract and installment promissory note must be executed on forms provided and approved by the city attorney. 
(f)  Liability in event of transfer. If a mechanic's lien contract and installment promissory note have been executed as provided under this division, and ownership of the property changes after execution of the contract and note, the new owner may assume payment of the unpaid installments. The new owner takes the property subject to the lien for pro rata charges. Notwithstanding the new owner's assumption of liability, the previous owner remains personally liable for unpaid pro rata under the contract until it is paid in full. In the event of nonpayment, the city manager may: 
(1)  Discontinue service to the property; 
(2)  Enforce the lien created under the contract and note; or 
(3)  Look to the previous owner for payment of pro rata due. 
(g)  Pro rata authorized from developers. Developers may not obtain extensions of water or wastewater mains by the payment of pro rata. However, payment of pro rata will be required from developers, if the developer's property is adjacent to an existing main and the developer will connect to the existing main to provide service to the property. 
(h)  Rules for developers. Pro rata for developers will be governed by the following additional rules: 
(1)  Pro rata will be charged at the rate prescribed in section 18-39. 
(2)  Pro rata will be charged for the actual linear footage of line adjacent to the subject property, not according to front footage of property abutting a street. 
(3)  If a developer owns property on both sides of a main and makes a connection to the main, the developer must pay pro rata for both sides. 
(i)  Payment of pro rata by developers. When a developer submits a preliminary plat of a subdivision to the city and it is determined by the city that such subdivision is subject to assessment for pro rata fees and charges, then in that event, the developer shall, prior to the acceptance of the final plat for such subdivision by the city, pay all pro rata fees and charges properly collectible for the subdivision, in full, to the city. 
(j)  Certain existing mains exempt. 
(1)  Exemption. Properly platted into lots, tracts or other parcels and having existing water and wastewater mains prior to September 28, 1971, is exempt from pro rata. 
(2)  Resubdivided property. Where the property described in subsection (a) is later subdivided, replatted or otherwise developed such that the existing mains are otherwise replaced or extended in order to serve the property, then the terms of this division apply. 
(3)  Charges already paid. Where an individual owner or developer has already paid or contributed toward an existing main in accordance with the terms of this division, that person will not be assessed any further charges prescribed under this division for that main. No person will be charged pro rata for connection to an existing main where the existing main has previously been fully paid for under this division. 
(k)  Method of enforcing payment. Nothing herein shall be deemed in any way to be an exclusive method of enforcing the payment of the pro rata cost against the consumer and property owner and shall not be deemed in any manner to be a waiver of the city's right to validly assess the property owners and/or consumers concerned for the cost of the installation of standard size water and sewer mains and to fix and enforce liens against said property, all of which may be done as provided by ordinance in the manner prescribed by law. 
(I)  Charges to be credited to water and wastewater fund. Any and all sums of money hereinafter collected on a fee or connection charge, at the rates set out in this article, shall be credited to the water and wastewater fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. V, § 18.43), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-59. - Pro rata refunds. 
(a)  Refunds to individuals. If an individual installs a water or wastewater main at his expense to serve his personal residence or business, and the main also serves intervening front footage, then said individual is eligible for reimbursement of pro rata when collected from intervening property owners. This period of eligibility for such refunds shall begin on the date of acceptance of the extension by the city and shall expire ten (10) years from that date. 
(b)  Refunds to developers. If a developer installs a water or wastewater main at his expense along intervening property to serve his development, he is eligible for reimbursement of pro rata when collected from intervening property owners. The period of eligibility for such refunds shall begin on the date of acceptance of the extension by the city and shall expire ten (10) years from that date. Such pro rata refunds shall be in addition to capital recovery fee offsets described in section 18-65. 
(c)  Responsibility for requesting refunds. It shall be the responsibility of individuals and developers who are eligible for refunds of pro rata collected from intervening property owners to file timely requests for said funds. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. V, § 18.44), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-60. - Replacement of substandard mains. 
(a)  Substandard size mains. Subject to the availability of funds, the city manager is authorized to replace a substandard size water or wastewater main when: 
(1)  Property owners request in writing to the city manager that the substandard size main be replaced in order to: 
a.  Increase the water supply for consumption; 
b.  Improve the water pressure in an area; 
c.  Improve the quality or capacity of wastewater collection in an area; 
(2)  A substandard size main must be replaced by a standard size main in advance of paving; or 
(3)  The city manager determines that replacement of a substandard size main is necessary to provide for orderly improvement or operation of the system. 
(b)  Substandard condition mains. The city manager is authorized to replace a water or wastewater main that is substandard as to condition when he determines that: 
(1)  Due to its overall condition, the main is no longer economical to maintain as a part of the water or wastewater systems, or 
(2)  The main is in such a condition that it poses a threat to the health or safety of persons or property. 
(c)  Removal and reconnection of main. When a substandard main is replaced, the city shall transfer and reconnect existing service connections to the new main and remove or abandon the substandard main. 
(d)  Temporary water lines. All existing two-inch or smaller water mains in the city shall be considered temporary, and any customer presently connected thereto shall owe pro rata upon installation of the permanent main. A person who requests to be connected to an existing temporary line owes pro rata, if not previously paid. 
(e)  Pro rata. Except for temporary lines as defined in subsection (d), a person connected to an existing substandard main at the time of its replacement will not be required to pay pro rata charges for the replacement of the main by a standard main. A person who requests to be connected to either the substandard or the replacement main owes front footage pro rata if not previously paid. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. V, § 18.45), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-61. - General rules for extensions by developers. 
(a)  Conformance with master plan. No extension of water and wastewater lines shall be made unless such extension conforms to the city's master plans. 
(b)  No extension without plat. Except in those instances where a plat is not required by law to develop property, the city manager shall not permit, and no person shall provide, extension of water or wastewater service to a lot, tract or other parcel of land unless: 
(1)  The lot, tract or other parcel of land has been platted in accordance with the requirements of this Code and state law; 
(2)  The plat has been released for filing by the city manager and given final approval by the city council; and 
(3)  The plat has been filed for record in the plat records of the county in which the lot, tract or other parcel of land is located. 
(c)  Plat approval guidelines. In addition, the following rules apply to the release and approval of plats by the city: 
(1)  The city shall not approve a plat for filing without a release from the director verifying that the plat conforms to the city's requirements for water or wastewater utility development and otherwise conforms to the comprehensive plan of the city for water and wastewater extensions. 
(2)  The city is not obligated to approve a plat, nor is the director obligated to release a plat, if the mains proposed to serve the development exceed the existing capacity, or the immediate future capacity, of the water or wastewater systems to adequately and economically serve that development and other adjacent property. 
(d)  Preliminary layout. At the same time that a preliminary plat is filed for consideration with the city plan commission, the developer must submit the following to the director: 
(1)  A preliminary layout or site plan showing the location and size of all mains, valves and hydrants necessary to serve the proposed development; and 
(2)  Designated locations of dedications or public easements, proposed or existing, necessary for the laying of all mains and appurtenances, to be indicated on the layout or site plan. 
(e)  Design criteria. All layouts and designs for proposed mains and appurtenances, whether preliminary or final, shall be strictly in accordance with the water and sanitary sewer design requirements of the department. The director may refuse to release any plat for approval by the city council where these requirements are not met. 
(f)  Development on previously platted or unplatted land. If a person develops property without having to file a plat or replat for approval by the city, the requirements of this section still apply, as modified by the following rules: 
(1)  A copy of the existing recorded plat or replat within which the property lies must be submitted with the request for extension; 
(2)  Any applicable charges for pro rata or capital recovery fee must be paid before or upon application for a service connection permit. 
(g)  Final acceptance. 
(1)  The city will issue final acceptance when construction is complete in accordance with the city's requirements and the developer has paid all costs of construction due and all charges due the city under this article. Following issuance of final acceptance, facilities installed become the property of the city free and clear of all liens, claims and encumbrances. 
(2)  Damage to the work, relocation or revisions in the plans necessitated by other construction or modification of the development shall be charged to the developer, and service will be withheld or discontinued to the development until the charges are paid. 
(h)  Lift stations and special installations. In the event a lift station or other special installations are required, the same shall be installed under separate agreements between the city and the developer. 
(i)  City not liable. Nothing in this division shall be construed to render the city liable for sums owed by a developer to private contractors or subcontractors for work done for a private development. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. V, § 18.46), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-62. - Construction of developer extensions. 
(a)  When owner may install. All water and wastewater main extensions herein provided for shall be laid, constructed and installed by the city directly or by contract made by the city or in any other manner specified by the city council. 
(b)  Commencement of construction. The city will approve commencement of construction after approval of the final plat by the city council, upon the developer's meeting the following conditions: 
(1)  The construction plans must be in complete and correct form; 
(2)  All easements, dedications and other public rights-of-way necessary for construction must be in existence; 
(3)  All necessary contract documents and bonds must be submitted; 
(4)  The final plat, as recorded, must be submitted; and 
(5)  The city manager may waive the requirement in subsection (b)(4) for good cause. 
(c)  Rules for construction. The following additional rules apply to actual construction of the facilities in a development under this section: 
(1)  When the project is ready for construction, line and grade stakes will be set by the developer's surveyor. All construction and installation of water and sewer mains shall be checked by inspectors of the city. 
(2)  All construction shall be performed in accordance with city standard specifications for materials and performance. 
(3)  Upon approval of the plans by the city, the developer may enter into a contract with any individual or may himself construct the system as so planned; provided, however, that the construction and installation of the water lines and sewer lines, or either of them, shall be checked by inspectors for the city to see that the installation is made in accordance with the plans and the city's standard specifications, which in every instance shall be a part of said installation contract. 
(4)  No installation of water and sewer mains shall be made at any other location except the dedicated street, alley, or an easement running in favor of the city, which shall be filed on record by the owner of said addition. Any such installation when made shall become the property of the city, free and clear of all encumbrances, and any contract entered into between the developer and a contractor shall provide for performance, payment and maintenance bonds such as the city uses in its standard specifications and contract documents. In the event the developer makes the installation himself, then he shall execute performance, payment and maintenance bonds in favor of the city, in the same form and conditioned in the same manner as provided for in the standard contract documents used by the city in the making of water and sanitary sewer installations. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. V, § 18.47), 3-14-89)  
Sec. 18-63. - Rules regarding the cost of new and existing mains. 
(a)  Oversize mains. For any oversize water or wastewater mains the city requires a developer to construct, the city will refund the developer for the oversize cost as described in subsection 18-65(b)(1). The director's determination of the size of the main required in each instance is final. 
(b)  On-site mains. The developer must pay the entire cost of all new on-site mains required to serve his development, subject to applicable refunds for oversize cost under subsection 18-65(b)(1). For an existing on-site main used to serve his development, the developer must pay pro rata for the existing main in accordance with section 18-58(i). 
(c)  Side mains. The following rules govern the installation of and payment for side mains: 
(1)  For a new side main constructed by the developer, the developer will construct the main at his total cost. The developer will be eligible for refunds from the city as described in subsection 18-65(b)(2). 
(2)  If the developer uses an existing side main to serve his development, the developer must pay pro rata for the existing main in accordance with subsection 18-58(i). 
(d)  Off-site mains. The following rules govern the installation of off-site mains: 
(1)  The developer may construct the extension at his total cost. 
(2)  The developer will be eligible for reimbursement for such off-site extensions on the basis of new connections utilizing the extensions, as described in subsections 18-65(b)(3) and (4). 
(3)  The city may elect to construct or cause to be constructed such mains upon deposit with the city of the total cost of the main, including the cost of off-site mains from fronting property not owned by the developer, if the off-site mains are necessary to connect the proposed development with the city's water and sewer systems. 
(e)  Replacement mains. If the city manager determines that an existing main serving a proposed development is substandard as to size or condition, the developer shall replace such substandard main with a main of adequate size and condition for permanent service, as determined by the department. The replacement of a substandard main will be subject to applicable refunds for oversize mains, as specified in section 18-65. 
(f)  Trunk or transmission mains. If platted property fronts an existing water transmission or trunk wastewater main and connection to the main is not permitted by the department, the developer will not be charged pro rata for the existing main if he installs another main to serve his development. 
(g)  Duplicate mains. If a water or wastewater main exists in front or back of a subdivision and a developer constructs a duplicate main for the property, the developer will not be charged pro rata for the existing main. However, if the department requires a developer to build a main in both front and back of a subdivision, and if one (1) of the mains is determined by the director to be a duplicate main, eligibility for refunds on the duplicate main will be treated according to the rules for off-site mains. 
(Ord. No. 89-1017, § 2(Art. V, § 18.48), 3-14-89)  
DIVISION 6. - CAPITAL RECOVERY FEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-199, Arts. I—V, adopted Jan. 10, 1995, amended this Code but did not specify the manner of inclusion. Such provisions have been treated as superseding, in effect repealing, former Div. 6, §§ 18-64—18-66, relative water and wastewater capital recovery fees, which derived form Ord. No. 90-017, Arts. I—III, adopted May 22, 1990, Exhibits A—G and Schedules 1 and 2 referred to in this division have not been set out herein but are available in appropriate city offices. 
Subsequently, Ord. No. 2002-123, §§ 1—5, adopted Sept. 24, 2002, renamed Exhibit A as Exhibit 5, Exhibits B, D, G, and F as 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively; and renamed Schedules 1 and 2 as Exhibits 6 and 7. 
 
Sec. 18-64. - Water, wastewater and roadway facilities capital recovery fees—Generally. 
(a)  Short title. This division shall be known and cited as the Cedar Hill Impact Fee Regulations. 
(b)  Purpose and policy. This division is intended to assure the provision of adequate public facilities for water, wastewater and roadway facilities to serve new development by requiring each such development to pay its pro rata share of the costs of such improvements necessitated by and attributable to such new development, in conformance with the provisions of Texas Local Government Code Chapter 395. 
(c)  Authority. This division is adopted pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 395 (Vernon 1993 Supp.) (SB336) and pursuant to the Cedar Hill City Charter. The provisions of this division shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to utilize other methods authorized under state law or pursuant to other city powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution for or in conjunction with this division. Administrative guidelines may be developed by resolution or otherwise to implement and administer this division. 
(d)  Definitions. 
Advisory committee means the capital improvements advisory committee established by the city for purposes of reviewing and making recommendations to the city council on adoption and amendment of the city's impact fee program. 
Area-related facility means a capital improvement or facility expansion which is designated in the impact fee capital improvements plan and which is not a site-related facility. "Area-related facility" may include a capital improvement which is located offsite, or within or on the perimeter of the development site. 
Assessment means the determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this division. 
Building permit means written permission issued by the city for the construction of, repair, alteration or addition to a structure. 
Capital improvement means either a roadway facility, a water facility or a wastewater facility, with a life expectancy of three (3) or more years, to be owned and operated by or on behalf of the city. 
City means the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
City council (council) means the governing body of the City of Cedar Hill. 
Comprehensive plan means the comprehensive long-range plan, adopted by the city council, which is intended to guide growth and development of the city which includes analysis, recommendations and proposals for the city regarding such topics as population, economy, housing, transportation, community facilities and land use. 
Credit means the amount of the reduction of an impact fee due, determined under this division or pursuant to administrative guidelines, that is equivalent to the value of area-related facilities provided by a property owner pursuant to the city's subdivision or zoning regulations or requirements, for the same type of facility. 
Director means the director of the city public works department or other city official designated by the city manager to administer these regulations. 
Facility expansion means either a roadway facility expansion, a water facility expansion or a sewer facility expansion. 
Final plat approval means authorization by the city planning and zoning commission or city council that the final map of a proposed subdivision meets all city standards and conditions in accordance with the city's subdivision regulations and that the plat may be recorded in the office of the county clerk of Dallas or Ellis County, as the case may be. 
Impact fee means either a fee for roadway facilities, a fee for water facilities or a fee for wastewater facilities imposed on new development by the city pursuant to this division in order to generate revenue to fund or recoup all or part of the costs of capital improvements or facility expansion necessitated by and attributable to such new development. "Impact fees" include capital recovery fees for water or wastewater facilities collected under prior Ord. No. 90-017, as amended. "Impact fees" do not include the dedication of rights-of-way or easements for such facilities, or the construction of such improvements, imposed pursuant to the city's zoning or subdivision regulations, nor do "impact fees" include fees placed in trust funds for the purpose of reimbursing developers for oversizing or constructing water or wastewater mains or lines, or other pro rata fees for reimbursement of water or sewer mains or lines extended by the city. "Impact fees" also do not include charges for water or wastewater services to a wholesale customer such as a water district, political subdivision of the State of Texas, or other wholesale utility customer. 
Impact fee capital improvements plan means either a roadway capital improvements plan, a water capital improvements plan or a wastewater capital improvements plan adopted or revised pursuant to these impact fee regulations. 
Land use assumptions means the projections of population and employment growth and associated changes in land uses, densities and intensities over at least a ten-year period as adopted by the city, and as may be amended from time to time, upon which the capital improvements plans are based. 
Land use equivalency table means a table converting the demands for capital improvements generated by various land uses to numbers of service units, as may be amended from time to time. 
Living unit equivalent (LUE) means the standard unit of measure for calculating service units to establish equivalency among and within various water and wastewater customer classes based upon the relationship of the continuous duty maximum flow rate in gallons per minute for a water meter of a given size and type compared to the continuous duty maximum flow rate in gallons per minute for a one-inch diameter simple water meter, using American Water Works Association C700-C703 standards. 
New development means a project involving the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; or any use or extension of the use of land; any of which has the effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements or facility expansions, measured by the number of service units to be generated by such activity, and which requires either the approval of a plat pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations, the issuance of a building permit, or the purchase of a new water or wastewater tap, and which has not been exempted from these regulations by provisions herein. 
Plat has the meaning given the term in the city's subdivision regulations. "Plat" includes replat. 
Platting has the meaning given the term in the city's subdivision regulations. "Platting" includes replatting. 
Property owner means any person, corporation, legal entity or agent thereof having a legal or equitable interest in the land for which an impact fee becomes due. "Property owner" includes the developer for the new development. 
Recoupment means the imposition of an impact fee to reimburse the city for capital improvements which the city has previously oversized to serve new development. 
Roadway means any freeway, expressway, principal or minor arterial or collector roadways designated in the city's adopted thoroughfare plan, as may be amended from time to time. "Roadway" does not include any roadway designated as a numbered highway on the official federal or Texas highway system. 
Roadway capital improvements plan means the adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the roadway facilities or roadway expansions and their costs for each road service area, which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten (10) years, which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of road facilities fees pursuant to this division. 
Roadway expansion means the expansion of the capacity of an existing roadway in the city, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing roadway to better serve existing development. 
Roadway facility means an improvement or appurtenance to a roadway which includes, but is not limited to, rights-of-way, whether conveyed by deed or easement; intersection improvements; traffic signals; turn lanes; drainage facilities associated with the roadway; street lighting or curbs. "Roadway facility" also includes any improvement or appurtenance to an intersection with a roadway officially enumerated in the federal or Texas highway system. "Roadway facility" excludes those improvements or appurtenances to a roadway which are site-related facilities. 
Service area means either a roadway service area, a water service area or wastewater service area within the city and, except for roadway facilities, within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, within which impact fees for capital improvements or facility expansion may be collected for new development occurring within such area and within which fees so collected will be expended for those types of improvements or expansions identified in the type of capital improvements plan applicable to the service area. 
Service unit means, for roadway facilities, a vehicle mile in p.m. peak hour, or, for water and for wastewater facilities, a living unit equivalent (LUE), which serves as the standardized measure of consumption, use or generation attributable to the new unit of development. 
Site-related facility means an improvement or facility which is for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary purpose of safe and adequate provision of roadway, water or wastewater facilities to serve the new development, and which is not included in the impact fees capital improvements plan and for which the property owner is solely responsible under subdivision or other applicable development regulations. 
Tap purchase means the filing with the city of a written application for a water or wastewater tap and the acceptance of applicable fees by the city. 
Wastewater facility means a wastewater interceptor or main, lift station, treatment facility or other facility included within and comprising an integral component of the city's collection and transmission system for wastewater. "Wastewater facility" includes land, easements or structures associated with such facilities. "Wastewater facility" excludes a site-related facility. 
Wastewater facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of any existing wastewater improvement for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing sewer facility to serve existing development. 
Wastewater capital improvements plan means the adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the wastewater facilities or wastewater expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten (10) years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of wastewater facilities fees pursuant to this division. 
Water facility means a water transmission line or main, pump station, storage tank, water supply facility, treatment facility or other facility included within and comprising an integral component of the city's water storage or distribution system. Water facility includes land, easements or structures associated with such facilities. Water facility excludes site-related facilities. 
Water facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of any existing water facility for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing water improvement to serve existing development. 
Water improvements plan means the adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the water facilities or water expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten (10) years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of water facilities impact fees pursuant to this division. 
Water meter means a device for measuring the flow of water to a development, whether for domestic or for irrigation purposes. 
(e)  Applicability. The provisions of this Code concerning water and wastewater impact fees apply to all new, non-exempt development within the corporate boundaries of the city and within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The provisions of this division concerning roadway impact fees apply only within the corporate boundaries of the city. The provisions of this division apply uniformly within each service area. 
(f)  Impact fee as condition of development approval. No final plat for new development shall be approved within the service area without assessment of an impact fee pursuant to these impact fee regulations. No building permit shall be issued or tap purchase be made, until the property owner has paid the impact fee imposed by and calculated herein, unless a different time and/or method of payment has been authorized by contract between the city and the property owner. 
(g)  Service unit determination. 
(1)  The number of service units for a new development shall be determined by using the land use equivalency table. Alternatively, the number of service units may be determined based upon the recommendation of the director in response to an engineering report prepared by a qualified professional engineer licensed to perform such professional engineering services in the State of Texas, which demonstrates that the number of service units for the new development will be less than those indicated by the land use equivalency table. The city may prescribe the methodology for making alternative determinations of service units through administrative guidelines, in addition to the following standards: 
a.  If the director determines that the size of the water meter in the land use equivalency table is not indicative of actual service demand, the director may adjust the number of LUEs based on a smaller or larger sized meter which more accurately reflects the flow rate and the system pressure conditions. 
b.  If the director determines that the number of vehicle miles to be generated by the new development during the p.m. peak hour is substantially different from that stated for such development in the land use equivalency table, the director may establish the number of vehicle miles based upon his interpretation of a traffic impact study prepared in accordance with city standards. 
(2)  In determining the number of service units, the following rules shall apply: 
a.  Each new freestanding building requires a new water meter, except as provided in subsection (2)b. below. 
b.  Where a site is redeveloped (clearance and reconstruction), no new LUEs will be attributed to such redevelopment, provided that the water meter is of the same size as the development previously occupying the site. If meter size is increased, the number of LUEs will be based upon the increase in capacity of the meter. 
c.  Existing buildings or land uses may be expanded using existing meter service. No LUEs will be attributed to such development if the water meter size remains the same. If the meter size is increased, the number LUEs will be based upon the increase in capacity of the meter. 
d.  Calculation of the number of service units for water and wastewater impact fees generally shall be the same, except that no LUEs for wastewater impact fees will be attributed to irrigation meters. 
e.  If an existing structure or use does not require a water meter for water or wastewater service, or does not generate the need for water or wastewater service, no LUEs will be attributable to such use or structure. 
f.  If a fire demand meter (tap) is purchased for a property, the meter size utilized to calculate the number of LUEs shall be the meter size which would provide only potable service to the property. The reduced meter size shall then be utilized to calculate the number of LUEs. 
1.  The meter types used to calculate the number of LUEs shall be simple, compound or turbine meters. 
2.  To avoid the use of fire flow volumes for potable usage, the owner of any property for which a fire demand meter is purchased shall be required to execute a restrictive covenant on a form approved by the city attorney, which covenant shall state that use of the fire demand meter for potable water needs in excess of that determined in establishing the meter size for impact fees shall be cause for collection of additional impact fees up to the actual size of the fire demand meter. Said covenant shall be executed prior to the purchase of the fire demand meter and shall be filed in the deed records of the county. 
(3)  The land use equivalency table may be amended from time to time utilizing the amendment procedure in subsection (r). The official land use equivalency table shall be that last updated in accordance with the procedures in subsection (r). 
(h)  Impact fees per service unit. 
(1)  The maximum impact fee per service unit for each service area shall be computed by dividing the total eligible costs of capital improvements in the service area identified in the impact fee capital improvements plan for that category of capital improvements, reduced by the amount of the credit for that portion of ad valorem or utility service revenues, as the case may be, to be generated by new service units for the payment of the improvements included in the capital improvements plan for the service area during the ten-year life of the plan, by the total number of service units anticipated within the service area, based upon the land use assumptions for that service area. Maximum impact fees per service unit for each service area shall be established by category of capital improvements and shall be as set forth in Schedule 1, attached hereto and made a part of these regulations by reference. 
(2)  The impact fee per service unit which is to be paid by each new development within a service area shall be that established by the city council, as may be amended from time to time, and shall be an amount less than or equal to the maximum impact fee per service unit established in subsection (1) above. Impact fees which are to be paid shall be as set forth in Schedule 2, attached hereto and made a part of these regulations by reference. 
(3)  Impact fee Schedules 1 and 2 may be amended from time to time utilizing the amendment procedure set forth in subsection (r). 
(i)  Assessment of impact fees. 
(1)  Assessment of the impact fee for any new development shall be made as follows: 
a.  For land which is unplatted at the time of application for a building permit or tap purchase, or for a new development which has received final plat approval prior to or on June 20, 1987, for water and wastewater facilities, or prior to the effective date of Ord. No. 95-199, for roadway facilities, and for which no replatting is necessary pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations prior to development, assessment shall occur at the time application is made for the building permit or tap purchase, whichever occurs first, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit then in effect, as set forth in Schedule 1. 
b.  For a new development which is submitted for approval pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations after June 20, 1987, for water and wastewater facilities, or after the effective date of Ord. No. 95-199, for roadway facilities, or for which replatting results in an increase in the number of service units after such dates, assessment shall be at the time of final plat approval, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit then in effect, as set forth in Schedule 1. 
c.  Because fire protection is of critical concern to the community as a whole, water demand related solely to fire protection is not subject to assessment of an impact fee. However, if the director determines that the fire protection capacity of the fire demand meter is routinely utilized for potable purposes as evidenced by the registration of consumption recorded on the city's meter-reading and billing systems, the director shall calculate the meter size equivalent to such potable usage, and assessment shall occur at the time of such determination, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit then in effect, as set forth in Schedule 1. 
(2)  Following initial assessment of the impact fee for a new development pursuant to subsection (1) above, the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit for that development cannot be increased, unless the owner proposes to change the approved development by the submission of a new development application, in which case the impact fee will be reassessed at the Schedule 1 rate then in effect for such additional service units. 
(3)  Following the lapse or expiration of approval of a new development, a new assessment shall be performed at the time a new application for such development is filed. 
(j)  Calculation of impact fees. 
(1)  At the time of tap purchase for new developments described in subsection (2) below, at the time the director recalculates consumption of potable water, as described in subsection (i)(1)c., or at the time of application for a building permit for all other new developments, the city shall compute the impact fees due for the new development in the following manner: 
a.  The amount of each impact fee due shall be determined by multiplying the number of service units generated by the new development by the impact fee due per service unit for the service area using Schedule 2. The number of service units shall be determined according to subsection (g). 
b.  The amount of each impact fee due shall be reduced by any allowable credits for that category of capital improvements, in the manner provided in subsection (l). 
(2)  The amount of each impact fee due for a new development shall not exceed an amount computed by multiplying the maximum impact fee per service unit under schedule 1 by the number of service units generated by the development. 
(3)  Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service units for a development, the additional impact fees collected for such new service units shall be determined by using Schedule 2 then in effect and such additional fee shall be collected either prior to or at the time of issuance of a new building permit, or prior to or at the time of enlargement of the connection to the city's water or wastewater system. 
(k)  Collection of impact fees. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided herein, impact fees shall be collected prior to or concurrent with the issuance of a building permit for a new development. 
(2)  If the building permit for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, and a new application is thereafter filed, the impact fees due shall be computed using schedule 2 then in effect, and previous payments of impact fees shall be credited against the new fees due. 
(3)  In the event that a water or wastewater tap is sold as a result of a conversion from an individual well, or septic or other individual waste disposal system, the appropriate fee shall be collected at the time of tap purchase, except that the city may apply the following provisions upon written request of the applicant: 
a.  Upon approval by the director, the applicant shall execute a contract for payment of the full amount of the fee within a reasonable amount of time; not to exceed a five-year period. The applicant also shall record "notice of capital recovery fee due" in the records of the county clerk for Dallas County or Ellis County, as the case may be, and shall pay recording costs for such instrument. 
b.  The contract shall provide for a deposit to be paid at the time of tap purchase with equal annual installments of the fee balance payable by the applicant on a monthly basis, not to exceed sixty (60) installments, together with interest payable on each installment from said date until paid in full. 
c.  The interest rate shall be that rate paid to the city of treasury deposits at the time the contract is approved; provided, however, that the applicant shall have the privilege of paying all or any of said installments at any time before maturity thereof by paying the total amount of principal of such installment together with interest accrued thereon to the date of payment. 
d.  If the property owner defaults in the payment of any of said installments of principal or interest as the same matures, then at the option of the city or its assigns, and while retaining all other remedies which the city may have to remedy such default, the city may accelerate the amount then due under the contract and such sums, together with reasonable attorney's fees and collection costs incurred, shall become immediately due and payable. 
(l)  Credits against impact fees. 
(1)  The city shall credit the present value of any area-related facility, pursuant to rules established in this section or pursuant to administrative guidelines promulgated by the city, which has been dedicated or contributed to and received by the city, including the value of rights-of-ways or capital improvements constructed pursuant to an agreement with the city, against the amount of the impact fee due for that category of capital improvement. The credit shall be associated with the plat of the property that is to be served by the capital improvement constructed. 
(2)  All credits against impact fees shall be based upon standards promulgated by the city, which may be adopted as administrative guidelines, including the following standards: 
a.  No credit shall be given for the dedication or construction of site-related facilities. 
b.  No credit shall exceed an amount equal to the eligible costs of the improvement multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the impact fee per service unit due for the new development as computed using schedule 2 and the denominator of which is the maximum impact fee per service unit for the new development as computed using Schedule 1. 
c.  The unit costs used to calculate credits shall not exceed those assumed for the capital improvements included in the impact fees capital improvements plan for the category of facility for which the impact fee is imposed. 
d.  No credit shall be given for an oversized facility which is not identified within the applicable impact fees capital improvements plan, unless the city agrees that such improvement supplies capacity to new developments other than the development paying the impact fee and provisions for credits are incorporated in an agreement for capital improvements pursuant to subsection (u). 
e.  In no event will the city reimburse the property owner or developer for a credit when no impact fees for the new development can be collected pursuant to these impact fee regulations or for any amount exceeding the total impact fees due for the development for that category of capital improvements, unless otherwise agreed to by the city. 
(3)  A credit created pursuant to impact ordinances adopted prior to 1995 shall expire February 1, 2005. Credits created after February 1, 1995, shall expire within 10 years from the date the credit was created. 
(4)  An applicant for new development shall apply for a credit against impact fees due for the development either at the time of application for plat approval or at the time of building permit application, unless the city agrees to a different time. The applicant shall file a petition for credits with the city on a form provided for such purpose. The city must provide the applicant, in writing, with a decision on the credit request, specifying the maximum value of the credit which may be applied against an impact fee. 
(5)  After the effective date of this amendatory ordinance, credits for construction of capital improvements to be applied against impact fees due shall be determined in accordance with an agreement for capital improvements pursuant to subsection (u). The agreement required may provide for participation by the city in the costs of the capital improvement to be constructed by the property owner, as provided in the city's subdivision regulations. The amount of any credit shall be reduced by the amount of the city's participation. 
(6)  A credit associated with a plat shall be prorated over the number of lots and applied to reduce an impact fee at the time of final plat approval, for single-family residential developments. For all other developments, the credit shall be applied to reduce an impact fee at the time of application for the first building permit or at the time of application for the first tap purchase for the property and, thereafter, to all subsequently issued building permits or tap purchases, until the credit is exhausted. 
(7)  The following provisions apply solely to the calculation of credits for roadway facilities: 
a.  If a property owner is required to dedicate or construct an offsite, area-related roadway facility pursuant to the city's development regulations, the city shall reasonably credit the costs of such improvement against roadway impact fees due consistent with this section. The amount of the credit shall be established by an agreement for capital improvements in the manner provided in subsection (c). 
b.  No credit for dedication or construction of an area-related roadway facility may be applied to reduce impact fees for water or sanitary sewer facilities. 
(m)  Establishment of accounts. 
(1)  The city shall establish an account to which interest is allocated for each service area for each type of capital facility for which an impact fee is imposed pursuant to this chapter. Each impact fee collected within the service area shall be deposited in such account. 
(2)  Interest earned on the account into which the impact fees are deposited shall be considered funds of the account and shall be used solely for the purposes authorized in subsection (n). 
(3)  The city shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the purposes authorized in subsection (n). Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the city at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of these regulations; provided, however, that funds shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten (10) years from the date impact fees are deposited into the account. 
(4)  The city shall maintain and keep financial records for impact fees, which shall show the source and disbursement of all fees collected in or expended within each service area. The records of the account into which impact fees are deposited shall be open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours. The city may establish a fee for copying services. 
(n)  Use of proceeds of impact fee accounts. 
(1)  The impact fees collected for each service area pursuant to these regulations may be used to finance or to recoup the costs of any capital improvements or facility expansion identified in the applicable capital improvements plan for the service area, including but not limited to the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees). Impact fees may also be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance such capital improvements or facility expansion. Impact fees also may be used to pay fees actually contracted to be paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant for preparation of or updating the impact fee capital improvements plan. 
(2)  Impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall not be used to pay for any of the following expenses: 
a.  Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital improvements or assets other than those identified in the applicable capital improvements plan; 
b.  Repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facility expansion; 
c.  Upgrade, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards; 
d.  Upgrade, expansion, or replacement of existing capital improvements to provide better service to existing development; provided, however, that impact fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements in order to meet the need for new capital improvements generated by new development; or 
e.  Administrative and operating costs of the city. 
(o)  Appeals. 
(1)  The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the following administrative decisions to the city council: 
a.  The applicability of an impact fee to the development; 
b.  The amount of the impact fee due; 
c.  The availability of, the amount of, or the expiration of a credit; 
d.  The application of a credit against an impact fee due; 
e.  The amount of the impact fee in proportion to the benefit received by the new development; or 
f.  The amount of a refund due, if any. 
(2)  The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the amount of the fee or the amount of the credit was not calculated according to the applicable schedule of impact fees or the guidelines established for determining credits. 
(3)  The appellant must file a written notice of appeal with the city within thirty (30) days following the decision. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a payment or other security satisfactory to the city attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the impact fee due, the development application or tap purchase may be processed while the appeal is pending. 
(4)  If an appellant alleges that an administrative decision listed in subsection (1) is unlawful in whole or in part because it results in imposition of a condition that is not roughly proportionate to the proposed development, the appeal shall be processed and decided in accordance with section 20-29 of the City Code of Ordinances or successor provision. 
(p)  Refunds. 
(1)  Upon application, any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to these regulations, which has not been expended within the service area within ten (10) years from the date of payment, shall be refunded to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid or, if the impact fee was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in Article 1.03, Title 79, Revised Statutes (Article 5069-1.03, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), or its successor statute. The application for refund pursuant to this section shall be submitted within sixty (60) days after the expiration of the ten-year period for expenditure of the fee. An impact fee shall be considered expended on a first-in, first out basis. 
(2)  An impact fee collected pursuant to these regulations shall also be considered expended if the total expenditures for capital improvements or facility expansion authorized in subsection (n) within the service area within ten (10) years following the date of payment exceeds the total fees collected within the service area for such improvements or expansions during such period. 
(3)  Upon written application, any water or wastewater impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to these regulations shall be refunded if: 
a.  Existing service is available and service is denied; or 
b.  Service was not available when the fee was collected and the city has failed to commence construction of facilities to provide service within two (2) years of fee payment; or 
c.  Service was not available when the fee was collected and has not subsequently been made available within a reasonable period of time considering the type of capital improvement or facility expansion to be constructed, but in any event later than five (5) years from the date of fee payment. 
(4)  If a refund is due pursuant to subsections 3a.—c., the city shall divide the difference between the amount of expenditures and the amount of the fees collected by the total number of service units assumed within the service area for the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying the refund due per service unit by the number of service units for the development for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount. 
(5)  Petitions for refunds shall be submitted to the director on a form provided by the city for such purpose. Within one (1) month of the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the director must provide the petitioner, in writing, with a decision on the refund request, including the reasons for the decision. If a refund is due to the petitioner, the director shall notify the city finance director and request that a refund payment be made to the petitioner. 
(q)  Rebates. 
(1)  If a tract of land for which an impact fee has been paid is replatted, resulting in a reduction in the number of service units, and the new impact fee to be collected is less than that paid, the city shall rebate the difference, provided that water meters to serve the development have not been installed. 
(2)  If the building permit for a new development for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, no tap purchases for that category of capital improvements have been made to the development, and a modified or new application has not been filed within six (6) months of such expiration, the city shall, upon written application, rebate the amount of the impact fee to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid. If no application for rebate pursuant to this subsection has been filed within this period, no rebate shall become due. 
(3)  The city shall rebate an appropriate portion of impact fee payments in the event that a previously purchased water meter is replaced with a smaller meter, based on the LUE differential of the two (2) meter sizes and the pre-LUE fee at the time of the original fee payment, less an administrative charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) and any meter replacement costs incurred by the city. 
(r)  Updates to plan and revision of fees. 
(1)  The city shall update its land use assumptions and capital improvements plans at least every five (5) years, commencing from the date of adoption of such plans, and shall recalculate the impact fees based thereon in accordance with the procedures set forth in Texas Local Government Code, Ch. 395, or in any successor statute. 
(2)  The city may review its land use assumptions, impact fees, capital improvements plans and other factors such as market conditions more frequently than provided in subsection (1) to determine whether the land use assumptions and capital improvements plans should be updated and the impact fee recalculated accordingly, or whether Schedule 1 or 2 should be changed. Schedule 2 may be amended without revising land use assumptions and capital improvements plans at any time prior to the update provided for in subsection (1), provided that the impact fees to be collected under Schedule 2 do not exceed the impact fees assessed under Schedule 1. 
(3)  If at the time an update is required pursuant to subsection (1), the city council determines that no change to the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan or impact fee is needed, it may dispense with such update by following the procedures in Texas Local Government Code, section 395.0575. 
(4)  The city may amend by resolution the land use equivalency table at any time prior to the update provided for in subsection 1; provided that the number of service units associated with a particular land use shall not be increased. 
(s)  Exemptions from and discounts of impact fees. 
(1)  From time to time, the city council may exempt a particular type of new development, or a class of new developments located within a defined geographic area, from payment of impact fees, or may discount the amount of impact fees due under Schedule 2 for such new developments, based on findings that such exemptions or discounts rationally further the city's defined goals, objectives or policies related to land use, city growth or economic development. 
(2)  A master water meter or master wastewater connection purchased by the city, and any meter purchased for and exclusively dedicated to fire protection, shall be exempt from payment of impact fees. 
(3)  The city, the Cedar Hill Independent School District, or any other school district shall not be subject to payment of impact fees. 
(t)  Functions of advisory committee. 
(1)  The advisory committee shall perform the following functions: 
a.  Advise and assist the city in adopting land use assumptions; 
b.  Review the capital improvements plans and file written comments thereon. 
c.  Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plans; 
d.  Advise the city of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, capital improvements plans and impact fees; and 
e.  File a semiannual report evaluating the progress of the capital improvements plans and identifying perceived inequities in implementing the plans or administering the impact fees. 
(2)  The city shall make available to the advisory committee any professional reports prepared in the development or implementation of the capital improvements plans. 
(3)  The city council shall adopt procedural rules for the advisory committee to follow in carrying out its duties. 
(u)  Agreement for capital improvements. 
(1)  An owner of a new development may construct or finance a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the capital improvements plan, if required or authorized by the city, by entering into an agreement with the city prior to fee collection for the development. The agreement shall be on a form approved by the city, and shall identify the estimated cost of the improvement or expansion, the schedule for initiation and completion of the improvement or expansion, a requirement that the improvement be designed and completed to city standards and such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the city. The director shall review the improvement plan, verify costs and time schedules, determine if the improvement is contained in the CIP, and determine the amount of the credit to be given against impact fees due for the development before submitting the proposed agreement to the city council for approval. 
(2)  The city and such owner either may agree that the costs incurred or funds advanced will be credited against the impact fees otherwise due from the new development, or they may agree that the city shall reimburse the owner for such costs from impact fees paid from other new developments which will use such capital improvements or facility expansions, or from other funding sources. In the event that the city elects to reimburse an owner for the dedication, construction or financing of a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the capital improvements plan, the terms of reimbursement shall be incorporated in the agreement required by subsection (1) above. 
(v)  Use of other financing mechanisms. 
(1)  The city may finance capital improvements or facility expansion designated in the capital improvements plan through the issuance of bonds, through the formation of public utility districts or other assessment districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in addition to the use of impact fees. 
(2)  Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of an impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and due against the property. 
(3)  The city council may decide that the city shall pay all or a part of impact fees due for a new development pursuant to duly adopted criteria. 
(w)  Impact fee as additional and supplemental regulation. 
(1)  Impact fees established by these regulations are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of; any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits, the sale of water or wastewater taps, or certificates of occupancy. Such fee is intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of city's comprehensive land use plan, the capital improvements plan, the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities in conjunction with the development of land. 
(2)  This article shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density of development, design, and improvement standards and requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of public improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other regulations of the city, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development. 
(3)  This ordinance is not intended to replace or supercede the city's subdivision [and] regulations or any provision thereof requiring the dedication, extension or construction or [of] water, wastewater or roadway facilities, and is deemed hereby to be consistent with such provisions. 
(4)  The maximum impact fee per service unit for any category of capital improvements set forth in Schedule 1, as may be amended from time to time, hereby is declared to be an approximate and appropriate measure of the impacts generated by a new unit of development on the city's capital facilities system for that category of capital improvements. To the extent that the impact fee charged against a new development under Schedule 2, as may be amended from time to time, is less than the maximum impact fee per service unit in Schedule 1, such difference hereby is declared to be founded on policies unrelated to measurement of the impacts of the new development on the city's capital facilities systems. The Schedule 1 impact fee rate may be used by the city in evaluating and deciding any claim by a property owner that the dedication or construction of a capital improvement imposed as a condition of development approval pursuant to the city's subdivision or development regulations is disproportionate to the impact created by the development on the city's capital facilities systems. 
(x)  Relief procedures. 
(1)  Any person who has paid an impact fee or an owner of land upon which an impact fee has been paid may petition the city council to determine whether any duty required by this article has not been performed within the time so prescribed. The petition shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and request that the duty be performed within sixty (60) days of the request. If the city council determines that the duty is required pursuant to this article and is late in being performed, it shall cause the duty to commence within sixty (60) days of the date of the request and to continue until completion. This subsection is not applicable to matters which may be appealed pursuant to subsection (o). 
(2)  The city council may grant a variance from any requirement of this article, upon written request by a developer or owner of property subject to this article, following a public hearing, and only upon finding that a strict application of such requirement would, when regarded as a whole, result in confiscation of the property. 
(Ord. No. 95-199, Art. I, 1-10-95; Ord. No. 95-203, § 1, 2-28-95; Ord. No. 98-392, § 1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2002-123, §§ 4—6, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 2007-338, § 6, 9-25-07)  
Sec. 18-65. - Land use assumptions. 
The official land use assumptions for the city shall be those last updated in accordance with section 18-64(r). Land use assumptions may be amended from time to time, or new land use assumptions may be adopted, pursuant to procedures in section 18-64(r). 
(Ord. No. 95-199, Art. II, 1-10-95; Ord. No. 2002-123, § 1, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 2007-338, § 7, 9-25-07)  
Sec. 18-66. - Water facilities impact fees. 
(a)  Water service area. There is hereby established a water service area, constituting all the land within the city limits and within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. The official water service area shall be that last updated in accordance with section 18-64(r). The boundaries of the water service area may be amended from time to time, or new water service areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures in section 18-64(r). 
(b)  Water capital improvements plan. The official water capital improvements plan for the city shall be that last updated in accordance with section 18-64(r). The water capital improvements plan may be amended from time to time, or new land use assumptions may be adopted, pursuant to procedures in section 18-64(r). 
(c)  Water facilities impact fees. 
(1)  The maximum impact fees per service unit for water facilities, which are to be assessed against each new development, shall be incorporated in Schedule 1. The official Schedule 1 for water facilities shall be that last updated in accordance with section 18-64(r). 
(2)  The impact fees per service unit for water facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, shall be incorporated in Schedule 2. The official Schedule 2 for water facilities shall be that last updated in accordance with section 18-64(r). 
(Ord. No. 95-199, Art. III, 1-10-95; Ord. No. 2002-123, §§ 2, 5, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 2007-338, § 8, 9-25-07)  
Sec. 18-66.1. - Wastewater facilities impact fees. 
(a)  Wastewater service area. There is hereby established a wastewater service area, constituting all the land within the city limits and within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. The official wastewater service area shall be that last updated in accordance with section 18-64(r). The boundaries of the wastewater service area may be amended from time to time, or new wastewater service areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures in section 18-64(r). 
(b)  Wastewater capital improvements plan. The official wastewater capital improvements plan for the city shall be that last updated in accordance with section 18-64(r). The wastewater capital improvements plan may be amended from time to time, or new land use assumptions may be adopted, pursuant to procedures in section 18-64(r). 
(c)  Wastewater facilities impact fees. 
(1)  The maximum impact fees per service unit for wastewater facilities, which are to be assessed against each new development, shall be incorporated in Schedule 1. The official Schedule 1 for wastewater facilities shall be that last updated in accordance with section 18-64(r). 
(2)  The impact fees per service unit for wastewater facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, shall be incorporated in Schedule 2. The official Schedule 2 for wastewater facilities shall be that last updated in accordance with section 18-64(r). 
(Ord. No. 95-199, Art. IV, 1-10-95; Ord. No. 2002-123, §§ 2, 5, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 2007-338, § 9, 9-25-07)  
Sec. 18-66.2. - Roadway facilities impact fees. 
(a)  Roadway service areas. Service areas for roadway facilities shall be those last updated in accordance with section 18-64(r). The boundaries of roadway service areas may be amended from time to time, or new roadway service areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures in section 18-64(r). 
(b)  Roadway capital improvements plan. The official roadway capital improvements plan for the city shall be that last updated in accordance with section 18-64(r). The roadway capital improvements plan may be amended from time to time, or new land use assumptions may be adopted, pursuant to procedures in section 18-64(r). 
(c)  Roadway facilities impact fees. 
(1)  The maximum impact fees per service unit for roadway facilities, which are to be assessed against each new development, shall be incorporated in Schedule 1. The official Schedule 1 for roadway facilities shall be that last updated in accordance with section 18-64(r). 
(2)  The impact fees per service unit for roadway facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, shall be incorporated in Schedule 2. The official Schedule 2 for roadway facilities shall be that last updated in accordance with section 18-64(r). 
(Ord. No. 95-199, Art. V, 1-10-95; Ord. No. 2002-123, §§ 2, 3, 5, 9-24-02; Ord. No. 2007-338, § 10, 9-25-07)  
DIVISION 7. - ON-SITE SEWAGE DISPOSAL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-622, § 1, adopted August 29, 2017, repealed div. 7, §§ 18-67—18-81 and enacted a new div. 7 as set out herein. Former div. 7 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 95-213, adopted June 27, 1995 and Ord. No. 99-410, adopted June 12, 1999. 
 
Sec. 18-67. - Reserved.  
Sec. 18-68. - Adopting Texas Health and Safety Code chapters 366, and Texas Administrative Code title 30 chapter 285. 
The City of Cedar Hill, Texas, hereby adopts Chapter 366 of the Texas Health and Safety Code (H&SC), and Chapter 285 of Title 30 of Texas Administrative Code (TAC) associated rules referenced in section 18-71 of this article in and for the regulation of on-site sewage facilities ("OSSF"). 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-69. - Area of jurisdiction. 
The rules adopted by the ordinance shall apply to all of the incorporated area of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-70. - On-site sewage facility. 
Any structure discharging sewage into an OSSF within the jurisdictional area of the city must comply with the rules adopted in section 18-71 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-71. - On-site sewage facility rules adopted. 
The rules ("Design Criteria for On-Site Sewer Facilities" and Administrative Rules 30 TAC 285.1 through 285.91), promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) for on-site sewage systems are hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-72. - Incorporation by reference. 
The design criteria and all future amendments and revisions thereto are incorporated by reference and are thus made a part of these rules. A copy of the current design criteria is available for review at the Cedar Hill Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-73. - Amendments. 
A more stringent conflicting local rule regulating an OSSF shall take precedence over a corresponding TCEQ requirement. Listed below are the more stringent rules adopted by the city: 
(1)  On-site sewerage for new structures shall only be allowed on lots which are a minimum of one (1) acre. 
(2)  All OSSFs shall be permitted and inspected regardless of lot size or acreage tract. 
(3)  OSSFs may be utilized only for disposal of normal domestic wastewater. No industrial waste may be discharged to any OSSF. Industrial waste shall be defined as waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal domestic wastewater. 
(4)  No person may cause or allow the installation of a new OSSF when part of the lot or tract on which the OSSF is proposed is to be within two hundred (200) feet in horizontal distance of an existing sanitary sewer system, unless one (1) of the following requirements has been met: 
a.  The person has received a written denial of service from the owner or governing body of the sanitary sewer system; or 
b.  The person has received a written determination from the designated representative that it is not feasible for the person to connect to the sanitary sewer system. 
(5)  Whenever a sanitary sewer disposal system is developed within two hundred (200) feet in horizontal distance from any lot or tract on which an OSSF is used, all buildings serviced by an OSSF shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system within six (6) months. Such connection shall be conducted in accordance with the established procedures for new sanitary sewer connections, including, but not limited to, the payment of any applicable fees. Existing on-site facilities may be exempt from connecting to the sanitary sewer system if: 
a.  One (1) of the requirements set forth in subsections (4)(a) or (4)(b) of this section has been met. 
b.  The owner of the existing on-site facility has received a written waiver from the designated representative after showing the existing OSSFs are being properly maintained and comply with all codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-74. - Duties and powers. 
The public works department of the city is herewith declared the designated representative and permitting authority for the enforcement of these rules. Any individual serving as the designated representative must be approved and certified by the TCEQ before assuming the duties and responsibilities of the designated representative. The designated representative shall have the following duties and concomitant powers: 
(1)  To resolve any question regarding any interpretation of these rules, or the design criteria. 
(2)  To enforce these rules and to make appropriate recommendations to proper city officials when instances of noncompliance with these rules have been determined. 
(3)  To make statutorily mandated inspections of proposed, new and existing OSSFs. 
(4)  To collect fees set by the authorized agent as necessary to recover the reasonable costs incurred in meeting the requirements of these rules. 
(5)  To make semiannual reports to the authorized agent on all actions, including legal actions, taken concerning these rules. 
(6)  To investigate nuisance complaints within twenty-one (21) days of receipt. All validated complaints shall be resolved or substantial progress made toward resolution by the responsible individual within thirty (30) days. 
(7)  To perform all other duties necessary to meet the requirements of these rules. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-75. - Permits and fees. 
No person shall operate an OSSF without a valid permit issued by the city. All fees collected for permits and/or inspections shall be made payable to the city. Permit fees are nonrefundable. 
(1)  A permit application for installation or modification of an on-site system is one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  The TCEQ on-site wastewater treatment system fee as required by Texas Health and Safety Code Chapter 367 is ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-76. - Inspection prior to final covering. 
Each new OSSF shall be inspected and approved by the designated representative prior to the final covering of the facility. 
(1)  The applicant or registered installer shall notify the designated representative that an inspection is desired at least five (5) working days prior to the need for inspection. 
(2)  The applicant or registered installer shall provide whatever reasonable assistance the designated representative requests in order to make the inspection. 
(3)  The applicant or registered installer must be present at the time of the inspection for that facility. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-77. - Appeals. 
Person aggrieved by an action or decision of the designated representative may file a written appeal [of] such action or decision to the building appeals and advisory board of the city within ten (10) working days of such action or decision. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-78. - Right of entry: inspection and sampling. 
The city, TCEQ, or their designated representative shall have the right to enter onto any property with an OSSF to determine whether the system is complying with all requirements of this article. Property owners/tenants shall allow inspecting or sampling personnel access to all parts of the premises necessary for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional, related duties. The designated representative shall inspect any on-site system that is believed to be causing pollution, nuisance conditions, is a threat to the public health, or is illegally installed or altered. 
(1)  If, upon inspection, it is found that any of these conditions exist, the designated representative shall take appropriate enforcement action, notify the owner of the OSSF of the violation and what steps must be taken to achieve compliance, and establish a compliance deadline. The OSSF shall be re-inspected at the expiration of the compliance deadline. 
a.  If the facility is found to be compliant, a permit therefore may be issued. 
b.  If the facility is found to be noncompliant, appropriate enforcement shall be taken. 
(2)  The regulatory authority shall have the right to set up on the property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling of the operations. 
(3)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the property owner/tenant at the written or verbal request of the regulatory authority and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the property owner/tenant. 
(4)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the inspection or sampling personnel access to the property owner's/tenant's premises shall be violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-78.1. - Search warrants. 
If the permitting authority has been refused access to a property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the permitting authority may seek issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-78.2. - Maintenance contract requirements. 
The permit holder of all OSSFs shall ensure that the OSSF is properly operated and maintained in accordance to 30 TAC 285. 
(1)  The maintenance provider, in order to perform maintenance on an OSSF shall be licensed by the TCEQ as a maintenance provider or registered by the TCEQ as a maintenance technician and employed by a licensed maintenance provider. The maintenance provider shall be responsible for fulfilling the requirements of the maintenance contract and for the work performed by registered maintenance technicians under their direct supervision. 
(2)  The initial two-year service policy shall be effective for two (2) years from the date of the OSSF is first used. For an existing single family dwelling this date is the date of notice of approval is issued by the permitting authority. The owner or owner's agent shall provide the permitting authority with a copy of a signed initial two-year service policy before the system is approved for use. 
(3)  OSSF contracts shall, at a minimum: 
a.  Specify a time frame in which the maintenance provider or maintenance technician will visit the property in response to a complaint by the property owner regarding the operation of the system; 
b.  Specify the name of the maintenance provider who is responsible for fulfilling the terms of the maintenance contract; 
c.  Identify the frequency of routine maintenance and the frequency of the required testing and reporting; 
d.  Identify who is responsible for maintaining the disinfection unit; and 
e.  Indicate the business physical address and telephone number for maintenance provider. 
(4)  Unless the owner maintains the system, a copy of the signed maintenance contract shall be provided by the owner to the permitting authority thirty (30) days before the expiration of the initial two-year service policy. For the time period after the initial two-year service policy, the owner is required to have a new maintenance contract signed and submitted to the permitting authority at least thirty (30) days before the contract expires. 
(5)  All OSSFs must be tested and reported in accordance to 30 TAC 285. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-78.3. - Exceptions to maintenance contract. 
At the end of the initial two-year service policy, the owner of an OSSF for a single-family residence shall either maintain the system personally or obtain a new maintenance contract. 
(1)  If the residence is sold before the end of the initial two-year service policy period, the terms of the initial service policy will apply to the new owner. 
(2)  An owner may not maintain an OSSF under the provisions of this section for commercial, speculative residential or multifamily property. 
(3)  The owner of an OSSF for a single-family residence that elects to maintain the system personally following the initial two-year service policy is exempt from testing and reporting requirements. 
(4)  The number of required tests may be reduced to two (2) per year for all systems having electronic monitoring and automatic telephone or radio access that will notify the maintenance provider of system or component failure and will monitor the amount of disinfection in the system. The maintenance provider shall be responsible for ensuring that the electronic monitoring and automatic telephone or radio access systems are working properly. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-79. - Violations; penalties; other remedies. 
(1)  A person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation, and for each day of violation exists or continues. 
(2)  In addition to proceeding under the authority of subsections (1) and (2) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or ordinances against a person committing violations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-80. - Emergency repair. 
An emergency repair to an OSSF without a permit is not an offense under these rules if the following procedures are carried out: 
(1)  The repair is made for the purpose of abatement of an immediate, dangerous and serious health hazard; 
(2)  That said repair does meet minimum state design criteria; 
(3)  That said repair does not constitute an alternation of the on-site system; 
(4)  That written notification of such repair, including a detailed description of the method and materials used in said repair, is made to the authorized agent within seventy-two (72) hours of the date of the repair; and 
(5)  That said repair must be inspected for compliance with the state's or authorized agent's design criteria whichever is more stringent. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-81. - Relinquishment of ordinance. 
If the city council decides that it no longer wishes to regulate OSSFs in its area of jurisdiction, the city council shall follow the procedures outlined below: 
(1)  The city council shall inform the TCEQ by certified mail at least thirty (30) days before the published date of the public hearing notice that it wishes to relinquish its OSSF ordinance. 
(2)  The city council shall post the required public notice in a newspaper regularly published or circulated in the area of jurisdiction at least thirty (30) days prior to the anticipated date of action by the authorized agent and must solicit written comments for that thirty-day period. 
(3)  The city council shall send a copy of the public notice, a publisher's affidavit of public notice, and a certified copy of the court's minutes to the TCEQ. 
(4)  The executive director of the TCEQ shall process the request for relinquishment and may issue an order relinquishing the authority to regulate OSSF's within an authorized agent's jurisdiction or may refer the request to relinquish to the commission. 
(5)  The city and the TCEQ executive director shall agree upon the effective date that the authorized agent is to surrender its authority prior to the issuance of a relinquishment order. 
(6)  Upon relinquishment of the ordinance, the local governmental entity shall surrender its area of jurisdiction to the commission. 
(7)  The local governmental entity shall pay the TCEQ the appropriate charge back fees for permitting, inspections and complaint investigations of OSSFs in the surrendered area of jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2017-622, § 2, 8-29-17)  
ARTICLE III. - OTHER UTILITIES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 18-82—18-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GAS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-112, §§ 1—10, adopted June 25, 2002, has been treated as superceding §§ 18-91—18-94. Provisions of said ordinance has been included as § 18-91 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
Sec. 18-91. - Rate schedules. 
(a)  The city council finds the existing rates for natural gas service provided by Atmos Mid-Tex are unreasonable and new tariffs which are attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A*, are just and reasonable and are hereby adopted. 
(b)  Atmos Mid-Tex shall reimburse the reasonable ratemaking expenses of the ACSC Cities in processing the company's rate application. 
(Ord. No. 2002-112, §§ 1—10, 6-25-02; Ord. No. 2011-447, § 2, 3, 8-16-11) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 2011-447, §§ 2, 3, adopted August 16, 2011, did not specifically amend the Code. Therefore, such ordinance has amended § 18-91 at the editor's discretion. 
Note— *Attachment A is not set out herein, but is on file in the office of the city secretary and is available for public inspection.  
Secs. 18-92—18-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical code, § 4-81 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-96. - Rate schedules and regulations approved. 
The rate schedules and service regulations of Texas Utilities Electric Company approved and set by the public utility commission pursuant to the petition and statement of intent filed by such company with the public utility commission on January 25, 2000, are hereby approved as the rate schedules and service regulations under which such company is authorized to render service and to collect charges from its customers for the sale of electric power and energy within the corporate limits of the city until such time as the rate schedules and service regulations may be changed, modified, amended or withdrawn with the approval of the city council. 
(Code 1976, § 15-81; Ord. No. 90-016, § 1, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 93-151, § 1- 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-186, § 1, 6-28-94; Ord. No. 99-414, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2000-16, 2-22-00) 
Editor's note— The rate schedules and regulations adopted by section 18-96 are on file in the office of the city secretary and are subject to public inspection.  
Sec. 18-97. - Approval to constitute notice. 
The filing of the rate schedules and service regulations shall constitute notice to the consumers of electricity within the city of the availability and application of such rate schedules and service regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 18-52; Ord. No. 90-016, § 3, 5-22-90)  
Secs. 18-98—18-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - E-911 EMERGENCY SERVICE 
 
Sec. 18-116. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
E-911 emergency service means a telecommunications service through which the user of a telephone system has the ability to reach the City of Cedar Hill's public safety answering point by dialing the digits 9-1-1. 
Equivalent local exchange access line or local exchange access line means the physical voice grade telecommunications connection or the cable or broadband transport facilities, or any combination of these facilities, owned, controlled, or relied upon by a service provider, between an end user customer's premises and a service provider's network that, when the digits 9-1-1 are dialed, provides the end user customer access to a public safety answering point through a permissible interconnection to the dedicated 9-1-1 network. In the case of multi-channel services or offerings, channelized by a service provider, each individual channel provided to an end user customer shall constitute a separate "local exchange access line" or "equivalent local exchange access line" (e.g., ISDN-PRI service consists of 24 individual channels.) Local exchange access line or equivalent local exchange access line include lines as defined above that a service provider offers at a fully or partially discounted rate from the provider's base rate to a class of end users (e.g., the service provider's employees/retirees). Such discounting is not a basis for eliminating or reducing the 9-1-1 emergency service fee on such lines, except in the instance of an emergency communication district imposing its 9-1-1 emergency service fee based on a percentage in lieu of a flat rate. 
Local exchange access lines means all types of lines or trunks that connect a service user to the service provider's local telephone exchange office. 
Public safety answering point means the City of Cedar Hill's communications facility that (1) is operated continuously, (2) is assigned the responsibility to receive 9-1-1 calls and to dispatch emergency response services directly or to transfer or relay emergency 9-1-1 calls to other public safety agencies, (3) is the first point of receipt by a public safety agency of a 9-1-1 call, and (4) serves the City of Cedar Hill. 
Service provider means an entity providing local exchange access lines and/or equivalent local exchange access lines in the City of Cedar Hill. 
Service user means a person or business entity that is provided local exchange access lines or equivalent local exchange access lines in the City of Cedar Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2015-557, § 1, 4-28-15)  
Sec. 18-117. - Fee imposed. 
There is hereby imposed on each service user's local exchange access line and equivalent local exchange access line in the City of Cedar Hill an E-911 emergency service fee of one dollar ($1.00) per month for each residential Voice over IP (VoIP) line, one dollar ($1.00) per month for each residential line; one dollar and twenty-five cents ($1.25) per month for each Business Voice over IP (VoIP) line, and one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per month for each business trunk line. Such E-911 emergency service fee shall be used only to provide for the purchase, installation, operation, maintenance and upgrading expenses of E-911 emergency service, including required personnel. 
(Ord. No. 87-939, § 1, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 93-158, § 1, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 98-355, § 1, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 2015-557, § 1, 4-28-15)  
Sec. 18-118. - Contract for implementation and maintenance. 
Every carrier providing local telephone service within the city limits of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, or within any service area over which the City of Cedar Hill, Texas has jurisdiction, shall be required to enter into an E-911 emergency service fee agreement with the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, whereby the carrier and the city shall provide for the implementation, maintenance and operation of the E-911 emergency service within the jurisdiction of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. For the purposes of this division and these requirements concerning E-911 emergency service, the term "carrier" shall include, but not be limited to, any local telephone service provider, local telephone service carrier, local telephone service reseller and any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity providing any local telephone service within the jurisdiction of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. For the purposes of this ordinance, the terms "carrier," "provider" or "reseller" shall be synonymous and the requirements of this ordinance shall apply to all. The E-911 emergency service fee agreement shall contain no provision or term inconsistent with applicable Texas statutes or any rules or regulations promulgated, issued or approved by the Public Utility Commission of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 87-939, § 2, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 98-355, § 2, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 18-119. - Restrictions; limitations. 
The E-911 emergency service fee imposed by this division shall be subject to the following restrictions and limitations: 
(1)  The E-911 emergency service fee may only be imposed upon telephone subscribers, local exchange access lines, or their equivalent located within the city limits of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas; 
(2)  The E-911 emergency service fee may not be imposed upon more than one hundred (100) local exchange access lines per telephone subscriber per location; 
(3)  The E-911 emergency service fee may not be imposed upon any coin operated or coin/card reader operated telephone equipment; 
(4)  The E-911 emergency service fee shall be separately stated on each subscriber's bill; 
(5)  The E-911 emergency service fee must have uniform application within the municipal boundaries; 
(6)  The carrier will not be obligated to take any legal action to enforce the collection of any billed E-911 emergency service fee; 
(7)  The carrier will not disconnect any subscriber's telephone service for failure to pay the E-911 emergency service fees; 
(8)  The carrier will remit the collected E-911 emergency service fees to the city on a periodic basis, not more frequently than monthly, or on or before the sixtieth (60th) day after the close of the month in which the fees were collected; 
(9)  The carrier will retain, from its remittance to the city, two (2) percent of the collected E-911 emergency service fees as compensation for providing such collection, or an amount or a rate as may be approved in the E-911 emergency service fee agreement with the carrier; 
(10)  In the event the city council of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, desires to amend the E-911 emergency service fees, it may do so, only consistent with the terms of the E-911 emergency service fee agreement executed between the city and the carrier. When amendments have been approved, the fee schedule attached to this division may be amended to implement those amended fees; 
(11)  The carrier will agree to provide the city with a list of any subscribers who have specifically advised the carrier of their refusal to pay the E-911 emergency service fee. This list shall be provided not more often than once per calendar year; 
(12)  The carrier will retain records of the fees collected pursuant to this division and E-911 emergency service fee agreement between the city and the carrier. Such records shall be retained for a period of at least two (2) years from the date of the collection of the fee; 
(13)  The city may, at its sole cost and expense, audit the carrier's records of the collected fees, but such audits shall occur not more than once annually; 
(14)  The collected E-911 emergency service fees shall be used only to provide for the purchase, installation, operation, maintenance, and upgrade expenses of the E-911 emergency service; 
(15)  The carrier will provide the city with a list of subscribers who have refused to pay the E-911 emergency service fees and such list shall be provided not more than once per calendar year. The carrier will not be obligated to take any legal action to enforce the collection of any billed E-911 emergency service fees; nor will it disconnect any subscriber's telephone service for failure to pay the E-911 emergency service fees. 
(Ord. No. 87-399, § 3, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 93-158, § 2, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 98-355, § 3, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 18-120. - Schedule of fees. 
There is hereby imposed on each telephone subscriber's local exchange access line, or its equivalent, in the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, an E-911 emergency service fee in the amount included on the schedule attached to this division as Exhibit "A," for the monthly charges for each residential line, each business line and each business trunk line serving the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 87-939, § 4, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 93-158, § 3, 6-22-93; Ord. No. 98-355, § 4, 1-13-98) 
Editor's note— Exhibit A is not set out herein but is available in the office of the city secretary.  
Sec. 18-121. - Amendment of fees. 
In the event the city council of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, desires to amend the E-911 emergency service fees, it may due so, only consistent with the terms of the E-911 emergency service fee agreement executed between the city and the carrier. When amendments have been approved, the fee schedule attached to this division may be amended to implement those amended fees. 
(Ord. No. 87-939, § 5, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 98-355, § 5, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 18-122. - Records; retention; audit. 
The carrier will retain records of the fees collected pursuant to this division and E-911 emergency service fee agreement between the city and the carrier. Such records shall be retained for a period of at least two (2) years from the date of the collection of the fee. The city may, at its sole cost and expense, audit the carrier's records of the collected fees, but such audits shall occur not more than once annually. 
(Ord. No. 87-939, § 6, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 98-355, § 6, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 18-123. - Collection of fee; remittance to city. 
The carrier will remit the collected E-911 emergency service fees to the city on a periodic basis, not more frequently than monthly, or on or before the sixtieth (60th) day after the close of the month in which the fees were collected. The carrier will retain, from its remittance to the city, two (2) percent of the collected E-911 emergency service fees as compensation for providing such collection, or an amount or a rate as may be approved in the E-911 emergency service fee agreement with the carrier. 
(Ord. No. 87-939, § 7, 11-24-87; Ord. No. 98-355, § 7, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 18-124. - VoIP Positioning Center Operator Minimum Requirements. 
The City of Cedar Hill codifies the adoption of Texas Administrative Code Title 1, Part 12, Chapter 251, Rule 251.14 and requires all VoIP Positioning Center (VPC) Operators comply to provide end-users of IP-enabled voice service providers (VSPs) with a consistent level of 9-1-1 service that is comparable to wireline E-911 emergency service. 
(Ord. No. 2015-557, § 1, 4-28-15)  
Secs. 18-125—18-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, adopted Feb. 11, 2003, amended art. IV, §§ 18-141—18-199, in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to similar subject matter as enacted by Ord. No. 95-233, §§ 1—16, adopted Sept. 26, 1995; as amended. 
 
Sec. 18-141. - Purpose and policy. 
This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of Cedar Hill and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(6)  To enable the control authority to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. This article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-142. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the public works director (PWD) shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the PWD may be delegated by the PWD to other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-143. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD: 	Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR: 	Code of Federal Regulations 
COD: 	Chemical oxygen demand 
CRWS: 	Trinity River Authority of Texas Central Regional Wastewater System 
EPA: 	U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
gpd: 	gallons per day 
mg/l: 	milligrams per liter 
NPDES: 	National pollutant discharge elimination system 
POTW: 	Publicly owned treatment works 
PWD: 	Public works director 
RCRA: 	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
RORWS: 	Trinity River Authority of Texas Red Oak Regional Wastewater System 
SIC: 	Standard industrial classification 
SIU: 	Significant industrial user 
TCEQ: 	Texas Commission on Environmental Quality 
TMCRWS: 	Authority of Texas Ten Mile Creek Regional Wastewater System 
TPDES: 	Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
TRA: 	Trinity River Authority 
TSS: 	Total suspended solids 
TTO: 	Total toxic organics 
U.S.C.: 	United States Code 
 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-144. - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
Act or "the Act." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority. The Regional Administrator of EPA, or the director of a state agency delegated to act on EPA's behalf with an approved pretreatment program (e.g. Director of TCEQ). 
Authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD. The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
City. The City or the City Council of Cedar Hill. 
Composite sample. A sample that is collected over time, formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples. The sample may be composited either as a time composite sample: composed of discrete sample aliquots collected at constant time intervals providing a sample irrespective of stream flow; or as a flow proportional composite sample: collected either as a constant sample volume at time intervals proportional to flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases while maintaining a constant time interval between the aliquots. 
Control authority. Trinity River Authority of Texas as holder of the NPDES permit. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial user. An industry that discharges wastewater into the wastewater system. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the control authority's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); 40 CFR 503 sludge regulations; any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act and 30 TAC 312; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Normal wastewater. Wastewater which the average concentration of suspended solids and five (5) day BOD does not exceed two hundred fifty (250) mg/l each. 
NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit program of the Environmental Protection Agency, and/or the permit program of the state agency delegated to act on EPA's behalf with an approved pretreatment program (e.g. TPDES or Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System). 
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the control authority's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards. Pretreatment standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 18-145 hereinbelow. 
Public works director (PWD). The person designated by the city who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or a duly authorized representative. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A treatment works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the city and/or the control authority. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
Shall is mandatory; May is permissive. 
Significant industrial user. 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 18-145, hereinbelow. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
Storm water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Suspended solids. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Total toxic organics. The sum of the masses or concentration of specific toxic organic compounds found in industrial user's discharge at a concentration greater than 0.01 mg/l. For categorical and non-categorical SIU's the TTO list is 40 CFR 122 Appendix D, Table 2, unless specifically designated in a particular categorical classification. 
User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. 
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater treatment plant ortreatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-145. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-up flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having corrosive properties capable of causing damage or injury to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the POTW, as per the specific prohibition in the applicable local limits in section 18-147. In no case shall wastewater containing a pH less than 5.0 be discharged unless the POTW is specifically designed to accommodate such discharges; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, blockage, or damage to the POTW. 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (65°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the PWD and the control authority in accordance with section 18-154 hereinbelow; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the applicable NPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the PWD and the control authority; 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the PWD and/or the control authority in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than specified in the applicable local limits in section 18-147. 
(18)  A discharge of water, normal domestic wastewater, or industrial waste that which in quantity of flow exceeds, for a duration of longer than fifteen (15) minutes, more than four (4) times the average twenty-four-hour flow during normal operations of the industry; 
(19)  Insecticides and herbicides in concentrations that are not amenable to treatment; 
(20)  Polychlorinated biphenyls; 
(21)  Garbage that is not properly shredded to such an extent that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in wastewater mains, with no particle having greater than one-half (½) inch cross-sectional dimension; 
(22)  Wastewater or industrial waste generated or produced outside the city, unless approval in writing from the PWD and the control authority has given to the person discharging waste; or, 
(23)  Without the approval of the PWD and the control authority, a substance or pollutant other than industrial waste, normal domestic wastewater, septic tank waste or chemical toilet waste that is of a toxic or hazardous nature, regardless of whether or not it is amenable to treatment, including but not limited to bulk or packaged chemical products. 
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-146. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the PWD may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the PWD shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-147. - Local limits. 
The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge or cause or permit to be discharged, wastewater containing in excess of the following maximum allowable discharge limits into the following systems: 
Toxic Pollutant 	TRA Central Instantaneous Max Limits (mg/l) 	TRA Ten Mile Creek Instantaneous Max Limits (mg/l) 	TRA Red Oak Creek Instantaneous Max Limits (mg/l) 
Arsenic 	0.2 	0.30 	0.100 
Barium 	- 	- 	1.000 
Cadmium 	0.1 	0.10 	0.1000 
Chromium 	2.9 	4.00 	1.000 
Copper 	2.3 	2.40 	1.500 
Cyanide 	0.5 	1.71 	2.00 
Lead 	0.9 	2.00 	1.000 
Manganese 	- 	- 	1.500 
Mercury 	0.0004 	0.0002 	0.005 
Molybdenum 	0.8 	3.74 	
Nickel 	4.6 	4.94 	1.000 
Selenium 	0.1 	0.27 	0.050 
Silver 	0.8 	0.16 	0.100 
Zinc 	8.0 	10.00 	2.000 
Oil & Grease 	200 	200 	100 
Total Toxic Organics 	2.13 	2.13 	1.000 
pH 	5.5 to 11.0 Standard Units 	5.5 to 11.0 Standard Units 	6.0 to 10.0 Standard Units 
 
The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. The PWD may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03; Ord. No. 2009-380, § 1, 2-24-09)  
Sec. 18-148. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-149. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The PWD may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-150. - Plant loading. 
No industry shall discharge wastewater containing a BOD or TSS loading that causes the city's prorata share of the total BOD or TSS loading to the POTW system to exceed the city's prorata share of the total flow to the POTW system. (Example: If the city contributes twenty-five (25) percent of the total wastewater flow to the system, the city's cumulative BOD or TSS loading to the system, as measured at the city's points of entry to the system, shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total BOD or TSS loading to the system.) 
Any industry with a wastewater strength that will cause the city's cumulative wastewater loading, at the city's points of entry, to exceed the city's prorata share of the total wastewater loading based upon flow, shall be required to install pretreatment facilities to reduce its wastewater strength to an acceptable level. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-151. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 18-145 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, the control authority, or the PWD, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the PWD for review, and shall be acceptable to the PWD before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-152. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the PWD may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and require such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The PWD may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the PWD, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the PWD and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter, or other control device as deemed necessary by the PWD. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-153. - Slug control plans. 
At least once every two (2) years, the PWD shall evaluate whether each permitted significant industrial user needs a slug control plan. The PWD may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. A slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the PWD of any slug discharge, as required by section 18-173 hereinbelow; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-154. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septage waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the PWD, and at such times as are established by the PWD. Such waste shall not violate sections 18-145—18-150 of this article or any other requirements established by the city. The PWD and/or control authority may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(b)  Septage waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of generator, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-155. - Wastewater analysis. 
When requested by the PWD, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within ten (10) days of the request. The PWD is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-156. - Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the PWD, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 18-157 of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The PWD may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 18-184 through 18-195 of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-157. - Wastewater discharge permitting—existing connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the PWD for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 18-159 of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the PWD. If, in the PWD judgment, the passing of the article does not significantly affect the industrial user's current permit, then the existing permit will continue through to the expiration date. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-158. - Same—new connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 18-159 herein below, must be filed at least sixty (60) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-159. - Wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The PWD may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by section 18-168(b) herein below; 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the PWD to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-160. - Application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-161. - Wastewater discharge permit—Decisions. 
The PWD will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the PWD will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The PWD may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-162. - Same—Duration. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the PWD. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-163. - Same—Contents. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the PWD to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with section 18-165 herein below, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the PWD to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-164. - Same—Modification. 
The PWD may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to POTW, POTW personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-165. - Same—Transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least sixty (60) days advance notice to the PWD and the PWD approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the PWD must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-166. - Same—Revocation. 
The PWD may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the PWD of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the PWD of changed conditions pursuant to section 18-172 herein below; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the PWD timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-167. - Same—Reissuance. 
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit re-issuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 18-159 hereinabove, a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-168. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the PWD a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b) below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that will become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the PWD a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured or estimated average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the PWD, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 18-177 herein below. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 18-178 herein below. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 18-169 hereinbelow. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 18-159 hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-169. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection 18-168(b)(7) herein above: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of minor events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the PWD no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the PWD. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-170. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the PWD a report containing the information described in subsection 18-168(b)(4)—(6) hereinabove. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 18-160 hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-171. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the PWD but in no case less than once every six (6) months, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. At the city's discretion, sampling and analysis may be performed by the city in lieu of industrial monitoring. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 18-160 hereinabove. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the PWD, using the procedures prescribed in section 18-177 and 18-178 herein below, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-172. - Reports of changed conditions. 
Each user must notify the PWD of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. 
(1)  The PWD may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 18-159 hereinabove. 
(2)  The PWD may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 18-161 hereinabove or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 18-164 hereinabove in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty (20) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants that are determined to be of concern. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-173. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the city and the control authority of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the PWD, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph A, above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-174. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the PWD as the PWD may require. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-175. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the PWD within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the PWD within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the PWD monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the PWD samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-176. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 18-172 hereinabove. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 18-168, 18-170 and 18-171 hereinabove. 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (a) above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the PWD, the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-177. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-178. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the PWD may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-179. - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-180. - Record keeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the PWD and/or control authority. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-181. - Right of entry—Inspection and sampling. 
The PWD and/or the control authority, TCEQ, or USEPA or their designated representative shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow inspecting or sampling person ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city, control authority, TCEQ or USEPA will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The PWD shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. All sampling and analysis performed by the PWD and/or control authority to monitor compliance shall be at the expense of the industrial user. 
(3)  The PWD may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated, at a minimum, annually to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the PWD and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the inspecting or sampling person access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(6)  In accordance with 40 CFR 403, the city shall inspect and monitor each permitted industrial user a minimum of once per year. If the city elects to perform compliance monitoring for the industry, then the city will monitor the industry a minimum of semi-annually. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-182. - Search warrants. 
If the PWD and/or control authority has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the PWD may seek issuance of a search warrant from the an appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-183. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city and/or control authority, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-184. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The PWD shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the PWD and/or control authority believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the PWD's or control authority's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the PWD determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-185. - Notification of violation. 
When the PWD finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the PWD may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the PWD. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the PWD to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-186. - Show cause hearing. 
The PWD may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the PWD and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-187. - Compliance orders. 
When the PWD finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the PWD may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-188. - Cease and desist orders. 
When the PWD finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the PWD may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-189. - Emergency suspensions. 
The PWD may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The PWD may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the PWD may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The PWD may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the PWD that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 18-190 herein below are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the PWD prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under sections 18-187 or 18-190 herein. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-190. - Termination of discharge. 
In addition to the provisions in section 18-166 hereinabove, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in section 18-146 hereinabove. 
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 18-187 hereinabove why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the PWD shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-191. - Injunctive relief. 
When the PWD finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the PWD may petition the municipal court through the city attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The PWD may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-192. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The PWD may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-193. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, per day, or imprisonment as decided by an appropriate court, or both. 
(b)  A user who introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to the same penalties described in subsection (a) above. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(c)  A user who makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to the same penalties described in subsection (a) above. 
(d)  Criminal responsibility. A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this article. A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this article if: 
(1)  The person commits or assists in the commission of a violation, or causes or permits another person to commit a violation; or 
(2)  The person owns or manages the property or facilities determined to be the cause of the illegal discharge under sections 18-145, 18-146, 18-147, 18-154 or 18-156 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-194. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The PWD may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the PWD may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the PWD is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-195. - Applicability of more stringent regulations. 
(a)  If national pretreatment standards, categorical or otherwise, more stringent than the discharge limits prescribed in this article are promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency for certain industries, the more stringent national pretreatment standards will apply to the affected industrial user. A violation of the more stringent national pretreatment standards will also be considered a violation of this article. 
(b)  Applicability of more stringent discharge limits. An industrial user within the city who discharges industrial waste ultimately received and treated by another governmental entity pursuant to a wholesale wastewater contract or a reciprocal agreement with the city is subject to the following additional rules: 
(1)  If the governmental entity has more stringent discharge limits than those prescribed by this article, or by a discharge permit issued hereunder, because the United States Environmental Protection Agency requires the more stringent discharge limits as part of the governmental entity's wastewater pretreatment program, the more stringent discharge limits shall prevail. 
(2)  The PWD is authorized to issue a discharge permit to an industrial user affected by subsection (1), to insure notice of and compliance with the more stringent discharge limits. If the industrial user already has a discharge permit, the PWD may amend the permit to apply and enforce the more stringent discharge limits. An industrial user shall submit to the PWD an expected compliance date and an installation schedule if the more stringent discharge limits necessitate technological or mechanical adjustments to discharge facilities or plant processes. 
(3)  If the PWD chooses not to issue or amend a permit under subsection (2), the PWD shall notify the affected industrial user in writing of the more stringent discharge limits and their effective date. Regardless of whether or not a permit is issued or amended, an industrial user shall be given a reasonable opportunity to comply with the more stringent discharge limits. 
(4)  The more stringent discharge limits cease to apply upon termination of the city's wholesale wastewater contract or reciprocal agreement with the governmental entity, or upon modification or elimination of the limits by the government entity or the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The PWD shall take the appropriate action to notify the affected industrial user of an occurrence under this subsection (4). 
(c)  Variances in compliance dates. The PWD may grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry when, in the PWD's opinion, such action is necessary to achieve pretreatment or corrective measures. In no case shall the PWD grant a variance in compliance dates to an industry affected by national categorical pretreatment standards beyond the compliance dates established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(d)  Authority to regulate. The PWD may establish regulations, not in conflict with this article or other laws, to control the disposal and discharge of industrial waste into the wastewater system and to insure compliance with the city's pretreatment enforcement program with all applicable pretreatment regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. The regulations established shall, where applicable, be made part of any discharge permit issued to an industrial user by the PWD. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-196. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations 
In an action brought in federal court only: 
Upset Provision 
A.  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
B.  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (C), below, are met. 
C.  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the PWD within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset, if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days: 
(a)  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
(b)  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
(c)  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
D.  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
E.  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
F.  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
In an action brought in municipal or state court only: 
Act of God Provision 
A.  An event that would otherwise be a violation that is caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe is not a violation. 
B.  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe shall have the burden of proof. 
C.  In the event that A. and B. above has been demonstrated the user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-197. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(2)  Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  (1)  If a user knows in advance of the need for bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the PWD, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the PWD of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The PWD may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(d)  (1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the PWD may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(2)  The PWD may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the PWD determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 18-198. - Wastewater treatment rates (Reserved).  
Sec. 18-199. - Pretreatment charges and fees (optional). 
(a)  The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(6)  Fees for treating abnormal strength wastes; 
(7)  Fees incurred from an upset, bypass or unauthorized discharge. 
(b)  Surcharge. The city may surcharge industrial users for the treating of abnormal strength wastes. Water or wastes having (1) A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than two hundred fifty (250) parts per million (ppm) by weight or (2) Containing more than two hundred fifty (250) parts per million by weight of total suspended solids shall be subject to the review and approval of the PWD. Where the PWD has approved the admission of (1) or (2) above into the POTW, that discharge may be subject to a surcharge as determined by the PWD. In no case shall a discharge be accepted that will prevent the POTW from meeting its limits. 
The surcharge will be assessed according to the following formula each month using the most current pollutant concentration data and the current months' wastewater flow: 
Surcharge = Q/1,000,000 × [a(BOD - x) + b(TSS - y)][8.34] 
Where: 
Q = flow in gallons 
8.34 = weight in pounds of one gallon of water 
x = normal limits of BOD in domestic wastewater expressed in milligrams per liter 
y = normal limits of TSS in domestic wastewater expressed in milligrams per liter 
a = unit cost of treatment per pound of BOD 
b = unit cost of treatment per pound of TSS 
BOD = measured amount of BOD, in mg/l 
TSS = measured amount of TSS, in mg/l 
A surcharge is an additional charge by the POTW for the increased cost of handling discharge of unusual strength and character and shall not serve as a variance to the requirements of this article. Exercise of this provision shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 2003-142, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Secs. 18-200—18-220. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— The provisions set out in this article as Divs. 2—4, §§ 18-91—18-94, 18-96 and 18-97 and 18-117—18-123, were formerly codified as Art. II, Divs. 2, 3 and 5, §§ 18-31—18-34, 18-46 and 18-47 and 18-67—18-73, respectively. Such provisions were designated at the discretion of the editor in order to facilitate the codification of new water and sewer provisions adopted by Ord. No. 89-1017 on Mar. 14, 1989, and codified as Art. II, Divs. 1—6, of this chapter. See also the editor's note to Art. II herein. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-221. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. If a word or term used in this article is not contained in the following list, its definition, or other technical terms used, shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the current edition of the "Manual of Cross Connection Control," published by the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California. 
Air gap means a physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or appurtenance and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An "approved air gap separation" shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device—in no case less than one (1) inch. 
Approved backflow prevention assembly or backflow assembly or assembly means an assembly to counteract backpressures or prevent backsiphonage. This assembly must appear on the list of approved assemblies issued by USC Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research. 
Auxiliary supply means any water source or system other than the public water system, that may be available in the building or on the property. 
Backflow means the flow in the direction opposite to the intended flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the water system of the city's water. 
Backpressure means any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow and the introduction of fluids, mixtures or substances from any source other than the intended source. 
Backsiphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixture or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
Blowout tapping or tapping blowout means a Y-type strainer that incorporates female iron pipe threads to facilitate flushing the strainer screen while on line. 
Boresight or boresight to daylight means providing adequate drainage for backflow prevention assemblies installed in vaults through the use of an unobstructed drain pipe. 
City means City of Cedar Hill. 
City manager means the city's appointed manager or his designee. 
Contamination means the entry into or presence in a public water supply system of any substance which may be deleterious to health and/or quality of the water. 
Cross connection means any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is connected, directly or indirectly (actual or potential), with any other non-potable water system, used water system or auxiliary water supply, sewer, drain conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, evaporative/water coolers, air conditioner units, fire protection system, or any other assembly which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage, or other liquid of unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of contaminating the public water system as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change over assemblies, or other temporary or permanent assemblies through which, or because of which, backflow may occur are considered to be cross connections. 
Cross connection control inspector is an individual who has fulfilled the requirements set out in TNRCC rules and regulations for public water systems, paragraph 290.46(j), and is recognized by the city. 
Customer service inspector or CSI is an individual who has fulfilled the requirements set out in TNRCC rules and regulations for public water systems, paragraph 290.46(j)(I). 
Degree of hazard means the low or high hazard classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential cross connections. 
Double check valve backflow prevention assembly or double check assembly or double check means an assembly which consists of two (2) independently operating check valves which are spring-loaded or weighted. The assembly comes complete with a shut-off valve on each side of the checks (check valve), as well as test cocks to test the checks for tightness. 
Health hazard means an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to health. 
High hazard means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connection that potentially could allow a substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable water supply. 
Inspector means a person that is a licensed plumbing inspector and/or a cross connection control inspector recognized by the city. 
Low hazard means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connection that potentially could allow a substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to one's health to backflow into the potable water supply. 
Mobile unit shall mean any operation, i.e. vehicles, tanks, trailer tanks, which may have the potential to introduce contaminants into a potable water system. They include, but are not limited to, carpet cleaning vehicles, water hauling vehicles, street cleaning vehicles, power wash operations, landscape/lawn care vehicles and pest control vehicles. 
Nonresidential use shall include all uses not specifically included in "residential uses" defined above. 
Plumbing Code means the Plumbing Code and amendments as currently adopted by the city council of Cedar Hill. 
Plumbing hazard means an internal or plumbing-type cross connection in a consumer's potable water system than may be either a pollutional or a contamination-type hazard. 
Point-of-use isolation means the appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at which the actual or potential cross connection exists. 
Pollutional hazard means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. The maximum degree of intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances. 
Potable water supply means any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use. 
Premises means any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures, and structures located on it. 
Premises isolation means the appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water system and the water user. 
Pressure vacuum breaker assembly or PBVA or PVB means an assembly consisting of a spring-loaded check valve loaded to the closed position and an independently-operating air inlet valve loaded to the open position, and installed as a unit with and between two (2) shut-off valves and with suitable connections for testing. 
Public water system or System means any public or privately owned water system which supplies water for public domestic use. The system must meet all the health requirements set forth by the TNRCC. The system will include all services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment use in the process of producing, treating, storing or conveying water for public consumption. 
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure principle assembly or RP assembly or RP shall mean an assembly containing two (2) independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically-operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. 
Residential use shall include single-family dwellings, duplexes, multiplex housing and apartments where the individual units are each on a separate meter; or, in cases where two (2) or more units are served by one (1) meter. 
Service connection is the point of delivery at which the public water system connects to the private supply line or lateral. 
System hazard means an actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or consumer's potable water supply or of a pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
Tester means a person that has met all TNRCC requirements to be a certified backflow prevention assembly technician. 
(1)  A "general tester" is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on any residential, nonresidential, commercial, industrial or irrigation service except fireline. 
(2)  A "fireline tester" is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on firelines only. The state fire marshal's office requires that a person performing maintenance on firelines must be employed by an approved fireline contractor. 
Thermal expansion means the increase in pressure caused by the heating or rise in the temperature of water. When a system becomes closed due to the installation of a backflow assembly, this problem can be acute. 
TNRCC means Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission. 
Used water means water supplied by a public water system to a water user's system after it has passed through the service connection. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 1(1.01), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-222. - Purpose and policy. 
Pursuant to Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Sections 290.44 and 290.46, it is the responsibility of the City of Cedar Hill to protect its drinking water supply by instituting and enforcing a cross connection program. The purpose of this article, therefore, is to comply with the above-cited regulatory requirements and to protect the water supply of the City of Cedar Hill from contamination or pollution due to any cross connections. 
The city shall not install or maintain a water service connection to any premises unless the water supply is protected as required by all applicable laws and regulations of the City of Cedar Hill and the State of Texas. Service of water to any premises or customer may be discontinued by the city if a backflow prevention assembly required by this article is not of the proper type, is not approved by the city, is not installed, tested successfully, and maintained, or if a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, and/or bypassed. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 1(1.02), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-223. - Backflow prevention assembly requirements. 
A certified cross connection inspector employed by or under contract with the city shall determine the type and location of backflow assembly to be installed within the city's water service area. The assembly shall be required in each of the following circumstances, but the inspector is in no way limited to the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the nature and extent of any activity at a premises, or the materials used in connection with any activity at a premises, or materials stored at a premises, could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply; 
(2)  When a premises has one (1) or more cross connections as that term is defined in section 18-221; 
(3)  When internal cross connections are present that are not correctable; 
(4)  When intricate plumbing arrangements are present that make it impractical to ascertain whether cross connections exist also known as ghost plumbing; 
(5)  When a premises has a repeated history of cross connections being established or re-established; 
(6)  When entry to a premises is restricted so that inspections for cross connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to assure that cross connections do not exist; 
(7)  When materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur, a health hazard could result; 
(8)  When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed by an inspector to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations; 
(9)  When an appropriate cross connection survey report form has not been filed with the city manager or his designee; 
(10)  All new commercial and industrial construction will be required to install a backflow assembly at the meter. This assembly will be a minimum of a double check or commensurate with the degree of hazard as determined by the city's cross connection inspector; 
(11)  When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of such building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed at the service connection to provide protection of the public water supply in the event of the most hazardous use of the building; 
(12)  An approved backflow assembly shall be required to be installed at the service connection of new residential services if it has been determined by a cross connection inspector that an actual or potential cross connection exists. This assembly shall be commensurate with the degree of actual or potential hazard; 
(13)  Any used water return system that has received approval from the city manager or his designee; 
(14)  If a point-of-use assembly has not been tested or repaired as required by the ordinance, the installation of a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection; 
(15)  If a cross connection inspector or the city's designated inspector determines that additions or rearrangements have been made to the plumbing system without the proper permits as required by the city's current plumbing code, premise isolation shall be required; 
(16)  All multistory buildings or any structure with a booster pump, elevated storage tank or is deemed a "high hazard"; 
(17)  Retrofitting shall be required on all high hazard connections and wherever else the city manager or his designee deems retrofitting necessary; 
(18)  An approved double detector check valve assembly shall be the minimum protection on all new fire sprinkler systems. An RP assembly shall be installed if any solution other than potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system. Retrofitting shall be required on all high hazard systems, where improper maintenance has occurred, and/or wherever an inspector deems necessary; 
(19)  All lawn irrigation systems, residential and nonresidential, will have a minimum of a double check assembly, an RP assembly will be required if any solution or any other source of supply is used or if it is deemed necessary by an inspector. 
(20)  All auxiliary water supplies. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 1(1.03), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-224. - Mobile units. 
(a)  A person who owns or operates any vehicle that uses water from the city's public water system shall obtain a use permit from the city manager or his designee before accessing the public water system. The city manager or his designee may require a fixed air gap or a backflow assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard mounted either on the vehicle or piping. 
(b)  The failure of the owner or operator of the vehicle to comply with this article shall be grounds for the city to revoke any permit or license required under the city code to operate the vehicle or the business for which such vehicle is used. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee may deny a permit to any person who is not in compliance with this article who has a history of violating the requirements of this article. 
(d)  All assemblies used to protect the water supply when using a mobile unit must abide by the maintenance and testing sections of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 1(1.04), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-225. - Multiple service connections. 
Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply and/or fire protection shall have a backflow assembly at each service connection. The assembly shall be commensurate with the degree of the highest potential hazard. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 1(1.05), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-226. - Plumbing Code. 
As a condition of water service, customers shall install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with the Plumbing Code. If there is a conflict between this article and the Plumbing Code, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 1(1.06), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-227. - Thermal expansion. 
It is the responsibility of the property owner to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion, if a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow assembly. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 1(1.07), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-228. - Pressure loss. 
Any water pressure drop caused by the installation of a backflow assembly shall not be the responsibility of the city. The city may give reasonable assistance to a property owner regarding information on adequate sizing of assemblies and proper plumbing practices to provide for required pressure and flows. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 1(1.08), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-229. - Residential service connections. 
Any residential property which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross connection, shall be equipped with an approved backflow prevention assembly installed in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 1(1.09), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-230. - Wholesale water customers. 
It shall be the responsibility of wholesale water customer of the city to implement an approved cross connection program within their jurisdiction and/or install backflow prevention assemblies on the water mains at the point of entry serving their jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 1(1.10), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-231. - Responsibilities of owners, agents and/or lessees. 
It is the responsibility of all property owners, agents and/or lessees to abide by the conditions of this article. The owner of leased or rented premises is responsible for the installation, testing and repair of all backflow assemblies on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 8(8.01), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-232. - Access to premises. 
(a)  Every person provided water service by the city directly or indirectly shall, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., permit the city manager or his designee to enter their premises and buildings for the purpose of inspecting pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the water is used to determine compliance with this article. 
(b)  If any water user refuses access to their premises for inspection by an inspector, the water user shall install a reduced pressure principle assembly at the service connection to the premises. 
(c)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises to be inspected shall be promptly removed by the water user at the written or verbal request of the city manager or his designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 9(9.01), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-233. - Rights-of-way encroachment. 
(a)  No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon or within any city right-of-way except as provided by this section. 
(b)  A backflow prevention assembly required by this article may be installed upon or within any city right-of-way only if the owner proves to the city that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, and installing it in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic or utilities. The city retains the right to approve the location, height, depth, enclosure, and other requisites of the assembly prior to its installation. 
(c)  Any assembly or portion of an assembly which extends aboveground shall be located no closer than eighteen (18) inches from the back of the curb. 
(d)  A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner's sole expense, relocate a backflow prevention assembly which encroaches upon any city right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for street or utility construction, repairs or for purposes of public safety. 
(e)  All city codes relevant to easement issues will be recognized by this article. 
(f)  The city shall not be liable for any damage done to or caused by an assembly installed in a right-of-way. 
(g)  All permits and inspections required by the city to perform work in the right-of-way shall be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 10(10.01), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-234. - Permits. 
All installations of backflow prevention assemblies require a plumbing permit from the code enforcement office. Permit fees for the installation of backflow devices will be in accordance with the current plumbing code fees. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 11, 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-235. - Fees. 
There shall be an annual nonrefundable registration fee for each nonresidential backflow prevention assembly device. The registration fee to be charged for a backflow prevention assembly shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per each separate device due on or before installation of said device and, thereafter, annually. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 12, 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-236. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to enforce the provision of this article by any one (1) or more of the enforcement mechanisms set forth in this article. 
(b)  The inspectors, agents or representatives of the city charged with enforcement of this article shall be deemed to be performing a governmental function for the benefit of the general public and neither the city, the city manager or his designee, nor the individual inspector, agent, or representative of the city engaged in inspection or endorsement activities under this article when acting in good faith and without malice shall ever be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted, caused, or alleged to have been caused, as a result of the performance of such governmental function. 
(c)  Failure on the part of any customer to discontinue the use of all cross connections and to physically separate cross connections is sufficient cause for the immediate discontinuance of public water service to the premises. 
(d)  Failure on the part of any customer (property owner, lessee or mobile unit owner/operator) to bring his property into compliance with this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not to exceed the maximum allowable by law. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(e)  Any person who has knowingly made any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained pursuant to this ordinance or any order issued under it, or who has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this ordinance shall upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed the maximum allowable by law. 
(f)  A person is criminally responsible for a violation of the ordinance if the person: 
(1)  Commits or assists in the commission of a violation, or 
(2)  Is a property owner, tenant, lessee, permittee or other person in control of the premises or mobile unit determined to be the source of a violation. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 13(13.01), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-237. - Emergency suspension of utility service. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee may, without prior notice, suspend water service to any premises when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or potential backflow which: 
(1)  Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of persons; or 
(2)  Presents or may present imminent and substantial threat of the city's public water supply. 
(b)  As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service, the city manager or his designee shall notify the owner, lessee, or agent-in-charge of the premises of the suspension in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall order such person to correct the cross connection which allowed the backflow to occur. When time permits, the city manager or his designee should also notify the owner or person in charge prior to suspending water service. 
(c)  If the person fails to comply with an order issued under subsection (b), the city manager or his designee may take such steps as the city manager or his designee deems necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the public water supply or to minimize danger to persons. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee shall not reinstate suspended services until: 
(1)  The person presents proof, satisfactory to the city manager or his designee, that the backflow has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected, 
(2)  The person pays the city for all costs the city incurred in responding to the backflow or potential backflow, and 
(3)  The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service. 
(e)  A person whose service has been suspended may appeal such enforcement action to the city manager or his designee, in writing, within ten (10) days of notice of the suspension. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service to premises suspended pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city manager or his designee. 
(g)  The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this article or allowed by law. Exercise of this remedy shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 13(13.02), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-238. - Nonemergency termination of water supply. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee may terminate the city-provided water supply of any water user who violates the following conditions: 
(1)  Refusing the city manager or his designee reasonable access to the water user's premises for the purpose of inspection, 
(2)  Hindering or denying the city manager or his designee access to backflow prevention assemblies, 
(3)  Failing to install a reduced pressure principle assembly as required by section 18-291, 
(4)  Failing to install and maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this article, or 
(5)  Failing to install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing systems in accordance with the Plumbing Code. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee will notify a water user of the proposed termination of his water supply. The water user may petition the city manager or his designee for reconsideration and hearing within ten (10) days of service termination. 
(c)  Exercise of this enforcement option by the city manager or his designee shall not be a bar to, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the water user. 
(d)  The city manager or his designee shall not reinstate suspended services until: 
(1)  The person presents proof, satisfactory to the city manager or his designee, that the backflow, actual or potential, has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected, and 
(2)  The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 13(13.03), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-239. - Water lien procedure. 
When delinquent charges remain unpaid the procedures as prescribed by the City of Cedar Hill of Ordinances, article II, sections 18-27, water lien procedure and section 18-28. Notice of water lien shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 13(13.04), 11-10-98)  
Secs. 18-240—18-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATION AND INSPECTION 
 
Sec. 18-251. - Customer service inspection. 
(a)  Pursuant to TNRCC Water System Regulations, Sections 290.44 and 290.46, a customer service inspection as outlined in the aforementioned regulations for cross connection control shall be completed by the city prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Water service to a newly constructed facility or previously existing premises, 
(2)  After any material improvement to building(s) or premises, 
(3)  Any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises served by the public water system of the city, 
(4)  The regulatory authority deems it necessary. 
(b)  Customer service inspections shall ensure that no pipe or fitting containing more than eight (8) percent lead exists in private plumbing facilities installed on or after July 1, 1988; and that no solder or flux containing more than two-tenths (0.2) of one (1) percent lead is being used on private plumbing installations. 
(c)  Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a new construction facility(s) until after the customer service inspection is completed. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 2(2.01), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-252. - Certification of cross connection and customer service inspectors. 
(a)  Inspectors performing cross connection control and/or customer service inspection duties within the city must be approved by the city manager or his designee and shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be employed by or under contract with the city. 
(2)  Attend a cross connection control inspector certification training course approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 3(3.01), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-253. - Certification of backflow prevention assembly testers. 
(a)  All backflow assembly testers operating within the city shall be certified in accordance with all applicable regulations of TNRCC. No person shall operate as a backflow prevention assembly tester within the city without first being registered annually with the city manager or his designee of the city. 
(b)  At the time of registration, renewal, or upon the city manager or his designee's request, each person certified as a backflow prevention assembly tester shall furnish evidence to show that he/she is insured and bonded to perform services on private property, and has current all required licenses. 
(c)  Persons certified as backflow prevention assembly testers shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Hold a TNRCC approved certification as a backflow tester, 
(2)  Receive confined-space entry training certification, and 
(3)  Maintain general commercial liability insurance, including independent contractor's liability, completed operations and contractual liability fully insuring tester's liability for injury to or death of employees of the city and third parties, extended to include personal injury liability coverage, and for damages to property of third parties, with combined bodily injury and property damage minimum limit of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence. This policy shall have no coverages removed by exclusions, 
(4)  An annual (January 1 through December 31) registration fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid by each contractor, business or tester for the first certified tester/employee prior to any work commencing within the city. Each additional employee (who is a certified tester) working for a contractor that is registered in the city shall pay an additional ten dollars ($10.00) registration fee per tester. (Fees are due and payable no later than January 31 for the registration year). 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 3(3.02), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-254. - Certified backflow prevention assembly tester responsibilities. 
(a)  No certified backflow assembly tester shall operate within the city without first registering with the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  A registration shall remain in effect provided: 
(1)  The tester maintains eligibility for registration and certification as defined in this article, 
(2)  The tester tests a minimum of fifteen (15) assemblies a year in the North Central Texas area otherwise know as the metroplex, 
(3)  The tester attends and successfully completes a recertification training course every three (3) years, and 
(4)  Registration is not revoked by the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  Upon recertifying, a tester shall renew his/her registration with the city manager or his designee. If a certification remains expired for a period of one (1) year, the tester shall reestablish registration eligibility. 
(d)  Each applicant for registration shall: 
(1)  Provide evidence to the city manager or his designee to establish that the applicant has available the necessary tools and equipment to properly test backflow prevention assemblies. 
(2)  Provide evidence to the city manager or his designee that the applicant has successfully completed "permit confined-space entry training" as specified by Federal Occupational Safety and Health Agency's 29 CFR 1910.146. 
(e)  A registered backflow prevention assembly tester shall: 
(1)  Submit a list identifying all test gauges by the name of the manufacturer, model number, and the serial numbers of each gauge that will be used in testing backflow prevention assemblies, 
(2)  Annually have each recorded test kit tested for accuracy and calibrated according to the current TNRCC regulations; and submit the test results at the time of registration or renewal, 
(3)  Perform competent and accurate certifications of each backflow prevention assembly tested and shall submit complete reports thereof to the city manager or his designee, 
(4)  List registered serial numbers of test gauges on tests and maintenance reports prior to submitting them to the city manager or his designee, 
(5)  Not change the design or operation characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly, 
(6)  Notify the city no less than twenty-four (24) hour prior to any testing within its jurisdiction. The city may find it necessary to have a representative on site for the test, 
(7)  Submit test results to the city within fifteen (15) days of testing, 
(8)  Provide the completed test report to the property owners and/or persons in charge of the premises within fifteen (15) days, and 
(9)  Maintain testing and/or repair records for a minimum of three (3) years (State of Texas requirement). 
(f)  After notice and hearing, the city manager or his designee may revoke a registration if the city manager or his designee determines that the tester: 
(1)  Has made false, incomplete, or inaccurate assembly testing reports, 
(2)  Has used inaccurate gauges, 
(3)  Has used improper testing procedures, 
(4)  Has expired insurance, 
(5)  Is not in compliance with safety regulations, 
(6)  Has failed to submit the required information on his/her test kits or failed to calibrate gauges annually as required by subsection (e) above, or 
(7)  Has violated any other provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 4(4.01), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-255. - Cost of compliance. 
The cost of complying with these regulations shall be the responsibility of the property owners, agents and/or lessees. These costs include but are not limited to purchasing, installation, testing and repair of the assembly. These costs shall include point-of-use and premises isolation assemblies. Any cost incurred by the city to enforce this article is the responsibility of the property owners, agents and lessees. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 5(5.01), 11-10-98)  
Secs. 18-256—18-270. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ASSEMBLY REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 18-271. - Testing of assemblies. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee will inspect and test, or cause to be inspected and tested, all assemblies in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Immediately after installation, 
(2)  A minimum of once a year for all reduced pressure principle assemblies, 
(3)  Immediately after repair, removal or disturbance, 
(4)  Any premises that has RP assemblies as point-of-use protection without high hazard premises isolation protection must be tested every six (6) months. 
(b)  Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the city manager or his designee deems necessary. 
(c)  All assembly testing shall be performed by a certified and registered backflow prevention assembly tester, in accordance with TNRCC approved testing procedures. 
(d)  It is the responsibility of the property owner to have all assemblies tested in accordance with this article. 
(e)  The city shall not be held liable for damages to an assembly that occurs as a result of or related to testing. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 6(6.01), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-272. - Maintenance of assemblies. 
(a)  A person who owns, operates, or manages premises in which required backflow prevention assemblies are installed, shall maintain such assemblies in proper working order at all times, including repair as required. All maintenance and repair of assemblies shall be done in accordance with all applicable regulations of the TNRCC and this article. 
(b)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained in a manner that allows them to be tested by a method that has been approved by TNRCC. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 6(6.02), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-273. - Installation requirements. 
Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements, to ensure their proper operation and accessibility: 
(1)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with all plumbing codes recognized by the city and this article. The assembly installer shall obtain the required permits prior to installation and shall have the assembly inspected by a certified cross connection inspector as required by the Plumbing Code and/or this article, 
(2)  No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be submerged in water or installed in a location subject to flooding. If a double check valve assembly is installed in a vault, approved plugs (galvanized plugs are not included) shall be maintained in the test ports at all times and adequate drainage shall be provided, 
(3)  Assemblies shall be installed at the point of delivery of the water supply, before any branch in the line, and on private property located just inside the boundary of the city's right-of-way. An inspector may specify other areas for installation of the assembly, 
(4)  The assembly shall be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions, 
(5)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model approved by the city, 
(6)  All vertical installations shall be approved in writing by the city manager or his designee prior to installation, 
(7)  The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for maintenance and testing, 
(8)  If the city manager or his designee grants written permission to install the backflow assembly inside of a building, the assembly shall be readily accessible between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, 
(9)  If an assembly is four (4) inches or larger and is installed five (5) feet or higher above the floor, it shall be equipped with rigid and permanently installed scaffolding acceptable to the city manager or his designee. This installation shall also meet all applicable requirements set out by the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the State of Texas Occupational Safety and Health laws, 
(10)  The property owner shall register all backflow assemblies with the city manager or his designee. Registration shall consist of date of installation, manufacturer, model, serial number of the backflow prevention assembly, initial test report and other related information as may be deemed necessary, 
(11)  Lines shall be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly, and 
(12)  The property owner assumes responsibility for all leaks and damages. The owner shall also see that any vault is kept reasonably free of silt and debris. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 6(6.03), 11-10-98)  
Secs. 18-274—18-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INSTALLATION STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Sections 1—13 of Ord. No. 98-399, adopted Nov. 10, 1998, added provisions as herein set out. See the history note following each section for further derivation thereof. 
Cross reference— Plumbing Code, § 4-116 et seq.; location of water and sewer mains, § 18-47. 
 
Sec. 18-291. - Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP). 
All RP assemblies will be tested in each of the following circumstances immediately upon installation, after repair, and annually: 
(1)  RPs shall be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to the public health if introduced into the potable water system. An RP is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical. An RP is effective against both backsiphonage and backpressure. 
(2)  RPs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served. 
(3)  Premises where non-interruption of water supply is critical shall be provided with two (2) assemblies of the same type installed in parallel. They shall be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the minimum water requirements while the two (2) together will provide the maximum flow required. 
(4)  Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line shall not be installed. 
(5)  The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and shall be located in an area where water damage to buildings or furnishings will not occur from relief valve discharge. An approved air gap funnel assembly may be used to direct minor discharges away from the assembly; this assembly will not control flow in a continuous relief situation. Drain lines shall accommodate full relief valve discharge flow. 
(6)  Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established below. Daylight drain ports shall be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the assembly. 
(7)  All assemblies larger than two (2) inches shall have a minimum of twelve (12) inches on the back side, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock side, and the relief valve opening shall be at least twelve (12) inches plus nominal size of assembly above the floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of six (6) feet is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of twenty-four (24) inches by twenty-four (24) inches is required on all vault lids. All assemblies two (2) inches and smaller shall have at least a six-inch clearance on all sides. 
(8)  All RP assemblies shall be tested in accordance with this article. 
(9)  Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations shall be prohibited without prior written approval of the city manager or his designee. 
(10)  RP assemblies may be installed in a vault only if relief valve discharge can be drained to daylight through a boresight type drain. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow of the assembly and shall be screened on both ends. 
(11)  An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RP assemblies. This air gap shall be at least twice the inside diameter of the incoming supply line as measured vertically above the top rim of the drain and in no case less than one (1) inch. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 7(7.01), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-292. - Double check valve backflow prevention assembly (DC). 
(a)  Double check valve assemblies may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. 
(b)  DCs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served. 
(c)  Premises where non-interruption of water supply is critical shall be provided with two (2) assemblies of the same type installed in parallel. They shall be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the minimum water requirements while the two (2) together will provide the maximum flow required. 
(d)  Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line shall not be installed. 
(e)  The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for testing and maintenance. DCs may be installed below grade, providing all test cocks are fitted with approved pipe plugs. All vaults shall be well drained, constructed of suitable materials, and sized to allow for the minimum clearances established below. 
(f)  Assemblies two (2) inches and smaller shall have at least a three-inch clearance below and on both sides of the assembly, and if located in a vault, the bottom of the assembly shall be not more than twenty-four (24) inches below grade. All assemblies larger than two (2) inches shall have a minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches on the back side, 24 inches on the test cock side, and 12 inches below the assembly. Headroom of 6 feet is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of 24 inches square is required on all vault lids. 
(g)  Vertical installations are allowed on sizes up to and including four (4) inches that meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Internally spring-loaded check valves, 
(2)  Flow is upward through assembly, 
(3)  Manufacturer states their assembly can be used in a vertical position, and 
(4)  Approved by the city manager or his designee. 
(h)  All DC's shall be tested in accordance with this article. 
(i)  Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. No deviations shall be permitted without prior written approval of the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 7(7.02), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-293. - Double detector check valve assembly (DDC). 
Double detector check valve assemblies may be utilized in all installations requiring a double check valve assembly and detector metering. DDCs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for double check valve assemblies (DCs). 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 7(7.03), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-294. - Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB). 
(a)  PVBs may be utilized at point-of-use protection only and where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system PVBs protect against backsiphonage only and shall not be installed where there is potential for backpressure. 
(b)  The assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the highest use outlet or overflow level downstream from the assembly. 
(c)  PVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from water discharge. 
(d)  The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches all around the assembly. 
(e)  PVBs shall be located between twelve (12) inches and sixty (60) inches above ground level. 
(f)  A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly. 
(g)  All PVBs must be tested in compliance with this article. 
(h)  Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case by case basis. No deviations shall be permitted without prior written approval of the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 7(7.04), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-295. - Atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB). 
(a)  AVBs provide minimal protection and are approved for very low hazard application only. AVBs protect against backsiphonage only and are prohibited where there is potential for backpressure. 
(b)  The assembly shall be installed a minimum of six (6) inches above the highest use outlet or overflow level downstream from the assembly. 
(c)  Shutoff valves downstream from the assembly are prohibited. 
(d)  AVBs shall be allowed only for those applications where there is less than twelve (12) hours per day continuous use. 
(e)  AVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage may occur from water discharge. 
(f)  AVBs shall be allowed for point-of-use protection only in accordance with the Plumbing Code. AVB's, in some installations, may not be recognized as adequate protection by the city manager or his designee, so additional protection will be required. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 7(7.05), 11-10-98)  
Sec. 18-296. - Air gap separation. 
(a)  Air gap separations provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. 
(b)  An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel—in no case less than one (1) inch. If splashing is a problem, tubular screens may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a 45-degree angle. The air gap distance is measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses shall not be allowed. 
(c)  Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(d)  Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps when spaced from the inside edge of the spout opening a distance greater than three (3) times the diameter of the effective opening for a single, or a distance greater than four (4) times the effective opening for two (2) intersecting walls. 
(e)  In cases where there are three (3) or more side walls, ribs or similar obstructions extending from the water surface to or above the horizontal plane of the spout opening other than as specified in subsection (d) above, the air gap shall be measured from the top of the wall. 
(f)  The effective opening shall be the minimum cross-sectional area at the seat of the control valve or the supply pipe or tubing which feeds the assembly or outlet. If two (2) or more lines supply one outlet, the effective opening shall be the sum of the cross-sectional areas of the individual supply lines or the area of the single outlet, whichever is smaller. 
(Ord. No. 98-399, § 7(7.06), 11-10-98) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Secs. 18-297—18-310. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-98, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 12, 2002, was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been included as art. VI, §§ 18-311—18-322, at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 18-311. - Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent. 
In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the City of Cedar Hill hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. 
Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought contingency plan (the plan) are considered to be non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in section 18-321 of this article and within the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cedar Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2002-98, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-02)  
Sec. 18-312. - Public involvement. 
Opportunity for the public to provide input into the preparation of the plan was provided by the City of Cedar Hill during an open comment period from January 13, 2000 to January 21, 2000. The open comment period was advertised on the city's radio station, via window posters and local newspapers. 
(Ord. No. 2002-98, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-02)  
Sec. 18-313. - Public education. 
The City of Cedar Hill will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of the city's radio station and local newspapers. 
(Ord. No. 2002-98, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-02)  
Sec. 18-314. - Coordination with regional water planning groups. 
The service area of the City of Cedar Hill is located within the Region C Water Planning Group and it (the city) has provided a copy of this plan to the Region C Water Planning Group. 
(Ord. No. 2002-98, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-02)  
Sec. 18-315. - Authorization. 
The city manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan. The above will be in concurrence with the city's ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2002-98, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-02)  
Sec. 18-316. - Application. 
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the City of Cedar Hill. The terms "person" and "customer" as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities. 
(Ord. No. 2002-98, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-02)  
Sec. 18-317. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this plan the following definitions shall apply: 
Aesthetic water use: Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and water gardens. 
Capacity: The amount of water storage as required by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) Rule and Regulations for Public Drinking Water Systems 290.45. 
Commercial and institutional water use: Water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and non-profit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and office buildings. 
Conservation: Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
Customer: Any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the City of Cedar Hill. 
Designated official or designee: City manager or his/her designee. 
Demand period: as deemed by the designated official. 
Domestic water use: Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution. 
Drip irrigation system: A watering system designed to maintain constant soil moisture by continuous application of water at a rate not to exceed one hundred ten (110) gallons per acre per minute. 
Industrial water use: The use of water in manufacturing and processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value. 
Landscape irrigation use: Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way and medians. 
Non-essential water or prohibited water uses: Water uses that are not essential nor required for the protection of public, health, safety, and welfare, including: 
(a)  Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except otherwise provided under this plan; 
(b)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle; 
(c)  Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas; 
(d)  Use of water to wash buildings, windows or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(e)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
(f)  Uses of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or jacuzzi-type pools; 
(g)  Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
(h)  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); and 
(i)  Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than fire fighting. 
(j)  Or other uses as yet undetermined. 
psi: Pounds per square inch. 
Pressure district: Any area of the water system distinguished by the high water level of its elevated storage tanks and/or designed pressure ranges. 
(Ord. No. 2002-98, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-02)  
Sec. 18-318. - Triggering criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages. 
The city manager or his/her designee shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the drought contingency plan. Public notification of the initiation or termination of drought response stages shall be by means of publication in local newspapers, signs posted in public places, and the city's website. This plan is subject to existing ordinances in effect. Ordinances having a direct effect on this plan are in the city's Code of Ordinances, article II, division 4, sections 18-42 and 18-43. The triggering criterion described below is based on the amount of water pumped each day and the percentage of water stored in the ground storage tanks. 
(Ord. No. 2002-98, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2008-370, §§ 1, 2, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 18-319. - Drought contingency plan. 
The purpose and scope of this plan is to establish the City of Cedar Hill policies and procedures in the event of shortages or delivery limitations in the City of Cedar Hill water supply, or in case of equipment malfunctions or similar situations that effect the City's Drought Contingency Plan and shall apply to all customers that obtain their water from the City of Cedar Hill water supply system, and is authorized by the Charter of the City of Cedar Hill. 
STAGE 1—WATER WATCH-VOLUNTARY ACTIVATION 
1.  TRIGGERING CRITERIA (if one or more occurs): 
Supply and Storage 
a.  The City of Dallas Water Utilities initiates action and requests customer cities to do likewise during high demand periods. 
b.  The City of Cedar Hill experiences three consecutive days of water pumping at 90% of water storage capacity. 
c.  The City Manager or his/her designee determines that an emergency exists within the city's water system. 
Other 
a.  Unforeseen situations that limit distribution of water, as determined by the Designated Official. 
b.  Short or long term equipment failure, failure to maintain 35 psi at all points in the distribution system and a minimum of 20 psi under combined fire and drinking water flow conditions. 
c.  Electrical power failures or restrictions. 
2.  ACTIONS AVAILABLE 
a.  City Manager or other Designated Official requests voluntary reductions in water use. 
b.  Accelerate public information efforts to teach reduced water usage. 
c.  Notify major water users and request voluntary water use reductions (including usage of all water at all construction sites). 
d.  Prohibit city government use of water for street washing, vehicle washing, operation of ornamental fountains and all other non-essential uses. 
e.  No watering of landscape or exterior use of water is requested on Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday. 
3.  ACCEPTABLE WATER USES 
a.  Water customers who reside or operate a business with an even numbered address are requested to water on Tuesdays and Fridays, but not between the hours of 10:00am and 6:00 pm. 
b.  Water customers who reside or operate a business with and odd numbered address are requested to water on Mondays and Thursdays, but not between the hours of 10:00am and 6:00 pm. 
The intent of this stage is to decrease total water consumption by approximately 1%. 
STAGE 2—WATER EMERGENCY-MANDATORY ACTIVATION 
1.  TRIGGERING CRITERIA (if one or more occur): 
Supply and Storage 
a.  The City of Dallas Water Utilities initiates action and requests customer cities to do likewise during high demand periods. 
b.  Combined ground storage levels fall below 50% of capacity at the beginning of any 24-hour period. 
c.  The City of Cedar Hill experiences five (5) consecutive days of water pumping in excess of 100%. 
d.  Stage 1 voluntary restrictions fail to alleviate continued potable water depletion. 
Other 
a.  If there are long term shortages of water supply within a pressure district. 
b.  Short or long term equipment failure, failure to maintain 35 psi at all points in the distribution system and a minimum of 20 psi under combined fire and drinking water flow conditions. 
c.  Unforeseen situations that limit distribution of water as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
d.  Electrical power failures or restrictions. 
2.  ACTIONS AVAILABLE 
a.  The City Manager or his/her designee may initiate studies that address solutions to the water problems. 
b.  The City Manager or his/her designee directs the commencement of Stage 2 Activation for water conservation. 
c.  No watering of landscape and/or exterior use of water is permitted on Wednesday, Saturday and Sunday unless mentioned in EXCEPTIONS OR ACCEPTABLE WATER USES of this Stage. 
3.  EXCEPTIONS 
a.  Vehicles may be washed at commercial auto washes; or may be washed at residences by the use of a water bucket or container (water running freely from hoses is prohibited); foundations may be watered with 'hand-held' water hose or the use of soaker hoses. 
b.  Watering of new landscaping may be permitted for thirty (30) days from the date of installation of such landscaping. (See Section 6 Variances) 
4.  ACCEPTABLE WATER USES 
a.  Water customers who reside or operate a business with an even numbered address are allowed to water on Tuesdays and Fridays, but not between the hours of 10:00am and 6:00 pm. 
b.  Water customers who reside or operate a business with an odd numbered address are allowed to water on Mondays and Thursdays, but not between the hours of 10:00am and 6:00pm. 
The intent of this stage is to decrease total water consumption by approximately 5%. 
STAGE 3—WATER CRISIS-CRISIS ACTIVATION 
1.  TRIGGERING CRITERIA (if one or more occur) 
Supply and Storage 
a.  At the request of the City of Dallas Water Utilities or as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee due to either known or unforeseen emergency situations. 
Other 
b.  Any unanticipated situations that limit distribution of potable water. 
c.  Electrical power failure or restrictions. 
d.  Natural or man-made contamination of the water supply source(s). 
2.  ACTIONS AVAILABLE 
a.  Continued implementation of all restrictions from previous restrictions. 
b.  Implement appropriate solutions to supply and/or distribution problems. 
c.  Landscape watering for all commercial, institutional and residential uses is prohibited. 
d.  All vehicle and/or equipment washing is prohibited except commercial auto washes unless restricted by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
e.  Nurseries and golf courses may continue to water as restricted by the previous stage restrictions, unless restricted by the City Manager or his/her designee. 
f.  Foundation watering may continue per restrictions established in previous stage. 
g.  Commercial water users may also be required to reduce water usage depending upon the severity of the water shortage. 
h.  Water used for construction purposes shall be prohibited between the hours of 2:00 PM until 9:00 PM daily during the emergency. The City Manager or his/her designee may impose further restrictions, if necessary. 
i.  If Dallas Water Utility or Cedar Hill water is contaminated, Cedar Hill Water Department may utilize water from other sources as needed, including but not limited to, wells or bottled water. 
The intent of this stage is to decrease total water consumption by approximately 15%. 
3.  EMERGENCY AUTHORITY 
a.  Purpose and Scope: The purpose of this section is to establish the City's policy in the event of shortages or delivery limitations in the City's water supply. This section applies to: 
1)  all persons and premises within the City using water from the water system; and 
2)  all retail customers who live in incorporated areas within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction and are served by the water system. 
b.  Emergency Water Management Plan: The City Manager shall promulgate and submit an emergency water management plan to the City Council for approval, the guidelines of which should include: 
1)  the conditions under which a particular stage of emergency will be implemented or terminated; and 
2)  provisions defining specific events that will trigger an emergency. 
c.  Authority: The City Manager is authorized to implement measures prescribed when required by this section and by the emergency water management plan approved by the City Council. The City Manager is authorized to enforce the measures implemented and to promulgate regulations, not in conflict with this section or state and federal laws, in aid of enforcement. 
d.  Implementation of Emergency Order: The City Manager may order that the appropriate stage of emergency response, as detailed in the emergency water management plan, be implemented. To be effective, the order must be: 
1)  made by public announcement: and 
2)  published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City within 24 hours after the public announcement, which order becomes immediately effective upon publication. 
e.  Duration of Order; Change; Extension: The order can be made effective for up to, but not more than, 60 days from the date of publication. The City Manager may upgrade or downgrade the stage of emergency when the conditions triggering that stage occur. Any change in the order must be made in the same manner prescribed in Subsection (d) for implementing an emergency order. The City Council may, upon the recommendation of the City Manager, extend the duration of the emergency order for additional time periods, not to exceed 120 days each. The City Manager shall terminate the order in the manner prescribed in Subsection (d) for implementing an emergency order, when the City Manager determines that the conditions creating the emergency no longer exist. 
f.  Violation of Section: A person commits an offense if he knowingly makes, causes or permits use of water contrary to the water management plan. For purposes of this subsection, it is presumed that a person has knowingly made, caused or permitted a use of water contrary to the measures implemented if the mandatory measures have been formally ordered consistent with the terms of Subsection (d) and: 
1)  the manner of use has been prohibited by the emergency water management plan; or 
2)  the amount of water used exceeds that allowed by the emergency water management plan. 
g.  Authority Under Other Laws: Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the Mayor, the City Council or the City Manager to seek emergency relief under the provisions of any state or federal disaster relief act. 
4.  EXCEPTIONS 
See Section 6: Variances 
(Ord. No. 2008-370, § 3, 11-25-08) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2008-370, § 3, adopted November 25, 2008, repealed the former § 18-319, and enacted a new § 18-319 as set out herein. The former § 18-319 pertained to water management plan and derived from Ord. No. 2002-98, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-02.  
Sec. 18-320. - Water conservation plan. 
The purpose and scope of this plan is to establish a water conservation plan to assure our citizens of the most economical approach for conserving water. The goal of this water conservation plan is to reduce the per capita consumption of water as much as possible in the City of Cedar Hill. 
(1)  Public education and information. The ultimate success of any water conservation program is dependent on an informed public. The water customers must have an awareness of the benefits and needs for water conservation. They must also have knowledge of how to contribute to the plan. The public education program is designed to provide information to as many of the users as possible. The education program will include, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  Distribution of educational materials available from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, American Water Works Association, Texas Water Development Board and Dallas Water Utilities. Other materials will be made semiannually and timed to correspond with peak summer demand periods. The semiannual notification of material availability may be made by publication in the newspaper or city newsletter and city website. 
b.  New retail customers applying for service will be provided with water conservation literature, including specific methods and ways to save water. 
c.  Water department staff will be available to present water conservation programs to local schools, civic organizations and other groups. 
d.  Water conservation information may be aired on local public radio and in all local newspapers. 
(2)  Water conservation rate structure. 
a.  The City of Cedar Hill shall maintain a water rate structure which provides for a monthly minimum base charge for the first one thousand (1,000) gallons, then a uniform rate for each one thousand (1,000) gallons of water usage per unit or connection. 
b.  The wastewater rate structure provides for monthly minimum fixed rate charge per unit or connection and variable rate charge per one thousand (1,000) gallons of user's wastewater volume. 
(3)  Universal metering and meter repair. 
a.  The City of Cedar Hill requires all water connections to the city's water system to be metered, except water used for fire fighting, fire flow testing of hydrants, closed fire systems with alarms and water main flushing. 
b.  The city routinely tests, replaces and repairs meters as deemed necessary to ensure accurate registering and recording of water usage. 
(4)  Leak detection. 
a.  The City of Cedar Hill may maintain a leak detection, location and repair program. Water personnel utilizing electronic locator equipment will locate water line leaks as necessary. 
(5)  Water conserving landscapes. 
a.  The City of Cedar Hill Public Works and Code Enforcement Departments shall encourage all new and existing structures to utilize landscaping materials and irrigation procedures that reduce water consumption. The city will also encourage the same procedures on all public parks and at all public facilities. Modifications to the existing landscape ordinance may also undergo study and be revised, if necessary. 
(6)  Daytime watering restriction. 
a.  No watering of landscape and/or exterior use of water during the daytime hours between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. from May 1 through September 30 of each year. 
(7)  Implementation and enforcement. 
a.  The staff of the City of Cedar Hill will be responsible for the following: 
1)  Evaluation and recommendation of rate structures for adoption by the city council—Director of public works, director of finance and city manager. 
2)  Evaluation and recommendation of plumbing codes modification—Building official and director of public works. 
3)  Maintenance and replacement of water meters—Utility billing 
4)  Public education and information—Director of public works and public information officer. 
5)  Leak detection and repair—Director of public works. 
6)  Evaluation and documentation of program progress—Director of public works. 
7)  Enforcement of ordinances relating to the water use—Director of public works. 
(7)  Periodic review and annual reporting. 
a.  Periodic reviews will be made to determine if changes might require an amendment or major change to this plan. 
b.  Annual reporting can be accomplished through budget program measurements. 
(Ord. No. 2002-98, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2008-370, § 4, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 18-321. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions contained in the water conservation plan shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court, may be punished by a fine as follows: 
First offense .....up to $200.00 
Second offense .....up to $400.00 
Third offense .....up to $600.00 
Fourth offense .....up to $2,000.00 
Each and every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2002-98, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2008-370, § 5, 11-25-08)  
Sec. 18-322. - Variances. 
The public works director, or his/her designee with the approval of the city manager, may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect. 
(b)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this article may file a petition for variance with the City of Cedar Hill. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the public works director, or his/her designee, and shall include the following: 
(a)  Name and address of the petitioner. 
(b)  Purpose of water use. 
(c)  Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief. 
(d)  Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this article. 
(e)  Description of the relief requested. 
(f)  Period of time for which the variance is sought. 
(g)  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date. 
(h)  Other pertinent information related to the property, facility or structure. 
Variances granted by the City of Cedar Hill may be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the public works director, or his/her designee: 
(a)  Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance. 
(b)  Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements. 
No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 2002-98, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2008-370, § 6, 11-25-08)  
ARTICLE VII. - SANITATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL IN PROXIMITY TO WATER SUPPLY WELLS 
 
Sec. 18-323. - Purpose and objective. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for the users and the construction of facilities in or on land within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the city's water well supply facilities (the "wells") in order to promote sanitary conditions in and around such wells, to secure all such land from pollution hazards, and to enable the city to comply with all applicable state and local regulations. 
(b)  The objectives of this article is to prevent certain uses and the construction of facilities in or on land surrounding the wells, which might create a danger of pollution to the water produced from such wells. 
(Ord. No. 2008-348, § 1, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 18-324. - Definitions. 
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
City council shall mean the City Council of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
City shall mean the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
Ordinance shall mean this article establishing rules and regulations regarding sanitary and pollution control of the area in proximity to the city's public water supply wells. 
Person shall mean any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company and any other entity, or its legal representatives, agents, successors, or assigns. 
Wells shall mean the water wells owned and operated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-348, § 1, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 18-325. - Prohibited activities. 
The following activities and items are prohibited within the designated areas of land surrounding the wells: 
(a)  Construction and/or operation of any underground petroleum and/or chemical storage tank, liquid transmission pipeline, stock pen, feedlot, dump grounds, privy, cesspool, septic tank, sewage treatment plant, sewage wet well, sewage pumping station, drainage ditch which contains industrial waste discharges or the wastes from sewage treatment systems, solid waste disposal site, land on which sewage plant or septic tank sludge is applied, land irrigated by sewage plant effluent, septic tank perforated drain field, absorption bed, evapotranspiration bed, area irrigated by low dosage, low angle spray on-site sewage facility, military facility, industrial facility, wood treatment facility, liquid petroleum and petrochemical production, storage, and/or transmission facility, class 1, 2, 3, and/or 4 injection well, pesticide storage and/or mixing facility, abandoned well, inoperative well, improperly constructed water well of any depth, and all other construction or operation that could create an unsanitary condition is prohibited within, upon, or across all areas of land within a one hundred fifty-foot radius of the wells. For the purposes of this article, "improperly constructed water wells" are those wells that do not meet the surface and subsurface construction standards for a public water supply well. 
(b)  Construction and/or operation of tile or concrete sanitary sewers, sewer appurtenances, septic tanks, storm sewers, and cemeteries is specifically prohibited within, upon, or across any area of land within a fifty-foot radius of the wells. 
(c)  Construction of homes or building upon any area of land within a one hundred fifty-foot radius of the wells is permitted, provided the restrictions described in subsections (a) and (b) above are met. 
(d)  Normal farming and ranching operations are not prohibited by this article; provided, however, livestock shall not be allowed within a fifty-foot radius of the wells. 
(Ord. No. 2008-348, § 1, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 18-326. - Right of entry. 
City employees, or authorized representatives of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon any premises located within a one hundred fifty-foot radius of any well to conduct any inspection or observation necessary to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-348, § 1, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 18-327. - Required removal. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be required to remove the prohibited construction or potential source of contamination within ten (10) days after notification that they are in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-348, § 1, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 18-328. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed the maximum amount allowed by law. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2008-348, § 1, 1-22-08)  
Sec. 18-329. - Superseding regulation or statute. 
Whenever any applicable statute, regulation, or permit of any state, federal, or other agency, having jurisdiction over the subject matter of this article, is in conflict herewith, the stricter requirement shall apply, unless mandated otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2008-348, § 1, 1-22-08)  
ARTICLE VIII. - LIQUID WASTE; GENERATION, TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 18-330. - Definitions. 
In this article: 
Approved means accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this article and given formal and official sanction by the regulatory authority. 
Director means the director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article. 
Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid or semi-solid grease trap waste, grit trap waste, and/or septage into or on any land or water so that such waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters. 
Disposal site means a permitted site or part of a site at which grease trap waste, grit trap waste, or septage is processed, treated and/or intentionally placed into or on any land and at which said waste will remain after closure. 
Disposer means a person who receives, stores, retains, processes, or disposes of liquid waste. 
Full-service grocery means a grocery store which may include, but is not limited to a deli, bakery, or meat market. 
Generator means a person who causes, creates, generates, or otherwise produces liquid waste. 
Grease trap means a watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid, and/or solid wastes generated from commercial operations into the publicly owned treatment works to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected. 
Grease trap waste means greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid, and/or solid wastes removed from commercial operations by a grease trap. 
Grit trap means a watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of petroleum based oil, grease wastes and solids into the publicly owned treatment works to which the receptacle is directly and indirectly connected. 
Grit trap waste means petroleum based oil, grease wastes and solids from commercial automotive or heavy machinery repair and/or washing facilities. 
Hazardous material means any matter which is or may be reasonably expected to be dangerous to human health, the environment, or property, and shall include, but not be limited to, those substances defined as hazardous materials or material by federal or state agencies. 
Liquid waste means waterborne solids, liquids, and gaseous substances derived from a grease trap, grit trap, chemical/portable toilet or septic tank and described as a grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage. 
Manager means the person conducting, supervising, managing or representing the activities of a generator, transporter or disposer. 
Manifest system means a system consisting of a five-part trip ticket used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of liquid waste. 
Owner means the person who owns a facility or part of a facility. 
Permit means the formal written document issued to a person by the regulatory authority collection of grease trap waste, grit trap waste and septage. 
Permittee means a person granted a permit under this article. 
Person means an individual, corporation (including a government corporation) organization, government, governmental subdivision or agency, federal agency, state, political subdivision of a state, interstate agency or body, business or business trust, partnership, association, firm, company, joint stock company, commission, or any other legal entity. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is owned by the city and/or the control authority. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Regulatory authority shall mean any municipal officer or department of the city appointed by the city manager to administer this article. 
Septage means wastes removed from a septic tank or chemical/portable toilet. 
Shall means the word "shall" wherever used in this article will be interpreted in its mandatory sense; "may" is permissive. 
Special waste means any waste or combination of wastes that, because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics or biological properties, require special handling and disposal to protect the human health or the environment. 
Spill means the accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of grease trap waste, grit trap waste, or other waste material. 
State regulatory authority shall mean the state's agencies which have the authority to adopt and enforce any rules necessary to carry out its powers and duties under the laws of Texas. 
Tank means a device, designed to contain an accumulation of grease trap waste, and septage which is constructed primarily of non-earthen materials (e.g., concrete, steel, plastic) to provide structural support for the containment. 
Toxic waste means any liquid, semi-liquid, or solid waste material which has the ability to chemically produce injury once it reaches a susceptible site in or on the body. 
Transporter means a person who operates a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste. 
Trip ticket means the shipping document originated and signed by the transporter which contains the information required by the regulatory authority. 
Vehicle means a mobile device in which or by which liquid waste may be transported upon a public street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-331. - Permit required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste without an applicable permit. A permit shall be issued for transportation of the liquid waste and regulatory authority shall designate on the permit the liquid waste authorized for transportation in the vehicle. A separate vehicle permit number is issued for each vehicle operated. 
(b)  A person who desires to obtain a permit shall make application on a form provided by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  The regulatory authority shall not issue a permit unless the applicant submits all vehicles the applicant proposes to use to transport liquid waste for inspection and the vehicles are found by the regulatory authority to be constructed and equipped in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  A permit is not transferable. 
(e)  A permit issued by the city excludes the hauling of hazardous materials as defined in this article. 
(f)  Each applicant shall specify the disposal site or sites to be used for the authorized disposal of liquid wastes. The regulatory authority shall be immediately notified of additional disposal sites used during the permit period. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-332. - Fee and display of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority shall not issue a permit to an applicant until the appropriate established fee is paid. A person shall pay a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each vehicle operated by the person. Each permit shall be renewed annually. 
(b)  The regulatory authority shall number the permits consecutively, and each permit holder shall cause to be displayed on each side of each vehicle in a color contrasting with the background in three-inch letters or larger the business name, state regulatory authority registration number and the approval authority's permit number. 
(c)  The permit holder shall keep the permit receipt, or a copy, in the vehicle at all times. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-333. - Liquid waste vehicles—Maintenance. 
(a)  A liquid waste transporter shall: 
(1)  Maintain hoses, tanks, valves, pumps, cylinders, diaphragms, pipes, connections, and other appurtenances on a vehicle in good repair and free from leaks; 
(2)  Provide a safety plug or cap for each valve of a tank; 
(3)  Provide a clean exterior and cause the vehicle to be odor-free at the beginning of each work day; 
(4)  Pass the state regulatory authority's safety inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-334. - Same—Inspection. 
(a)  A liquid waste transporter's vehicle shall be inspected by the regulatory authority prior to the issuance of a vehicle permit with qualifications as follows: 
(1)  Use a vehicle with a single tank as an integral portion of vehicle to transport liquid wastes; portable tanks or other containers temporarily installed in vehicles are prohibited; 
(2)  Piping, valves and connectors shall be permanently attached to tank and/or vehicle; 
(3)  Tank to be liquid tight; 
(4)  Tank to be constructed so that every interior and exterior portion can be easily cleaned; 
(5)  Piping, valves, and connections shall be accessible and easy to clean; 
(6)  Inlet or opening of tank to be constructed so that collected waste will not spill during filling, transfer, or during transport; 
(7)  Outlet connections to be constructed so that no liquid waste will leak, run, or spill out from the vehicle; 
(8)  Outlets to be of a design and type suitable for the liquid waste handled and capable of controlling flow or discharge without spillage or undue spray on or flooding of immediate surroundings while in use; 
(9)  Pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances to be of a design and type suitable for the type of waste handled, capable of operation without spillage, spray, or leakage, and capable of being easily disassembled for cleaning. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-335. - Responsibilities of a liquid waste transporter. 
(a)  Before accepting a load of liquid waste for transportation, a liquid waste transporter shall determine the nature of the material to be transported and that the transporter's equipment is sufficient to properly handle the job without spillage, leaks, or release of toxic or harmful gasses, fumes, liquids, or other substances. Upon delivery of the waste to the disposer, the transporter shall inform the disposer of the nature of the waste. 
(b)  A transporter with a city liquid waste transporter permit shall not transport materials that are hazardous as defined in section 18-330 in vehicles permitted by the city for transporting liquid waste. 
(c)  A transporter holding a city permit shall use a disposal site permitted and approved by the city, state, and/or the federal government. 
(d)  Trip tickets shall be used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of all applicable liquid waste generated in the city and shall be used as follows: 
(1)  A transporter shall complete one (1) trip ticket for each location serviced, with the exception of chemical toilet companies servicing their own units; 
(2)  One (1) copy of the trip ticket shall have the generator and transporter information completed and shall be given to the generator at the time of waste collection; 
(3)  One (1) copy of the trip ticket with all required information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the trip ticket shall go to the receiving facility; 
(4)  One (1) copy of the trip ticket with all required information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the trip ticket shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all trip tickets showing the collection and disposition of the waste; 
(5)  One (1) copy of the trip ticket with all required information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the trip ticket shall be returned by the transporter to the person who generated the waste within fifteen (15) days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility; 
(6)  One (1) copy of the trip ticket with all required information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party before distribution of the trip ticket shall go to the City of Cedar Hill, Public Works Department and shall be provided within thirty (30) days of the disposal; 
(7)  A copy of all trip tickets shall be maintained for a period of two (2) years and shall be made available for inspection by the regulatory authority. 
(e)  A transporter or any person cleaning or servicing a grease trap or grit trap shall remove the entire contents of the collection device. Skimming the surface layer of waste material, partial cleaning of the trap or use of any method which does not remove the entire contents of the collection device is prohibited. 
(f)  Any person wishing to make use of a mobile treatment process or of an on-site process to clean or service grease traps or grit traps shall demonstrate the process to the satisfaction of the regulatory authority. Included with the demonstration shall be a written explanation of the treatment process. Any costs to the city associated with the demonstration such as, but not limited to, sampling and analysis shall be recovered. 
(g)  A transporter shall allow the director and his or her designee to inspect vehicles registered under a permit upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-336. - Accumulation of liquid waste. 
A person commits an offense if he allows liquid waste that emits noxious or offensive odors, or is unsanitary or injurious to public health, to accumulate upon property under that person's control. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-337. - Disposal of liquid waste. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if they unload or offer for sale or exchange liquid waste, except at a place permitted by the city, the state, and the federal government. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if they deposit or discharge liquid waste at any site not approved for the disposal of such material. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-338. - Responsibilities of liquid waste generator. 
(a)  A generator of liquid waste shall have all liquid waste material picked up from the generator's premises by a liquid waste transporter who holds a valid permit from the city and the liquid waste shall be transported to an approved site for disposal. 
(b)  A generator of liquid wastes shall not have hazardous materials or liquid waste in combination with hazardous materials removed from the generator's premises by a liquid waste hauler operating under a city permit. 
(c)  A generator shall sign the trip ticket from the transporter when a load is picked up by the transporter and shall keep a copy of all trip tickets for a period of two (2) years. The regulatory authority may inspect these records during normal business hours. 
(d)  A generator shall: 
(1)  Install or provide collection device of size and type specified by regulatory authority. If the director determines that a collection device is insufficient in size or design, he or she may require the generator to upgrade their collection device; 
(2)  Supervise the servicing of the generator's liquid waste facilities, and shall ensure that they are completely emptied by the transporter during such servicing; 
(3)  Maintain collection device in continuous, proper operation; 
(4)  Report spills and accidents involving collection device to regulatory authority immediately or through emergency dispatch after business hours; 
(5)  Clean up all spills and accidents immediately and have material disposed of by permitted transporter by proper means. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-339. - Schedule of service required for generators. 
(a)  Grease interceptors shall cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease interceptor; that the discharge is in compliance with local wastewater discharge limits; and to ensure that no visible grease is observed in the discharge. 
(b)  Grease interceptors shall be completely evacuated at a minimum of every ninety (90) days, or more frequently when: 
(1)  Twenty-five (25) percent or more of the wetted height of the grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases; 
(2)  The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other pollutant levels by the public works director and/or his or her designee; or, 
(3)  If there is a history of noncompliance. 
(c)  Grit interceptors shall be pumped at a minimum of once per year and at all other times as necessary to maintain their effectiveness. 
(d)  Septic tanks shall be pumped out as often as necessary to maintain their effectiveness. 
(e)  The director and/or his or her designee may require more frequent pumping upon assessment. 
(f)  The director may change the frequency required upon formal written request. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-340. - Responsibilities of disposers. 
(a)  A liquid waste disposer commits an offense if they allow accumulation of liquid waste on any premises so that rainfall could carry the material to storm sewers or adjacent property or create a noxious odor or potential health hazard. 
(b)  A liquid waste disposer shall: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain compliance with all licenses and/or permits required by local, state or federal law; 
(2)  Accept waste only from a permitted transporter; 
(3)  Maintain trip ticket copies for a period of two (2) years; 
(4)  Accept only those classes of wastes authorized by license or permit; 
(5)  Make available all records required to be kept for inspection by the regulatory authority during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-341. - Denial, suspension, revocation of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may deny a permit if it is determined that an applicant is not qualified under this article and may suspend or revoke a permit if it is determined that a permittee: 
(1)  Is not qualified under this article; 
(2)  Has violated a provision of this article; 
(3)  Has failed to pay a required fee; 
(4)  Has failed to comply with maintenance or inspection requirements; 
(5)  Has failed to deliver trip tickets to the regulatory authority; 
(6)  The applicant, a partner of the applicant, a principal in the applicant's business, or applicant's manager or operator has: 
a.  Within the five (5) years preceding the date of the application been convicted of a misdemeanor that is punishable by confinement and/or by a fine in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in operating a liquid waste transportation business; or 
b.  Been convicted of a felony which relates directly to the duty or responsibility in operating a liquid waste transportation business; 
(7)  The applicant fails to provide evidence of liability insurance or self-insurance; 
(8)  The application contains a false statement of a material fact. 
(b)  After six (6) months following a suspension under this section, a permittee may file a request for reinstatement of the permit. When the regulatory authority determines that the permittee is again qualified, all violations have been corrected, precautions have been taken to prevent future violations, and all required fees have been paid, he shall reinstate the permit. 
(c)  The regulatory authority may revoke for a period of one (1) year or less all permits held by a liquid waste transporter if the transporter or an employee of the transporter violates any of the provisions of this article, or applicable provisions of the City Code or state law. 
(d)  A permittee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not collect, transport, or dispose of any waste materials within the jurisdiction of the regulatory authority. 
(e)  Any denial, revocation, or suspension of a permit by the city shall be reported to the state regulatory authority. The city shall also report any violation notices or illegal operations to said department. 
(f)  Any applicant aggrieved by the action of the regulatory authority with reference to the revocation of a permit as provided in section 18-341 of this article shall have the right to appeal to the public works director and/or his or her designee. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the public works director and/or his or her designee, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been delivered in person or mailed to such person's address given in the application, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The public works director and/or his or her designee shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the public works director and/or his or her designee on such appeal shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-342. - Right of entry. 
The city's representative(s) shall have the right to enter the premises of any person subject to the provisions of this article to determine whether that person is in compliance with all requirements of this hereof. Persons shall allow inspecting or monitoring personnel ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspecting, monitoring, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional, related duties. Any information concerning a requirement under this article shall be made available upon request. 
(1)  Where security measures are in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises, that person shall make necessary arrangements with its security personnel so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city's representatives will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The city's representatives shall have the right to set up on any person's property such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring of any person's operations. 
(3)  Unreasonable delays in allowing inspecting or monitoring personnel access to any person's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-343. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In the event that an owner shall fail to comply with this article, the director or designee may notify such owner by letter addressed to such owner at their post office address, or by publication as many as two (2) times within ten (10) consecutive days in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, if personal service may not be had on the owner, or if the owner's address is not known. The notification shall contain in brief terms the condition or conditions which exist on such owner's premises which fail to comply with this article. At the expiration of ten (10) days after issuance and receipt of the notification, or at the end of ten (10) days after the final date of publication, the city may enter upon such premises and may do such work as necessary, or cause the same to be done, to abate the unlawful condition of the premises in order that the premises may comply with the requirements of this article. A statement of the cost incurred by the city to abate such condition shall be mailed to the owner of the premises and such statement shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the mailing of the statement of costs. 
(b)  In the event that an owner shall have an emergency condition, the fire chief, the public works director, or their designees, may enter upon such premises and may do such work as necessary, or cause the same to be done, to abate the condition in order that the premises may comply with the requirements of this article. For the purposes of this section, "emergency condition" shall be defined as any condition or conditions which are or reasonably could be an immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city or to the environment. A statement of the cost incurred by the city to abate such condition shall be mailed to the owner of the premises and such statement shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the mailing of the statement of costs. 
(c)  Any person found to be guilty of violating provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage incurred by the city in the cleanup and disposal of said waste materials. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to one-half of assessed cleanup costs shall be levied by the city against the guilty party. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 18-344. - Punishment for violations; other remedies. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine for violations of public health for each act of violation and for each day of violation. 
(b)  Any person, firm, or corporation who obstructs, impedes, or interferes with a representative of the city or with a representative of a city department, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine for violations of public health for each act of violation and for each day of violation. 
(c)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the city is entitled to pursue all criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person, firm, or corporation that remains in violation of this article. 
(d)  The regulatory authority may cause to be impounded a vehicle which is being operated in violation of this article may authorize the holding of the vehicle until the violation is corrected. The regulatory authority may also revoke the permit for the improperly operated vehicle. If a vehicle is impounded or if a permit is revoked an appeal may be filed by the transporter pursuant to section 18-341(f). 
(e)  In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by any person, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation or association legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in behalf of a corporation or association and within the scope of his office or employment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-623, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Chapter 19 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Provisions relating to powers of city over streets, art. IV, § 11. 
Cross reference— Board of development, § 2-101 et seq.; capital improvement board, § 2-121 et seq.; moving and demolition of buildings, § 4-161 et seq.; numbering of buildings, § 4-191 et seq.; trench safety program, § 4-311 et seq.; civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; planning, Ch. 16; public utilities, Ch. 18; subdivision regulations, Ch. 20; vehicles for hire, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Authority of home-rule cities regarding control, improvement, use, etc., of streets and sidewalks, V.A.C.S. art. 1175(16)—(18); obstructing public road, V.T.C.A. Penal Code, § 42.03(a)(1). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 19-1—19-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 2001, repealed art. II in its entirety. Formerly, said article pertained to excavations and cuts. Said ordinance additionally provided for the inclusion of a new article II to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 
DIVISION 1. - RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT; GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-620, § 1, adopted August 29, 2017, designated §§ 19-16—19-28 as a new div. 1. 
 
Sec. 19-16. - Title. 
This chapter may be known and cited as the Right-of-Way Management Ordinance for the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 19-17. - Construction; governing law. 
This chapter shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas and the City Code to the extent that such City Code is not in conflict with or in violation of the Construction and laws of the United States or the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 19-18. - Scope. 
This article applies to all persons that place facilities in, on or over public rights-of-way within the geographical limits of the city, including any areas subsequently annexed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 19-19. - Definitions. 
City shall mean the City of Cedar Hill. 
Certified telecommunications providers shall mean the same as in Local Government Code, Section 283.200(2) [any entity that has been granted a certificate from the Public Utility Commission of Texas under Chapter 54 of the Texas Utility Code authorizing that entity to provide local exchange telephone service]. 
Director means the Director of Public Works for the City of Cedar Hill or his/her designee. 
Facilities means any and all of the wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways and other equipment, structures, plant and appurtenances and all associated physical equipment placed in, on or under the public rights-of-way. 
Person means any entity, whether a natural person, partnership, corporation of any type, joint venture, or any other legal entity. 
Street or public way or public right-of-way or public rights-of-way or rights-of-way or right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include the airwaves above a right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
(Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 19-20. - Right-of-way construction. 
No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of facilities within the right-of-way in the city except as provided by the ordinances of the city and the directives of the public works department. All construction activity in city right-of-way will be in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 19-21. - Registration and construction permits. 
(a)  Registration. In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, all users of the right-of-way will register with the City of Cedar Hill Registration and permits will be issued in the name of the person who will own the facilities. Registration shall include: 
(1)  The name of the user of the right-of-way; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of people who will contact person(s) for the user and for the contractor; 
(3)  The name(s) and telephone number of an emergency contact who shall be available twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
(b)  Construction permits. 
(1)  No person shall perform any construction or installation of facilities in the right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, except as provided herein. The permit will be in the name of the person who will own the facilities to be constructed. The permit must be completed and signed by a representative of the owner of the facilities to be constructed. 
a.  Emergency and safety responses related to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit; however the public works department should be notified in writing within two (2) business days of any construction related to an emergency response; including a reasonably detailed description of the work performed in the right-of-way and an updated map of any facilities that were relocated, if applicable. 
b.  The phrase "construction or installation of facilities" does not include repair or maintenance of existing facilities unless such repair or maintenance requires the breaking of pavement or the closure of a nonresidential traffic lane; nor does the phrase "construction or installation of facilities" mean the installation of facilities necessary only to initiate service to a customer's property. 
(2)  The permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of facilities, dates and times work is to take place and any other conditions set out by the director of public works or his/her designee. 
(3)  The person requesting a permit will provide the director with documentation in the format specified by the public works department describing: 
a.  The proposed, approximate location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and applicant's plan for right-of-way construction; 
b.  Engineering plans, which will be on a reasonable scale, acceptable to the public works department; 
c.  Description detail of the location of all right-of-way that owner plans to use; 
d.  Description of all existing city utilities in relationship to applicant's proposed route; 
e.  Description of what applicant proposes to install; 
f.  Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt and/or concrete in streets (include City of Cedar Hill standard construction detail); 
g.  Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, etc. including depth located in public right-of-way; 
h.  Typical details of manholes and/or handholes applicant plans to use or access; 
i.  Complete legend of drawings submitted by applicant, which may be provided by reference to previously submitted documents; 
j.  Three (3) sets of plans must be submitted with permit application; 
k.  The construction and installation methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the estimated dates and times work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the director; and 
l.  Proof of insurance or net worth as required herein. 
(4)  All construction and installation in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the facilities. After permit issuance, the director shall be provided access to the work and to such further information as the director may reasonably require to ensure compliance with the permit. 
(5)  A copy of the construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the director at all times when construction or installation work is occurring. 
(6)  All construction or installation work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the construction permit. If the work cannot be completed in the specified time periods, the permittee may request a reasonable extension from the director. The director shall use best efforts to act on an extension request as soon as practicable. 
(7)  General permits. 
a.  The city may authorize the use of general permits for specific categories of activities within the public rights-of-way. 
b.  A general permit authorized by the city shall set forth the construction standards and notification requirements applicable to such categories of activity. 
c.  A person may comply with the terms of a general permit authorized by the city in lieu the requirements set forth in Sections 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 hereof, excepting those requirements regarding registration as set forth in section 6.a. 
(8)  Insurance and bonds. 
a.  An applicant must provide proof of liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), as approved by the director of public works or his/her designee. Such requirements may be waived by the director of public works or his/her designee, if the applicant provides acceptable evidence of self-insurance. 
b.  The coverage must be on an "occurrence" basis and must include coverage for personal injury, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, underground, explosion and collapse hazards. 
c.  Each policy must include a cancellation provision requiring the insurance company to notify the city in writing not fewer than thirty (30) days before canceling, failing to renew, or reducing policy limits. 
d.  The applicant shall file the required original certificates of insurance prior to any commencement of work. The certificate shall state the policy number; name of the insurance company; name and address of the agent or authorized representative of the insurance company; name, address and telephone number of insured; policy expiration date; and specific coverage amounts. 
e.  Applicant shall file a surety bond from a surety company authorized to do business in the State of Texas in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) to guarantee that the restoration of the right-of-way in the event the applicant leaves a job site in the right-of-way unfinished, incomplete or unsafe. 
f.  The above requirements may be met by utilities with a current franchise, license or municipal authorization if their current franchise, license or municipal authorization adequately provides for insurance or bonds or provides an indemnity in favor of the city. 
g.  For purpose of this section, the city may accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas or letters written by the applicant in those instances where the state does not issue such certificates, which provide the same coverage as required herein. The applicant must demonstrate by written information that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the city. 
(9)  A request for a permit must be submitted at least five (5) working days before the commencement of work proposed in the request, unless waived by the director. 
(10)  Requests for permits will be acted on by the director promptly after receiving all the information specified in this chapter. The director will use best efforts to act on a request for permit as soon as possible. 
(11)  The director may require or a permittee may request a pre-construction meeting among the director, the permittee and the construction contractor. 
(c)  A registration or construction permit shall not constitute a franchise, and shall not replace any obligations to either obtain a franchise, if applicable, or to pay a fee pursuant to a franchise obligation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 19-22. - Construction standards. 
(a)  Director must be notified twenty-four (24) hours in advance that construction is ready to proceed by either right-of-way user, their contractor or representative. The notice must include the name, address and phone numbers of the contractor who will perform the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of an individual with the contractor who will be available at all times during construction. 
(b)  All construction shall be in conformance with all city codes and applicable local, state and federal laws. 
(c)  A three-foot by three-foot information sign stating the identify of the person doing the work, telephone number and permittee's identity and telephone number shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur twenty-four (24) hours prior to the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring. 
(d)  Erosion Control: Storm Water Management. 
(1)  Erosion control measures, as applicable, and advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades must be in place before work begins. 
(2)  The director may require the permittee to show proof of EPA approved plans relating to storm water and erosion when applicable or a letter stating they are not required to obtain such approval. 
(3)  Permittee shall be responsible for storm water management erosion control that complies with city, state and federal guidelines. 
(e)  Lane closure on major thoroughfares will be limited to between 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. unless the director grants prior approval. Barricades and signage shall be installed in accordance with the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(f)  Without affecting the legal relationship between permittee and its contractors, permittees are responsible for the workmanship and any damages by its contractors. A responsible representative of the permittee will be available to public works at all times during construction. 
(g)  Permittee or its contractor or subcontractor will notify the public works department and the affected utility immediately of any damage to other utilities, either city or privately owned. 
(h)  When a street or sidewalk cut is required, the permittee must obtain prior approval and all requirements of the public works department shall be followed. Repair of all street and sidewalk removals must be made promptly to avoid safety hazards to vehicle and pedestrian traffic. 
(i)  Newly installed facilities must not interfere with city utilities, in particular gravity dependent facilities. 
(j)  Underground or buried utilities must be installed at a minimum depth of thirty (30) inches, unless a lesser depth is approved by the public works department. 
(k)  All directional boring shall have locator place bore marks and depths while bore is in progress. Locator shall place mark at each stem with paint dot and depth at least every other stem. 
(l)  The normal working hours for permitted activities in rights-of-way are 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Permitted work that needs to be performed after 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday must be approved in advance. Any permitted work performed outside the above work must be approved twenty-four (24) hours in advance by the director. 
(m)  Permittee or its contractor or subcontractor working in the right-of-way are responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected utilities prior to any excavation. 
(n)  Contractors will be responsible for physically verifying the location, both horizontal and vertical, of all affected facilities prior to any excavation or boring. 
(Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 19-23. - "As-built" plans. 
(a)  Right-of-way users will provide the director with "as-built" plans within ninety (90) days of completion of facilities in the right-of-way. The plans shall be provided to the city in a format used in the ordinary course of user's business to the extent they are prepared in the ordinary course of business, but excluding customer specific, proprietary or confidential information and as reasonably prescribed by the city, and as allowed by law. 
(b)  The director may, for good cause, waive all or portions of this requirement. The determination of good cause shall include assessment of (1) the right-of-way user's ability to feasibly and economically remove customer specific, proprietary or confidential information from its plans and (2) the right-of-way user's standard business practice relative to the preparation of construction and as-built plans. The director may reassess waivers from time to time to determine whether a right-of-way user's ability to provide as-built plans has changed. 
(Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 19-24. - Conformance with public improvements. 
(a)  Whenever by reasons of widening or straightening of streets, water or sewer line projects, or any other public works projects, it shall be deemed necessary by the governing body of the city to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the underground or overhead facilities of a right-of-way user, such alterations shall be made by the owner of the facilities at their expense unless otherwise provided for by state law or a current franchise within one hundred twenty (120) days from receipt of notice to make the alterations, unless a different schedule has been approved by the director. 
(b)  An owner may trim trees in or over the public rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the National Arborist Association and the International Society of Arborculture. 
(Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 19-25. - Improperly installed facilities. 
(a)  Any person doing work in the city right-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade and maintain facilities. 
(b)  Facilities installed after the effective date of this article shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if: 
(1)  The installation, repairs, upgrade or maintenance endangers people; 
(2)  The facilities do not meet applicable federal, state or city codes; 
(3)  The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices; or 
(4)  The facilities are not located in the proper place in accordance with the directions provided by the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 19-26. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Users of the right-of-way shall restore property affected by construction of facilities to a condition that is equal to or better than the condition of the property prior to the performance of the work. This shall include replacing concrete with same thickness concrete, asphalt with asphalt, etc. 
(b)  Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the public works department and the property owner. The restoration shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Replacing all ground cover with ground cover that is the same or an equivalent to the type of ground cover impacted during work either by sodding or seeding; 
(2)  Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required; 
(3)  Backfilling all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes shall be filled in or covered daily, unless other safety requirements are approved by public works; 
(4)  Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines; 
(5)  Restoration of excavation site to city specifications; and 
(6)  Restoration of all landscaping and other affected structures such as sprinkler systems and mailboxes. 
(c)  All locate flags shall be removed during the clean up process by the permittee or his/her contractor at the completion of the work. 
(d)  Restoration must be made in a timely manner as specified by approved public works schedules and to the satisfaction of director. 
(Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 19-27. - Locating facilities. 
(a)  All pipelines, cables, wiring, or other underground facilities that are beneath the surface of the right-of-way must be identified by a sign or a marker, or by other notification procedures to the appropriate entities, so that all persons in the area and desiring to excavate may locate the underground facility. Such signs, markers and other notification devices must contain all necessary information so that all persons desiring to excavate may comply with the provisions of the Underground Facility Prevention and Safety Act (Section 251.001 et seq. of the Texas Utilities Code, and any amendments). Where applicable such signs and markers shall be placed in accordance with state and federal requirements. The markers and signs must be maintained by the utility in a manner that is not unsightly or in a state of despair. 
(b)  Any person installing, maintaining, or locating any facilities within any right-of-way in the City of Cedar Hill must ascertain if there are facilities in that area, and must comply with the provisions of the Underground Facility Prevention and Safety Act prior to commencing any work under a permit issued by the city. 
(c)  If any of the provisions of this article are not followed, the director may revoke a permit. If the person has not followed the terms and conditions of this article in work done pursuant to a prior permit, new permits may be denied or additional terms required. 
(Ord. No. 2001-54, § 1, 1-9-01)  
Sec. 19-28. - Penalties. 
Any person or firm violating any provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day of the violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2003-152, § 1, 4-22-03)  
DIVISION 2. - NETWORK PROVIDERS 
 
Sec. 19-29. - Network providers; authority required and nonexclusive use. 
A network provider, as such term is defined in Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, must provide evidence that the network provider has acquired all authorizations required under Texas law prior to obtaining a permit to use public right-of-way. The network provider's right to use and occupy the public right-of-way shall not be exclusive, and the city shall have the right to exercise its police powers and manage its public rights-of-way based on the provisions of Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code and all other applicable state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 2017-620, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 19-30. - Transfer and notice. 
A network provider shall notify the director of the city public works department of any sale, transfer, merger, or assignment of the ownership or control of a network provider's business within thirty (30) days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A network provider shall maintain and provide the city with name, address, telephone number and e-mail address of the current contact person for the network provider during use and occupation of public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2017-620, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 19-31. - Indemnity. 
A network provider shall indemnify the city as required under the Texas Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-620, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 19-32. - Compliance with design manual. 
A network provider shall comply with Cedar Hill's "Wireless Services (Small Cells) Design Manual," adopted hereby, and as from time-to-time amended by the director of the city public works department. 
(Ord. No. 2017-620, § 2, 8-29-17)  
Secs. 19-33—19-45. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL EVENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-641, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 24, 2018, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 19-46—19-57, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 85-785, 4-23-85. 
 
Sec. 19-46. - Purpose. 
The City of Cedar Hill recognizes that special events are essential for a vibrant community and provide a distinct benefit to the local culture, and economy. This article creates a uniform, fair, and simple process for the safe and orderly implementation of special events, which utilize city infrastructure, assets, and personnel. This article enables industry professionals to effectively communicate their needs while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-47. - General authority. 
The city manager or his/her designee will carry out the responsibilities under this article including but not limited to: 
(1)  Review all special event permits and approve or deny applications in compliance with the rules adopted under this article. 
(2)  Impose reasonable conditions on the special event based on health, safety, and welfare requirements. 
(3)  May establish a special events district. 
(4)  Coordinate permit issuance or authorization for the special event with other city departments, maintaining a special events committee. 
(5)  Adopt rules and fees governing the administration and enforcement of this chapter, including application requirements, provisions for interdepartmental review. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-48. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means a person who has filed a written application for a special event permit. 
Permittee means the person to whom a special event permit is granted pursuant to this article. 
Special event means a planned temporary accumulation of people or attractions for a common purpose, including but not limited to, street fairs, arts and crafts shows, carnivals, circuses, rallies, public entertainments, festivals or other similar events or attractions, that: 
(1)  Interfere with the normal flow or regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or 
(2)  Require special city services, including but not limited to, street closure, provisions of barricades, special parking arrangements, special electrical services or special police services. 
Special event permit means the written approval from the city manager for a special event. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-49. - Permit required; exemptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a special event without first having obtained a special event permit from the city manager unless it falls within the following exempted activities: 
(1)  An event conducted entirely on city park land that uses only parks and recreation department facilities, personnel and equipment; 
(2)  An event conducted in a city facility that requires only facilities, personnel, or equipment related to that facility; 
(3)  A spontaneous event that is occasioned by news or affairs coming into public knowledge less than forty-eight (48) hours before the spontaneous event and that is conducted on sidewalks or city park land; 
(4)  An event solely on private property; 
(5)  The armed forces of the United States of America, the military forces of the state and the forces of the police and fire departments acting within the scope of their duties; 
(6)  Funeral processions proceeding by vehicle under the most reasonable route from a funeral home, church, or residence of the deceased to the place of service or place of interment; 
(7)  Sidewalk processions which observe and comply with traffic regulations and traffic control devices utilizing that portion of a sidewalk nearest the street, but at no time more than one-half of the sidewalk; 
(8)  Those activities of the Cedar Hill Independent School District contained on CHISD property under the approval and supervision of the superintendent of Cedar Hill Independent School District, or his designated agent; 
(9)  Activities of the city under the approval and supervision of the city manager, or his designated agent. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-50. - Application for permit; fee. 
(a)  A person seeking a special event permit shall file an application with the city manager upon forms provided by the city, which shall be accompanied with an application fee as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. In the event of good cause shown the city manager shall have the authority to lower or waive the fee. 
(b)  The city manager shall ensure that other licenses and permits, restrictions, regulations, fees for the city services, safeguards or other conditions deemed necessary by individual city departments for the safe and orderly conduct of a special event be requested, submitted and approved before the special event permit is granted. City services and permits may include but are not limited to: health permit applications; agreement with the police department for police coverage; agreements for the provision of fire department and emergency medical services; agreement with the public works department regarding costs associated with street closures; agreement with the parks and recreation department for the use of any park facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-51. - Filing period. 
(a)  Applications for a special event permit shall be filed not less than forty-five (45) days before the special event is to begin and no more than three hundred sixty-five (365) days before the special event is to begin. 
(b)  Late applications, where good cause is shown, may be considered when filed after the deadline prescribed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-52. - Contents of application. 
The application for a special event permit shall set forth as a minimum the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the person seeking to conduct the special event; 
(2)  If the special event is to be held for or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and name, address, telephone number, and email address of the authorized representatives of such organization; 
(3)  If the special event is to be held by or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant shall file a written statement from that other person showing authority to make the application; 
(4)  The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the person who will be the person responsible for the special event; 
(5)  The time at which on-site activities in preparation for the special event will begin; 
(6)  The dates and times the special event will start and terminate; 
(7)  The details pertaining to sanitation and cleanup; 
(8)  The location, size and number of stages, seating, tents, awnings, canopies, food service booths, first aid stations, portable restrooms or other temporary structures shall be shown; 
(9)  The proposed location of entrances and exits and a plan of evacuation in case of emergency; 
(10)  The proposed location of parking areas and the number of spaces provided for the special event; 
(11)  If food or beverages will be served or sold, include copies of any licenses or permits issued by the appropriate agencies for such vendors; 
(12)  The number, size, material and location of any planned signage shall be included; 
(13)  When public address systems will be used, the location and orientation of those speakers shall be shown; 
(14)  If any portion of the special event is to be held on private property, including parking, written permission for the holding of the special event or parking from the owner of the property or his authorized representative; 
(15)  Copies of permits and agreements with all county officials or state agencies shall be included with the application for a special event permit; 
(16)  If required, a copy of a certificate of insurance that complies with the requirements set forth in section 19-67. 
(17)  Any other information which the city manager shall find necessary under the standards for issuance. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-53. - Standards for issuance. 
A special event permit will be issued if, upon review, the city manager finds that the applicant has secured the police services, if any, required under section 19-50(b); all applicable fees have been paid; and that the special event will be conducted in such a way that: 
(1)  It is not likely to cause injury to persons or property; 
(2)  It will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic near its location or route; 
(3)  There will be adequate sanitation and other required health facilities made available in or adjacent to any public assembly areas; and 
(4)  There are sufficient parking places on the site of the special event to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected to be parked in accordance with section 19-58 or the applicant has made adequate arrangements for off-site parking and transfer of attendees; 
(5)  It will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the special event location or line of movement and the adjacent areas as to unduly interfere with the normal protection for the city; 
(6)  It will not require the diversion of so great a number of fire protection or emergency medical services (EMS) personnel so as to unduly interfere with the provision of these services to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the special event and adjacent areas; 
(7)  The concentration of people, animals, and vehicles at assembly points and during the event will not unduly interfere with proper fire, EMS, and police services. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-54. - Denial or revocation. 
(a)  The city manager may deny a special event permit if: 
(1)  The special event, in the opinion of one (1) or more city departmental directors, would unduly hinder or compromise the delivery or performance of normal services, including previously scheduled construction or maintenance services, or emergency services, or constitutes a public threat, or if the special event will conflict in time and location with another special event, parade or assembly for which a permit has already been granted; 
(2)  The applicant fails to submit a complete application or fails to provide any additional information requested by the city manager; or 
(3)  The proposed date or time for the special event or the location of the special event or parking for such special event would unduly interfere or disrupt the educational activities of a school when such school is in session. 
(4)  The applicant fails to comply with or the special event will violate an ordinance of the city or any other applicable law; 
(5)  The applicant makes or permits the making of a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact on an application for a special event; 
(6)  The applicant has been convicted of violating this article, has had a special event permit revoked within the preceding twelve (12) months, or has failed to pay any additional costs assessed by the city for a previous special event within the previous two (2) years; 
(7)  The applicant fails to provide proof of a license or permit required by this article or another city ordinance or by state law; 
(8)  The applicant is unable or unwilling to provide any required insurance or surety bonds that may be required under this article; 
(9)  The applicant is unable or unwilling to pay any additional costs as may be required by the city manager. 
(b)  A special event permit shall be revoked upon the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant made or permitted to be made a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact on an application for a special event permit; 
(2)  In the event that the police chief, fire chief, director of utilities, other city officials or their designated representatives find that any of the provisions of this section, another city ordinance, or state or federal law is being violated, they shall immediately notify the city manager, and the special event permit issued hereunder shall be revoked; 
(3)  When, in the judgment of the above-named officials, a violation exists which requires immediate abatement, they shall have authority to revoke a special event permit in the absence or unavailability of the city manager. 
(c)  The city manager shall act upon a complete application for a special event permit within fifteen (15) days after the filing thereof. If the city manager does not approve the application, he shall mail to applicant a notice of this action stating the reasons for the denial of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-55. - Notice to adjoining property owners. 
The city manager shall have authority to require that permittee send notices of the special event to adjoining property owners when, in the city manager's judgment, the special event is of a scope and nature that will impact those owners. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-56. - Inspection of special event. 
The city may enter and inspect any property, building, or premises before, during, or after a special event for the purposes of verifying the accuracy of the information on the permit application, ensuring compliance with this chapter and all city ordinances, and determining if there are any conditions on the premises contrary to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or any participant. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-57. - Permit to be maintained on-premises. 
The special event permit shall be maintained at all times on the premises and shall be made available to any police officer or other authorized city employee or representative. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-58. - Parking. 
(a)  An applicant shall submit evidence that sufficient parking will be available to accommodate the projected number of users with a ten (10) percent surplus. The number of spaces deemed sufficient will be determined by the nature of the event, number and age of people attending, including event staff, participants and performers during peak times. If said parking is to be on private property adjacent to the special event, written evidence that the applicant has a right of possession of said property through ownership, lease, license, or other property interest must be provided. When the location is not an established parking area, a parking and traffic plan shall be submitted which will show how the needed parking will be achieved and arranged. The number of parking spaces and layout of parking area, including aisle widths, size of parking spaces and whether parking attendants will be provided, shall be included in the submittal. 
(b)  When adequate parking is not available at or immediately adjacent to the site of the special event, off-site parking may be used. When off-site parking and transfer of attendees is used the parking and traffic plan will show how this will be accomplished. 
(c)  The city shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary as determined by the police department, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or highway or part thereof adjacent to the site of the special event. The city shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-59. - Amusement rides. 
Rides and/or attractions associated with special events shall conform to the statutory rules and regulations set forth in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code Chapter 2151, designated the Amusement Ride Safety Inspection and Insurance Act. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-60. - Hours of operation. 
A special event may be conducted only between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 11:59 p.m. daily. The police department shall be responsible for enforcing this provision. The city manager may waive the time limit on certain special events when good cause is demonstrated by the applicant in writing. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-61. - Tents and temporary structures. 
Any special event which includes the use of a stage, seating, tent, canopy, or other temporary structure shall meet the requirements of the city's fire code and building code except that a separate permit is not required when a special event permit has been obtained. Fire lanes for emergency equipment must be provided and the site prepared in a manner so as not to be a fire hazard as determined by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-62. - Food and beverage service. 
Where food or beverage service is provided or sold, said operation shall be in compliance with all provisions of the food and food establishment ordinances of the city, as well as all other applicable state and local laws. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-63. - Alcohol. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that if alcoholic beverages will be possessed and consumed during a special event, that they have obtained all necessary city approvals for such possession and use. 
(b)  For special events requiring a permit from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC), a copy of the state permit shall be required prior to the issuance of a special event permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-64. - Sanitation. 
(a)  An applicant shall submit evidence in the form of a waste, recycling and sanitary plan that sufficient waste resources will be available to accommodate the projected number of users with a ten (10) percent surplus. The amount of waste receptacles (including dumpsters, bins and recycling bins) and sanitary facilities deemed sufficient will be determined by the nature of the event, number and age of people attending, including event staff, participants and performers during peak times. 
(b)  Waste from animals used in any such special event shall be removed daily from the grounds. Should animals be kept within the city limits at night, they shall be kept not less than three hundred (300) feet from any developed residential or commercial districts. 
(c)  The applicant shall make their best effort to arrange for recycling: 
(1)  The number of recyclable containers at special events shall be equal to the number of trash containers. 
(2)  Recycling and trash containers next to each other throughout the event. 
(3)  Each recyclable container should be clearly identified as a recycling receptacle and display a list of types of recyclable materials accepted. 
(4)  Organizers can determine types of recyclables to be collected. 
(5)  The event's coordinator must ensure that all recyclable materials are delivered to a recycling facility, and not to a landfill. 
(6)  The use of disposable expanded polystyrene (a.k.a. Styrofoam ™ ) foodware is prohibited due to its tendency to easily break apart and create litter. Alternatives such as plastic, paper, or reusable plates/cups should be used instead. 
(d)  If facilities are used on private property adjacent to the special event, written evidence that the applicant has a right of possession of said property through ownership, lease, license, or other property interest must be provided. 
(e)  Contents of required waste, recycling and sanitary plan. 
(1)  Name and contact info of contracted vendor; 
(2)  Number of and placement of sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Number, placement and size of dumpsters; 
(4)  Number and placement of trash and recycling bins; 
(5)  Pickup schedules. 
(f)  Water usage and disposal of wastewater. 
(1)  Any special event or related activity desiring use of water from the city water system must coordinate with the utilities department to obtain a temporary meter. Deposit for the meter and payment for water used shall be in accordance with ordinances of the city. 
(2)  An applicant shall submit a plan for the disposal of wastewater and the utilities department shall approve the plan. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-65. - Public address systems. 
During the special event, the permit holder shall comply with all applicable noise regulations of the city as set forth in section 23-5.5.3. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-66. - Signage. 
Signage used in accordance with the special event shall comply with the sign regulations of the city under the provisions for promotional sign pursuant to article XII. Signs advertising the special event or directing potential customers to the special event site are expressly prohibited in the city rights-of-way (see section 4-243). 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-67. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  When a special event is partially or fully contained on the city rights-of-way, the applicant for a special event permit shall furnish the city manager with a certificate of general liability insurance with limits of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence/two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate and naming the city as an additional insured. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the right to lower, waive, or increase the public liability insurance limits based upon the type of special event, equipment, machinery, location, number of people or animals involved and other pertinent factors or risks associated with the special event. 
(c)  An applicant shall have the right to show cause why the insurance requirement should be reduced or waived, and to present such request to the city manager. Upon receipt of such request, the city manager shall consult with the city's risk manager or his designee. The city manager shall respond to an applicant's request for lower insurance or waiver within five (5) days from date of request. 
(d)  If a mutually agreeable insurance limit cannot be agreed upon, the application shall be considered denied. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-68. - Indemnification. 
When a special event is partially or fully contained on city property, an applicant shall sign an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, agents, and representatives against all claims of liability and causes of action resulting from injury or damage to persons or property arising out of the special event. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-69. - Additional costs. 
(a)  In the event the city manager determines, upon a review of the application, that a special event may require the special attention and involvement of city personnel or facilities, the city manager shall so notify the applicant. In such event, prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the applicant and the city manager shall agree upon the cost of city services including but not limited to: policing, fire, EMS, cleaning, closure of roads, and the applicant shall pay that amount to the city upon application. Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the applicant shall agree in writing to pay any additional costs to the city incurred as a result of the special event within five (5) days of the date upon which the city informs the permittee of the amount of such additional costs. Should the permittee not pay such additional costs, no future special event permits shall be issued to the same permittee for a period not to exceed five (5) years. Nothing herein shall preclude the city from enforcing any legal or equitable remedy against the permittee for recovery of such additional costs. 
(b)  The chief of police or his/her designee shall determine whether and to what extent additional police services are reasonably necessary for the special event for traffic control and public safety. The chief of police shall base this decision on the size, location, duration, time and date of the special event, and the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and use of the streets and sidewalks. If possible, without disruption of ordinary police services or compromise of public safety, off-duty personnel will police the special event. If additional police services for the special event are deemed necessary by the chief of police, he shall so inform the applicant for the special event permit. The applicant then shall have the duty to secure the police services deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
Sec. 19-70. - Offenses and penalty. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that this section governs public health and safety and, therefore, any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be liable for penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that a violation of this article is found to exist or continue shall constitute a separate, punishable offense. 
(b)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2018-641, § 2, 4-24-18)  
ARTICLE IV. - VISIBILITY ON STREETS, OBSTRUCTIONS AND FIRE HYDRANT CLEARANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, § 6-21 et seq.; nuisances generally, § 9-16 et seq.; weeds and grass on vacant lots, § 9-146 et seq. 
 
Sec. 19-71. - Height above streets and sidewalks. 
The city will have the authority to require all landowners of any property bordering, adjoining or contiguous to a public right-of-way to keep any portion of such tree, shrub, vine, etc. from overhanging or obtruding upon or over any dedicated alleyway, street, highway in the city unless there be a thirteen and one-half (13½) feet clearance between the surface of all portions of such street or highway and the overhanging tree limb, shrub, vine or plant of any description or kind. Sidewalks shall have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above the surface of the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 97-330, § 1, 8-26-97; Ord. No. 2015-587, § 3, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 2016-589, § 4, 8-23-16)  
Sec. 19-72. - Fire hydrant clearance. 
No tree, shrub, vine, hedge or any similar plant of any description or kind shall be grown or maintained between the sidewalk and edge of street at lesser distance than seven and one-half (7½) feet from any fire hydrant in the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-330, § 2, 8-26-97)  
Sec. 19-73. - Visibility triangle. 
(a)  Definitions. The area of public and private property within a triangle formed by two (2) intersecting streets, commercial driveway or alley is called a visibility triangle. The legs of the triangle are formed by the curb line of the streets and are extended to the point at which they intersect, which usually forms a ninety-degree angle. Each of the legs are attached at the end by a diagonal line (the hypotenuse), which forms a triangle. Dimensions of a visibility triangle are based on speed, type of roadway and curvature of the roadway. The criteria to determine the size of a triangle are specified in division 300 of the city's "Manual for General Design Standards for Pavement, Drainage Systems and Water and Sanitary Sewer Systems." 
(b)  Visibility triangle requirements. No walls, buildings, fences or other obstructions to view in excess of thirty (30) inches in height shall be placed within the visibility triangle areas at the intersections of streets, commercial driveways and alleys, except trees pruned high enough to permit unobstructed vision to automobile drivers. 
(Ord. No. 97-330, § 3, 8-26-97; Ord. No. 2017-621, § 1, 8-29-17)  
Sec. 19-74. - City removal and trimming in right-of-way. 
If the resources are available, the city may cut and remove all limbs and branches overhanging streets at no expense to the adjoining property owners. 
(Ord. No. 97-330, § 4, 8-26-97)  
Sec. 19-75. - Penalty for violation. 
Failure on the part of any land owner to bring his property into compliance with this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not to exceed the maximum allowable by law. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 97-330, § 5, 8-26-97)  
Secs. 19-76—19-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OBSTRUCTIONS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 19-100. - Definitions. 
Obstruction means any sign, equipment, or any other structure or object of real or personal property that is within a right-of-way and which, in the discretion of the city manager or his or her designee, interferes with or jeopardizes the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of Cedar Hill. 
Right-of-way means the area in, on, above or below a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or easement in which the city has an interest. 
(Ord. No. 2006-294, § 1, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 19-101. - Obstruction of right-of-way. 
(a)  No person shall place, construct or erect any obstruction within or across any right-of-way. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to impair a person from constructing a facility within a right-of-way in accordance with chapter 19, article II of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-294, § 1, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 19-102. - Right to abate unlawful obstruction or use not impaired; city not required to a obtain permit. 
The provisions of this section shall not be construed to impair the right of the city or its designee to abate or cause to be abated any obstruction or use of a right-of-way. The city reserves the right to abate an obstruction and charge all costs incurred in connection with the abatement to the owner or party responsible for the of the obstruction, but the city shall have no duty to remove the obstruction. The city shall not be required to obtain any permit in order to exercise its rights under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-294, § 1, 6-27-06)  
Sec. 19-103. - Removal required. 
(a)  Any obstruction prohibited by this article which has been placed or constructed within a right-of-way prior to the effective date of this article, and which remains in the right-of-way on the effective date of this article, shall be removed by the owner or other party responsible for the obstruction within ten (10) days of the effective date of this article. The owner or other party responsible for the obstruction shall be responsible for all costs in connection with the removal of the obstruction. 
(b)  Failure to remove an obstruction shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and upon conviction thereof shall subject the offender to a fine in an amount not to exceed the maximum fine allowable by law. Each day that such violation is committed or continues shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 2006-294, § 1, 6-27-06)  
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONEERING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 19-104. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide reasonable regulations for electioneering on city-owned or controlled public property when such property is used as an election polling place. The regulations contained herein are to mitigate safety concerns, prevent damage to public facilities, and ensure that the property is sufficiently available for the city's patrons who use the facilities other than for election purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-578, § 3, 12-8-15)  
Sec. 19-105. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the meanings as set forth in this section: 
Electioneering shall mean communicating, posting, use, or distribution of political campaign advertisements, signs, endorsements or literature, including the use of tents, chairs, booths, tables or other furniture or devices to post, use or distribute political campaign signs or literature. 
Political campaign sign or literature shall mean any temporary sign or advertisement promoting the candidacy of a person running for governmental office or promoting a position on an issue to be voted on at a governmental election. 
Voting period shall mean the period each day beginning the hour the polls are open for voting and ending when the polls close or the last voter has voted, whichever is later on election day and early voting days. 
(Ord. No. 2015-578, § 3, 12-8-15)  
Sec. 19-106. - Regulations and exceptions. 
(a)  The following regulations apply to electioneering on the premises of public property during the voting period. 
(1)  It is an offense for any person to leave any political campaign sign or literature on public property that is used as a polling place other than during the voting period and for thirty (30) minutes before and after the voting period. 
(2)  It is an offense for any person to engage in electioneering or loitering in or on driveways, parking areas, on medians within parking areas, or driveways on the premises of public property used as a polling location, or outside of designated electioneering areas on public property used as a polling location. This restriction shall not apply to electioneering signs that are attached to vehicles that are lawfully parked at the premises of a polling location. 
(3)  It is an offense for any person to attach, place or otherwise affix any political campaign sign, literature or material to any building, tree, shrub, pole or other improvement on public property used as a polling location. 
(4)  It is an offense for any person to place any political campaign sign or literature within twenty-five (25) feet of the public roadway adjacent to public property used as a polling location. 
(5)  It is an offense for any person to place a political campaign sign on the premises of public property used as a polling location that exceeds thirty-six (36) square feet and is more than eight (8) feet in height, including any supporting poles. 
(6)  In addition to imposing any criminal penalty, electioneering sign(s) located in violation of this section may be removed and disposed of by the City of Cedar Hill. 
(7)  The authority to conduct electioneering on public property under this article is limited to the property on the premises where the voting is conducted and only for the voting period. 
(b)  The regulations set forth in (a) above shall not apply to any signs, materials or other messages authorized by the City of Cedar Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2015-578, § 3, 12-8-15)  
Secs. 19-107—19-112. - Reserved.  
Chapter 20 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Board of development, § 2-101 et seq.; capital improvement board, § 2-121 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; trench safety program, § 4-311 et seq.; landscape regulations, § 4-331 et seq.; civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 5; flood damage prevention and control, Ch. 7; natural resources, Ch. 13; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; planning, Ch. 16; public utilities, Ch. 18; streets and other public places, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference— Platting and recording subdivisions, V.T.C.A. art. 974a. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to the adoption of Ord. No. 86-888 on Dec. 16, 1986, which set out requirements relative to park land dedication, the provisions formerly codified as Ch. 20, §§ 20-1—20-27, subdivision regulations, have been redesignated as Art. I, and the provisions of Ord. No. 86-888 have been included as Art. II, §§ 20-41—20-48 at the discretion of the editor to facilitate classification and reference. 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be determined in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. 
Addition shall mean one (1) or more lots, tracts or parcels of land. 
Alleys are minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side properties otherwise abutting on a street, and for all utilities with exception to water and sewer utilities. 
Arterial streets and highways are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic and which are designated in the master plan as Class I, II, expressway or freeway. 
Base flood shall mean the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
City engineer shall mean that person or group of persons or consultants or any employee thereof that has been appointed as city engineer by the city council. 
City manager shall mean that person appointed by the city council to serve as the chief administrative officer for the city government. 
Collector streets, Class III are those which carry traffic from minor streets to major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development and which are designated in the master plan as secondary streets. 
Construction shall mean installation of city maintained facilities. 
Cul-de-sac is a short minor street having but one (1) vehicular service access to another street and terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
Dead-end street is a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one (1) outlet. 
Development shall mean any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, paving, drainage or utility improvements. 
Drainage way shall mean all areas beneath a ground elevation defined as being the highest elevation of the following: 
(1)  One (1) foot above the base flood, calculated by the city's criteria. 
(2)  One (1) foot above the elevation required for the peak discharge for the one-hundred-year design flood, Alternate C, of the Flood Insurance Study, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Agency. 
(3)  The top of the high bank. 
Easement shall mean a right granted for the purpose of limited public or semipublic use across, over or under private land. 
Engineer shall mean a person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the provision of engineering. 
Feeder lines shall mean those electric lines that emanate from substations to distribute power throughout an area. 
Final plat shall mean a plat of a subdivision which has been approved in accordance with the requirements of these regulations and which has been filed for record with the county clerk of Dallas or Ellis County. 
Floodplain shall mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from the base flood. 
Floodway shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
Lateral lines shall mean those electric lines that emanate from a feeder line and used to distribute power to smaller area of electric consumers. These electric lines are normally connected to a feeder line through a sectionalizing device such as a fuse or disconnect switch. 
Lot shall mean land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings and including such open spaces as are required by ordinances of the city and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place. 
Lot of record shall mean a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the county clerk of Dallas or Ellis County, or parcel of land, the deed for which was recorded in the office of the county clerk of Dallas or Ellis County prior to March 25, 1986. 
Marginal access streets are minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
Planning and zoning commission shall mean the agency appointed by the city council as an advisory body to it relative to zoning, platting and planning matters and the physical development of the city and its environs and designated by the city charter as the planning and zoning commission. 
Platting shall mean the plat of an addition or subdivision to the city filed for record in the county where the addition or subdivision is situated. 
Public service director shall mean the individual in the public services department with responsibility for inspection and approval of construction of development projects. 
Replatting shall mean the arrangement of any part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract. 
Sepia is a three-mil diazo process polyester film sepia. 
Service lines shall mean those electric lines which through a transformer connect a lateral line to a customer's service entrance. 
Standards shall mean the official maps, master plans, ordinances and specifications of the city. 
Streets and alleys shall mean a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise designated. 
Subdivision shall mean the division of any tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots for the purpose of building development, expressly excluding development for agricultural purposes, and shall include resubdivision. Lots combined for use as one (1) lot for development must be replatted into one (1) lot. Subdivision shall also mean the division or redivision of an existing subdivision together with any change of lot size therein or with the relocation of any street. Subdivision does not include the division of land for agricultural purposes in parcels or tracts of ten (10) acres or less. A division of land for single-family use which does not involve the creation of any new street, alley, easement or access for building sites shall not be deemed a subdivision. 
Surveyor shall mean a licensed state land surveyor or a professional land surveyor authorized by the land surveying practice act to practice the profession of surveying. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(III), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 94-194, § 1, 9-27-94) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 20-2. - Compliance with chapter. 
All land within the limits and/or legal jurisdiction of the city shall be developed in accordance with the rules and regulations set out in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any owner, or agent of any owner, to subdivide or plat any land into lots, blocks and streets, or to sell property therein and thereby which has not been platted or subdivided in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § III, 3-25-86)  
Sec. 20-3. - Division of land to be under supervision of the city. 
(a)  All land not heretofore subdivided into lots, blocks and streets within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall hereafter be laid out under the direction of and approved by the city council upon recommendation of the city planning and zoning commission in accordance with the rules and regulations herein contained. No right-of-way, street, alley, utility, or drainage improvements shall be recognized, accepted or serviced by the city unless such right-of-way and improvements are officially approved by the city; provided further, no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless such building or structure is located on a lot which conforms to the rules and regulations herein contained. 
(b)  Prior to the plat being considered by the city planning and zoning commission and city council, the plat will be reviewed by the city manager or his designated representative and city engineer for recommendations. 
(c)  No officer or employee of the city shall do, or cause to be done, any work upon any street or in any addition or subdivision of the city unless all requirements of these regulations have been complied with by the owner of such addition or subdivision. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(I), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 2005-249, § 1, 8-30-05)  
Sec. 20-4. - Withholding improvements. 
It shall be the policy of the city to withhold all city improvements, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of sewage facilities and water service, from all additions, the platting of which has not been officially approved by the city council. Improvements should not be initiated until approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(II), 3-25-86)  
Sec. 20-5. - Filing fees for preliminary and final plat. 
(a)  The following schedule of fees and charges shall be collected by the city and when any preliminary plat is tendered to the city council, and each of the fees and charges provided for herein shall be paid in advance, and no action of the city council or any other board or agency shall be valid until the fees have been paid to the city. 
(1)  Preliminary plats: All preliminary plats shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per plat, plus ten dollars ($10.00) per lot. 
(2)  Final plats: All final plats shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) per plat, plus ten dollars ($10.00) per lot. 
(3)  Other plats: All other plats for land studies, industrial commercial, or multiple dwellings shall be five dollars ($5.00) per acre per plat. 
(4)  Replat: Filing fees for all replats shall be the same fee as for final plats. 
(b)  These fees shall be charged on all plats regardless of the action taken by the city, whether the plat is approved or denied. 
(c)  The money collected shall defray the cost of administrative, technical, and clerical services necessary to properly investigate and process the plats and replats of subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(IV), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 95-17, § 1, 8-8-95)  
Sec. 20-6. - Application review procedures. 
(a)  Completeness determination. Every application for approval of a master land plan, preliminary plat or final plat shall be subject to a determination of completeness by the planning director. No application shall be accepted for processing unless it is accompanied by all documents required by and prepared in accordance with the requirements of these subdivision regulations. The director from time to time may identify additional requirements for a complete application that are not contained within but are consistent with the application contents and standards set forth in the subdivision regulations. The director also may promulgate a fee for review of the application for completeness. 
(b)  Incompleteness as grounds for denial. The processing of an application by any city official or employee prior to the time the application is determined to be complete shall not be binding on the city as the official acceptance of the application for filing, and the incompleteness of the application shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the application. A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of these subdivision regulations. 
(c)  Pre-application conference. A property owner may request a pre-application conference with the director for purposes of identifying requirements that are applicable to a proposed plat. The request shall be made in writing on a form prepared by the director and shall state that any proposed development concept discussed at the pre-application conference is not intended as a plan of development or application for plat approval. 
(d)  Time for making determination. Following submission of a plan of development or plat application, the planning director shall make a determination in writing whether the plan or application constitutes a complete application for a master land plan, a preliminary plat or a final plat not later than the tenth (10th) business day after the date the application is submitted. The determination shall specify the documents or other information needed to complete the application and shall state the date the application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided. 
(e)  When deemed complete. An application for approval of a master land plan or preliminary plat that is filed on or after April 28, 2005, or any subsequent preliminary plat or final plat application filed after approval of such master land plan or preliminary plat, shall be deemed complete on the eleventh (11th) business day after the application has been received, if the applicant has not otherwise been notified that the application is incomplete. 
(f)  Time for completing application. If an application is not completed on or before the forty-fifth (45th) day after the application is submitted to the planning director for processing the application in accordance with his or her written notification, the application will be deemed to have expired and it will be returned to the applicant together with any accompanying documents. Thereafter, a new application for approval of the master land plan, preliminary plat or final plat must be submitted. The city may retain any fee paid for reviewing the application for completeness. 
(g)  Vested rights. No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has expired pursuant to this section, or from the filing of a complete application that is subsequently denied. 
(h)  Official filing date. The time period established by state law or these subdivision regulations for processing or deciding an application shall commence on the official filing date. The official filing date for the decision of the planning and zoning decision on a plat application shall be the date that a complete application has been accepted for filing under this section. The official filing date for the decision of the city council on a plat application shall be the date that a final decision has been rendered by the commission on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2005-249, § 2, 8-30-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-239, § 2, adopted August 30, 2005, amended section 20-6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former section 20-6, pertained to procedures for subdivision, and derived from Ord. No. 86-846, § II(V), 3-26-86; Ord. No. 94-194, § 2, 9-27-94.  
Sec. 20-7. - Annexation. 
If the property is not within the city limits and the owner desires that it be annexed so as to be qualified to receive city services, when available, and be afforded zoning protection, the owner must petition the city for annexation through lawful annexation proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(VI), 3-26-86)  
Sec. 20-8. - Zoning. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this subdivision ordinance to the contrary, an application for a master land plan, preliminary plat or final plat shall not be considered complete unless accompanied by a copy of the zoning ordinance or other certification verifying that the proposed use and lot dimensions for which the application is submitted is authorized by the zoning district in which the property is located. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(VII), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 2005-249, § 3, 8-30-05)  
Sec. 20-9. - Master land plan procedures. 
(a)  Purpose and effect. The purpose of a master land plan shall be to delineate the sequence and timing of development within a proposed subdivision, where the tract to be developed will be developed in phases or is part of a larger parcel of land owned by the applicant, in order to determine compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and the availability and capacity of public improvements needed to serve the development. Approval of a master land plan authorizes the applicant to submit an application for approval of a preliminary plat. 
(b)  Applicability. A master land plan shall be required for any division of land where proposed development of the tract is to occur in phases, or for land inside city limits, where the land is located within an existing or proposed PD planned development district. A master land plan may not be accepted for filing and any application that conflicts with the limitations of this section shall be deemed incomplete, if the land subject to the master land plan exceeds one hundred fifty (150) acres for single family residential developments, or seventy-five (75) acres for other types of developments. A phasing schedule for the master land plan shall not be for more than five (5) years. The limitations on acreage and phasing schedule do not apply where the proposed acreage or phasing schedule for the master land plan is in conformity with an approved planned development. If the land subject to the master land plan is part of a larger parcel, the remaining land shall be shown as a remainder tract, but shall not be included within the master land plan. 
(c)  Remainder tract. A remainder tract is that portion of a larger parcel that is not included within the boundaries of a proposed plat. Remainder tracts shall not be considered lots or tracts of the subdivision. Approval of a plat shall not constitute approval of development on a remainder tract. The city may require that information be submitted for a remainder tract with a master land plan application solely for the purpose of determining whether the planned public facilities and improvements proposed to serve the master land plan will be adequate. Information concerning remainder tracts may be considered in formulating conditions to approval of the master land plan application. Based upon such information, the city may require that additional or less land be included in the subdivision plat in order to satisfy the standards applicable to the plat application. If the master land plan is approved, a plat application for a remainder tract shall not be accepted for filing and any application that conflicts with the limitations of this section shall be deemed incomplete until a final plat has been approved for the first phase of the master land plan. 
(d)  Application. An application for a master land plan shall be submitted to the planning director, together with the number of copies of the master land plan required by current submittal standards and drawn at a scale of not more than four hundred (400) feet to the inch. If more detailed contour information is not available, the USGS map contours may be used for concept planning purposes in most cases. The application for the master land plan shall include the following information: 
(1)  Names and addressed of the subdividers, record owner, land planner, engineer and/or surveyor. 
(2)  Proposed name of the subdivision. 
(3)  Location in relation to the rest of the city and boundaries of proposed subdivision. 
(4)  A schematic layout of the entire tract to be subdivided, any remainder tracts and its relationship to adjacent property and existing adjoining developments. 
(5)  Proposed major categories of land use showing existing and proposed zoning. 
(6)  Proposed number of dwelling units and population densities. 
(7)  Proposed and existing arterials and collector streets to serve the land to be platted consistent with the thoroughfare plan or proposed amendments. 
(8)  Location of proposed sites for parks, schools and other public uses as consistent with those shown in the Comprehensive Plan. 
(9)  Significant natural drainage features including drainage courses and wooded areas, as delineated on USGS topographic maps or on any other topographic maps showing equivalent information. 
(10)  Significant man made features such as railroad, roads, buildings, utilities or other physical structures as shown on USGS topographic maps, utility company records and city records when such features affect the plan. 
(11)  Proposed dedication of land or rights-of-way for and construction of public improvements, whether on site or off site, intended to serve each proposed phase of the subdivision. 
(12)  Designation of each phase of development within the subdivision, the order of development, and a schedule for the development of each phase of the master land plan. 
(13)  A detailed statement of how the proposed subdivision will be served by water, wastewater, roadway and drainage facilities that have adequate capacity to serve the development. 
(e)  Procedures. 
(1)  Planning and zoning commission action. After review of the master land plan application by the director and the city engineer, the application shall be scheduled for consideration by the planning and zoning commission. The commission shall decide whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny the master land plan application based on the criteria for approval in subsection (f). 
(2)  City council action. Following decision by the planning and zoning commission, the city council shall determine whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny the master land plan application, taking into consideration the action taken by the commission, and the criteria for approval in subsection (f). 
(3)  Conditions. The commission or the council may impose such conditions to the approval of the master land plan application as are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with the criteria in subsection (f). Such conditions may address but are not limited to matters involving conformity with the city's zoning regulations, the availability and capacity of public improvements, or the phasing of development. In addition to other conditions, approval of the master land plan may be conditioned on exclusion of land from the master land plan or adjustments in the proposed sequence or timing in the proposed phases of the development. 
(f)  Criteria for approval. The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the application for a master land plan shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied: 
(1)  The master land plan is consistent with all existing or proposed zoning requirements for the property, including any development plans for a PD planned development district and standards of any applicable overlay district, and any approved development or annexation agreements. 
(2)  The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities generally conforms to the city's master facilities plans for such facilities. 
(3)  The water, wastewater, roadway and drainage systems serving the development have adequate capacity to accommodate the demands for services created by each phase of the development by the time of final plat approval. 
(4)  The schedule of development is feasible and prudent, and assures that the proposed development will progress to completion within the time limits proposed. 
(5)  The location, size and sequence of the phases of development proposed assure orderly and efficient development of the land subject to the plat. Each phase of the development shall contain the minimum number of dwelling units or quantity of non-residential use to assure that such standard is met. 
(6)  Where the proposed development is located in whole in part in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and is subject to an interlocal agreement under Tex. Local Government Code Ch. 242, the proposed master land plan meets any county standards to be applied pursuant to the agreement. 
(g)  Expiration and extension. 
(1)  Time of expiration. The subdivider shall submit and receive approval for a preliminary plat for the first and all subsequent phases of the master land plan within the time limits prescribed in this section or in an approved phasing schedule. The master land plan shall expire within eighteen (18) months of the date the city council approves the master land plan application, unless a preliminary plat has been submitted and approved within such period. Within eighteen (18) months of approval of the preliminary plat for the first phase of the development, or within such other period as may be provided in an approved phasing schedule, a complete application for a preliminary plat must be approved for the next phase of the development, continuing with each successive phase, until preliminary plats have been approved for all the land subject to the original master land plan in accordance with this section or an approved phasing schedule. Failure to meet a platting deadline as prescribed in this section or as included in the phasing schedule, shall result in the expiration of the master land plan for that and all subsequent phases of the development. If an approved preliminary plat subsequently expires, the master land plan for that phase shall expire, and for all other phases for which a preliminary plat or final plat has not been approved, is not pending for approval or no longer remains in effect. 
(2)  Extension. The expiration date for any phase of the development may be extended by the city council for a period of not more than one (1) year, provided that a request for extension is made in writing by the subdivider at least thirty (30) days before the approved master land plan lapses. Extension of the expiration date for the phase extends the expiration date for the master land plan for a like period. Every request for extension shall include a statement of the reasons why the expiration date should be extended. The council shall take into account the reasons for the requested extension, the ability of the applicant to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval, whether extension is likely to result in timely completion of the project, and the extent to which newly adopted regulations should be applied to the original application. The council may attach conditions to approval of an extension request such as are needed to assure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served, including a requirement that one or more current development standards be applied to subsequent plat applications within the area subject to the master land plan. 
(Ord. No. 2005-249, § 4, 8-30-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-249, § 4, adopted August 30, 2005, amended section 20-9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former section 20-9, pertained to land study, and derived from Ord. No. 86-846, § II(VIII), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 94-194, § 3, 9-27-94.  
Sec. 20-10. - Preliminary plat and plans. 
(a)  An application in writing requesting approval of the preliminary plat, together with six (6) copies of the plat and plans, must be submitted to the city secretary with filing fees as provided herein, with written application for conditional approval at least twenty (20) working days prior to the hearing of such application together with twenty (20) reduced copies of plat and plans measuring eight and one-half (8½) by eleven (11) or eleven (11) by fourteen (14) inches. 
(b)  The purpose of the submittal is to allow the city to review overall platting of the tract, water and sewer service, street patterns and other city services within the addition or subdivision for conformance with the requirements of the city. The plat and plans shall be prepared as follows: 
(1)  The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or larger, on paper measuring twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. 
(2)  It shall contain the name of the proposed addition or subdivision, the name and address of the developer and the engineer or surveyor responsible for the design or survey, the tract designation, and other descriptions according to the abstract and survey records of Dallas or Ellis county. 
(3)  It shall contain a north point, scale, and date. 
(4)  The boundary line of the tract, accurate in scale, shall be shown. 
(5)  It shall show the names of adjacent additions or subdivisions or names of record owners of adjoining parcels, the location, widths, and the names of all existing or platted streets, easements, or other public ways within or adjacent to the tract, existing railroad rights-of-way, and other important features such as section lines, political subdivision or corporation section lines, political subdivision or corporation limits and school district boundaries. 
(6)  It shall show all parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved in the deeds for the use of all property owners in the proposed subdivision, together with the purpose or conditions of limitations of such reservation. 
(7)  It shall show the layout and width of proposed streets, alleys, and easements. 
(8)  It shall show the layout, numbers, and dimensions of proposed lots and all building lines. 
(9)  The location of proposed screening walls shall be tentatively indicated. 
(10)  The preliminary plat shall show contours of the tract in intervals of ten (10) feet or less, referred to sea level datum. 
(11)  The plans shall show existing sewers, water mains, fire hydrants, culverts, or other underground structures within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto with pipe sizes and locations indicated. 
(12)  The plans shall show proposed water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer pipe lines with sizes indicated and valves, fire hydrants, fittings, manholes, inlets, culverts, bridges, and other appurtenances or structures shown. 
(13)  The plans shall show stormwater detention/retention basins as required by the city. 
(14)  The plans shall show all existing floodways and one-hundred-year floodplains. 
(15)  The plat shall show all street names. 
(16)  The plat shall show all park spaces as required by the park dedication ordinance. 
(c)  Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. 
(d)  An approved preliminary plat shall expire eighteen (18) months from the date of approval by the city council, unless a final plat for all of the land subject to the preliminary plat has been approved by the city council within such period, or unless the preliminary plat has been extended. Subsequent expiration of the final plat shall also result in expiration of the preliminary plat for the same land. The council may extend a preliminary plat for a period not to exceed one (1) year on the written request of the applicant. The request must be filed before the preliminary plat expires and must document the reasons for the extension. In determining whether to grant a request, the council shall take into account the reasons for the requested extension, the ability of the applicant to comply with any conditions attached to the original approval, whether extension is likely to result in timely completion of the project, and the extent to which any newly adopted regulations should be applied to the proposed development. In granting an extension, the council may impose such conditions as are needed to assure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served, including compliance with one or more new adopted development standards. 
(e)  The preliminary plats shall be distributed to the following and evidence of such receipt from each of the following, attached with application: 
(1)  Cedar Hill Independent School District when the plat is within the school district's boundaries or to such other independent school districts as may be affected by the plat (one (1) copy). 
(2)  City engineer (one (1) copy with all plans). 
(3)  City secretary (six (6) copies with all plans) plus twenty (20) reduced copies eight and one-half (8½) by eleven (11) or eleven (11) by fourteen (14) inches. 
(4)  Texas Power and Light Company (one (1) copy). 
(5)  Lone Star Gas Company (one (1) copy). 
(6)  Southwestern Bell Telephone Company (one (1) copy). 
(7)  Dallas/Ellis County commissioner and Dallas/Ellis County public works director if the subdivision is outside the city limits (one (1) copy each). 
(8)  Storer Cable TV (one (1) copy). 
(f)  An application for preliminary plat approval is considered filed with the city when it has been determined to be complete pursuant to section 20-6. 
(g)  After review of the preliminary plat application by the director and the city engineer, the application shall be scheduled for consideration by the planning and zoning commission. The commission shall decide whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny the preliminary plat application based on the criteria for approval in subsection (i). 
(h)  Following a decision by the planning and zoning commission, the city council shall determine whether to approve, approve with conditions or deny the preliminary plat application, taking into consideration the action taken by the commission. 
(i)  In deciding an application for preliminary plat approval, the commission and council shall take into consideration the following criteria: 
(1)  Where no master land plan has been approved, the following criteria apply: 
a.  The plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property; 
b.  The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities conform to the master facilities plans for the facilities, including without limitation the water facilities, wastewater facilities, transportation, drainage and other master facilities plans; 
c.  The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities, and easements and rights-of-way are adequate to serve the subdivision in accordance with section 20-22; 
d.  The plat meets all other requirements of these subdivision regulations; and 
e.  The plat meets any county standards to be applied under an interlocal agreement between the city and a county under Texas Local Government Code Ch. 242, where the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and in the county. 
(2)  Where the preliminary plat is subject to an approved master land plan, the following criteria shall apply: 
a.  The plat conforms to the general layout of the master land plan and is consistent with the phasing plan approved therein; 
b.  The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities, and easements and rights-of-way are adequate to serve the subdivision in accordance with section 20-22; 
c.  The plat meets all other requirements of these subdivision regulations; and 
d.  The plat meets any county standards to be applied under an interlocal agreement between the city and a county under Texas Local Government Code, Ch. 242, where the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and in the county. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(IX), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 94-194, § 4, 9-27-94; Ord. No. 95-217, § 2, 8-8-95; Ord. No. 2005-249, § 5, 8-30-05)  
Sec. 20-11. - Final plat and plans. 
(a)  Six (6) copies of the final plat and construction plans of the final plat shall be submitted to the city secretary only after all changes and alterations have been made in accordance with the review and acceptance of the preliminary plat. Such plats shall be filed at least twenty-five (25) working days prior to the hearing at which approval is requested. All fees shall be paid at the time of filing. 
(b)  The final plat shall contain the following: 
(1)  Be drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet or larger on paper measuring twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches. 
(2)  The boundary lines with accurate distances and bearings and the exact location and width of all existing or recorded streets intersecting the boundary of the tract. 
(3)  True bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments, which shall be accurately described on the plat; municipal, township, county, or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and bearings. 
(4)  An accurate location of the subdivision with reference to the abstract and survey records of Dallas or Ellis County. 
(5)  The exact layout including: 
a.  Street names. 
b.  The length of all arcs, radii, internal angles, points of curvature, lengths, and bearings of the tangents. 
c.  All easements for rights-of-way provided for public services or utilities and any limitations of the easements. 
d.  All lot numbers and lines with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths of feet and with bearings and angles to street and alley lines. 
(6)  Provide one (1) sepia for insertion to scale of city base map. 
(7)  The accurate location, material, and approximate size of all monuments. 
(8)  The accurate outline of all property which is offered for dedication for public use with the purpose indicated thereon, and of all property that may be reserved by deed covenant for common use of the property owners in the addition or subdivision. 
(9)  Setback building lines. 
(10)  Special restrictions including, but not limited to, drainage and floodway and fire lanes. 
(11)  Proposed name of the addition or subdivision. 
(12)  Name and address of the developer. 
(13)  North point, scale, and date. 
(14)  Certification by a registered professional land surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him and that all the monuments shown thereon actually exist, and that their location, size, and material description are correctly shown. 
(15)  A certificate of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys, parks and playgrounds to public use forever, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner and lienholder of the land along with complete and accurate description of the land subdivided and the streets dedicated. 
(16)  Additional certificates to properly dedicate easements or rights-of-way as may be necessary. 
(17)  Boundary survey closure and area calculations. 
(18)  The plans shall show all floodplains and floodways. 
(19)  The location of screening walls shall be clearly indicated. 
(20)  The plat shall show all park space as required by the park dedication ordinance. 
(21)  A landscape plan for medians and intersections shall be submitted and shall conform to the guidelines established in this section. 
a.  For residential subdivisions and for nonresidential subdivisions where the landscaping occurs in common areas to be maintained by a property owner's association, the following plans shall be submitted. 
1.  Medians and intersections landscape plans along principal and minor arterial, residential collector, commercial/industrial secondary streets shall be submitted. 
2.  Subdivision entry features including monument signs. 
3.  Screening walls. 
4.  Irrigation systems are required in all medians and at all intersections. 
b.  A certified copy of the owner association agreement and association by-laws where required for maintenance. 
c.  The landscape plans shall be prepared by or under supervision of a registered landscape architect in the State of Texas and shall bear his seal on each sheet. 
d.  The irrigation plan shall be designed by a license irrigator. 
e.  Any change in landscape design during construction shall be made by the landscape architect and shall be approved by the city. 
f.  Median and intersection treatment. All medians and intersection shall be landscaped and irrigated with a sprinkler system. When a developer is responsible for the construction of a median opening and left turn lanes in the median, he shall also be responsible for the costs associated with the landscaping in those portions of the medians affected by the opening. 
(22)  City approval block shall be placed on the plat as shown below: 
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL 
Approved this _______ day of _______, 19_______ by the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
_____
Mayor of Cedar Hill, Texas 
_____
City Secretary 
_____
Chairman Planning and Zoning Commission 
(c)  No application for final plat approval shall be considered complete unless accompanied by a complete set of construction plans prepared by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas, bearing his seal and signature on each sheet. 
(d)  The construction plans shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas and shall bear his seal and signature on each sheet. 
(e)  The plans shall contain all necessary information for construction of the project, including screening walls. All materials specified shall conform to the standard specifications and standard details of the city. 
(f)  Each sheet of the plans shall contain a title block including space for the notation of revisions. This space is to be completed with each revision to the plan sheet and shall clearly note the nature of the revision and date the revision was made. 
(g)  After review of the plat and plans, the plat shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission and the city council for their determination. If approved subject to changes, the engineer for the owner shall make all changes required. The city engineer or his designated representative will review and return all plans to the engineer of the owner for use by the contractors. Each contractor shall maintain one (1) set of the plans, stamped with city approval, on the project at all times during construction. If construction has not commenced within one (1) year after approval of the plans, resubmittal of plans will be required to meet current standards and engineering requirements. 
(h)  An application for final plat approval is considered filed with the city when it has been determined to be complete pursuant to section 20-6. 
(i)  After review by the director and the city engineer, the final plat application shall be scheduled for consideration by the planning and zoning commission. The commission shall decide whether to approve, conditionally approve or deny the final plat application based on the criteria for approval in subsection (k). 
(j)  Following a decision by the planning and zoning commission, the city council shall determine whether to approve, conditionally approve or deny the final plat application, taking into consideration the action taken by the commission, and applying the criteria in subsection (k). 
(k)  In deciding an application for final plat approval, the commission and council shall take into consideration the following criteria: 
(1)  The final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat; 
(2)  Where public improvements have been installed, the improvements conform to the approved construction plans and have been approved for acceptance by the city engineer; 
(3)  The final layout of the subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained in section 20-22; and 
(4)  The plat meets any county standards to be applied under an interlocal agreement between the city and a county under Texas Local Government Code, Ch. 242, where the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and in the county. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(X), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 94-194, §§ 5—8, 9-27-94; Ord. No. 95-217, § 3, 8-8-96; Ord. No. 2005-249, § 6, 8-30-05)  
Sec. 20-12. - Filing of approved final plat. 
After approval of the final plat by the city council and any correction of the plat as required by the city council, the developer or his engineer shall submit filing fees and the required number of copies for filing with the county clerk. These copies shall bear all signatures of the mayor, the chairman of the planning and zoning commission and the city secretary. Such copies shall show the volume and page of the map and plat records into which the plat was filed by the county clerk. Two (2) mylars and two (2) blueline plats signed and recorded will be returned to the city. If the final plat has not been submitted for signature by the city officials within six (6) months after approval by the city council, the plat shall be deemed null and void, resubmittal shall be required, and concurrent regulations shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(XI), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 94-194, § 9, 9-27-94)  
Sec. 20-13. - Short form for platting. 
Plats meeting the following criteria may, with the approval of the city manager, be approved by the city manager thus not requiring approval by the planning and zoning commission and city council. Failure of the city manager to approve such platting shall require the developer to follow requirements of this chapter. Each of the following conditions shall be met by the developer before the city manager may approve such plat: 
(1)  Land which abuts upon a street of adequate width and is so situated that no other street, alley, easement, or other public property is required to meet requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The perimeter of the tract being subdivided has been surveyed and marked on the ground and a plat prepared and filed with the city of which the nearest corner of each lot or parcel of such proposed subdivision is within two hundred (200) feet of a known corner which is adequately marked by a concrete monument or iron stake. 
(3)  The topography of the tract and the surrounding land is such that no regard need be given in such subdivision to drainage, or where drainage is required, arrangements have been made for the construction of such facilities which are approved by the director of public services. 
(4)  All utilities as required by this chapter to serve each parcel or lot of such subdivision, or such arrangements to provide such facilities have been made and such arrangements meet the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(XII), 3-25-86)  
Sec. 20-14. - Submittals required for construction. 
Prior to authorizing construction, the public service director and the city engineer shall be satisfied that the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The final plat shall be completed to the requirements of the city council at the time of approval. 
(2)  The developer or contractor(s) shall provide a copy of the certificate of insurance for proof of liability insurance to the city secretary. 
(3)  All necessary offsite easements or dedications required for city maintained facilities not shown on the final plat must be conveyed solely to the city, with proper signatures affixed. 
(4)  All contractors participating in the construction shall be presented with a set of approved plans bearing the stamp of approval of the public services department. These plans shall remain on the job site at all times. 
(5)  The public service director and parties participating in the construction shall meet for a preconstruction conference to discuss the project prior to beginning work. 
(6)  A complete list of the contractors, their representatives on the site, and telephone numbers where a responsible party may be reached at all times, must be submitted to the public service director. 
(7)  Five (5) prints of the utility plan sheet, scale one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, measuring twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches shall be submitted to the public service director, in addition to previous submittal of construction plans. 
(8)  Manufacturers' drawings for all fabricated appurtenances or special construction items shall be submitted to the public service director. 
(9)  The developer shall provide at his entire expense a geotechnical report acceptable to the public service director pertaining to soil stabilization and other necessary design concerns related to construction of the development. The geotechnical engineering company preparing the report shall be a local firm acceptable to the public service director. 
(10)  The developer shall pay to the city a fee for inspection, laboratory tests and administration for the facilities to be constructed. The fee shall be three and one-half (3½) percent of the actual construction cost of the facility. The cost includes labor, material and equipment required to construct the facility in accordance with the subdivision regulations. The developer shall provide the city a copy of an itemized contract prepared by the engineer of record. 
(11)  All developmental fees must be paid. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(XIII), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 92-117, § 1, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 94-154, §§ 10, 11, 9-27-94; Ord. No. 2000-22, § 1, 5-9-00)  
Sec. 20-15. - Development construction. 
(a)  Construction shall be observed by representatives of the public service department. Testing methods and procedures shall be as specified by the North Central Texas Council of Governments Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction. All construction of public improvements shall be in compliance with the North Central Texas Council of Government Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction in addition to special provisions by the city. 
(b)  Completion of construction to the approved standard specifications for public works construction is the entire responsibility of the developer and the contractors. The responsibility of the public service department is to confirm the conformance to the approved plans and specifications. Any change in design required during construction shall be made by the engineer whose seal and signature are shown on the plans and shall be approved by the public service director. 
(c)  All engineering plans shall conform to the Design Manual for Paving and Drainage and Water and Sewer Lines and the Standard Details for Paving and Drainage and Sewer and Water Lines. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(XIV), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 92-117, § 3, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 94-194, §§ 12, 13, 9-27-94)  
Sec. 20-16. - Acceptance of the subdivision. 
(a)  After completion of all items required in the plans and specifications, the contractor or developer shall submit to the public service director a two-year maintenance bond for fifty (50) percent of the cost of the facility. 
(b)  Acceptance of the development shall mean that title to all improvements is vested in the city. The developer and his contractors shall, however, be bound to the city for a period of one (1) year to repair any defects in the improvements. 
(c)  Prior to final acceptance of the subdivision by the city, the developer shall present a letter acceptable to the public service director from the developer's engineer confirming that all construction work in the development was constructed in full compliance with the standard specifications for public works construction. The letter shall also confirm that the quality of the work was verified by materials testing performed in accordance with the city requirements. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(XV), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 92-117, § 2, 5-12-92; Ord. No. 94-194, § 14, 9-27-94)  
Sec. 20-17. - As-built plans. 
Prior to final acceptance by the city of the improvements, the engineer for the developer shall submit to the public service director a complete set of drawings of the paving, drainage, water, sanitary sewer, or other improvements, showing all changes made in the plans during construction and containing on each sheet an as-built stamp bearing the signature of the engineer and the date. In addition, one (1) sepia and two (2) blue lines measuring twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches, a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, drawings of the plat and construction plan sheets containing the as-built information shall be submitted. The developer shall provide to the city, plans and specifications for all signs, walls, sprinklers, etc. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(XVI), 3-25-86)  
Sec. 20-18. - Issuance of building permits. 
No building permit shall be approved by the city until the land has been finally platted in accordance with section 20-12 and all subdivision improvements within the development have been completed and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, II(XVII), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 2005-249, § 7, 8-30-05)  
Sec. 20-19. - Streets and alleys. 
(a)  Streets shall be in line and consistent with existing streets in adjoining developments. Streets shall be made so as to provide continuity with existing streets in adjoining developments. Dead-end streets shall be avoided except where planned for future extension. Half streets shall be prohibited except as approved by the city in accordance with this chapter. In all cases, the parks and recreation director shall have the right to review and approve the proposed street alignment fronting on city parks and shall in cases where the alignment is unsatisfactory, negotiate a satisfactory alignment with the developer and the city engineer. Minimum right-of-way width shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential streets, fifty (50) feet. 
(2)  Class III thoroughfares, sixty (60) feet. (Any street serving industrial, commercial, multifamily or school areas shall not be of lesser width provided further Class III thoroughfares generally shall be located every half-mile between Class II or I thoroughfares for any type of development.) 
(3)  Class II thoroughfares (minor arterial), eighty (80) feet to one hundred (100) feet. (A primary thoroughfare shall generally be located every mile in any type development.) 
(4)  Class I thoroughfares (principal arterial), one hundred (100) feet or more, all developments shall provide for permanent roadways, as approved by the director of public services, to all structures prior to construction. (A primary thoroughfare shall generally be located every mile in any type development.) 
(5)  Major thoroughfares or any type thoroughfare shall be located according to the city's master thoroughfare plan or as specified by the city council. 
(6) Right-of-way (feet);  l; Minimum width of pavement (feet) 
50 Residential street 	27—Back to Back 
60 Collector street 	37—Back to Back 
80—100 Minor arterial 	24 on each divided lane 
100—120 arterial 	36 on each divided lane if six (6) or more lanes are required 
 
In platting the addition or subdivision, the developer shall provide additional right-of-way required for existing or future streets, including abutting streets, roads, and highways, as shown in the thoroughfare plan or other plan approved by the city council. In the developed areas of the city, the right-of-way provided may be of a minimum width adequate for the actual construction of the roadway and all necessary physical features of the roadway. 
(b)  Streets and alleys shall be platted and constructed in accordance with the thoroughfare plan of the city comprehensive plan or other plans approved by the city council, and shall conform to the following general requirements: 
(1)  All streets or thoroughfares shall be constructed in the right-of-way as required by the thoroughfare plan. Where streets are dedicated adjacent to undeveloped land and the property line is normally the centerline of the street, the developer shall provide right-of-way of sufficient width and shall construct paving a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet to a maximum width of twenty-seven (27) feet as required by the city. The developer of the adjacent land, when platting the land, shall construct that remaining portion of the street as determined by the city. 
(2)  Median openings and left-turn lanes, constructed to serve dedicated streets in a development, or to serve private drives, shall be paved and marked to city standards, inspected by city inspectors and paid for by the developer. 
(3)  Acceleration or declaration lanes shall be constructed to the same standards as the adjoining street, and the cost of construction shall be the developer's responsibility. 
(4)  Alleys shall be constructed a minimum of ten (10) feet in width within a minimum fifteen-foot right-of-way. Wider alleys required for drainage or other purposes, shall be constructed in right-of-ways approved by the public service director. Alley turnouts shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width at the curbline, or the width of the alley, whichever is greater. Paving in alleys adjacent to masonry screening walls shall be constructed a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width and shall abut the screening wall. Alleys for other than residential uses shall be dedicated and paved a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width. All alleys shall be constructed with pavement of reinforced concrete of three thousand (3,000) psi minimum compressive strength or thirty-six hundred (3600) psi minimum compressive strength. The developer shall construct the full width of the alley at his own costs. Alleys with three thousand (3,000) psi concrete shall be constructed with a minimum thickness of five (5) inches in the invert and eight (8) inches at the edges (average seven-inch thickness), and alleys with thirty-six hundred (3600) psi concrete shall be constructed with a minimum thickness of five (5) inches in the invert and seven (7) inches at the edges (average six-inch thickness.) 
(5)  The subgrade on all streets and alleys shall be pretested by a certified laboratory for soil analyses. The results of these tests will determine the amount of stabilization need for all areas of the project. All streets and alleys shall be compacted and stabilized to ninety-five (95) percent or greater before actual paving is started. When hydrated line is needed for stabilization, additional laboratory reports will be submitted for P.I. and compaction. All P.I.'s shall be no greater than fifteen (15) on any part of the project. When stabilizing and compacting for street and alley construction the width shall be one (1) foot greater than the back of the curb or one (1) foot greater than the edge of the alley. A minimum depth of six (6) inches line stabilization below the finish grade will be required before pavement construction is started according to laboratory results. All reports must meet city specifications before construction of streets and alleys. Refer to North Central Texas Council of Governments Standard Specifications Item 5:8 for Portland cement concrete pavement. 
(6)  The city shall be provided landscape plans for all medians by the developer. Plants and ground cover shall be low maintenance and low to the ground. Landscaping shall be approved by the director of public services. 
(c)  When a proposed addition or subdivision of land abuts on both sides of an existing substandard road, street or highway, such road, street or highway being substandard according to the then existing current city standards specifications for public works construction, the developer shall be required to improve the existing road, street or highway, including sidewalks, to bring the same to city standards, or to replace it with a standard city street as required by the traffic demand of the proposed addition or subdivision and at no cost to the city. 
(1)  If the proposed addition or subdivision is for residential use and is located along only one (1) side of a substandard road, street or highway, the developer shall be required to improve the developer's half of such road, street or highway, including sidewalks, to bring the same to city standards, at no cost to the city. The minimum half street shall be twenty-two and five-tenths (22.5) feet to a maximum width of twenty-four (24) feet. 
(2)  Half streets shall be prohibited, except when essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision, conforming with other requirements of these regulations, and where the city finds it will be practical to require the dedication of the other one-half when the adjoining property is subdivided or developed. Whenever a partial street exists along a common property line, the other portion of the street shall be constructed as required by the traffic demands of the proposed addition or subdivision when that property is developed. New streets of like alignment shall bear the names of existing streets and shall be dedicated at equal or greater widths than the existing street. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the city council. 
(3)  Where subdivisions are platted so that the front yard of single-family residential lots are adjacent to a dedicated roadway, the developer shall provide at his sole expense one (1) of the following types of treatment: 
a.  Reserved. 
b.  For streets designated residential, lots may have direct access to the street with no additional development standard required. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, II(XVIII), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 91-104, § 1, 12-10-91; Ord. No. 94-194, §§ 15, 16, 9-27-94)  
Sec. 20-20. - Blocks. 
(a)  Blocks in residential developments shall be platted to allow two (2) tiers of lots. 
(1)  The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
a.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
b.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
c.  Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
(2)  In general, intersecting streets, determining the blocks, lengths and widths shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross traffic adequately, and to meet existing streets or customary subdivision practices. Where no existing subdivision controls, the block lengths shall not exceed one thousand six hundred (1,600) feet and shall generally be one thousand (1,000) to one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet in length. Where no existing subdivision controls, the blocks shall not be less than five hundred (500) feet in length. 
(3)  Where no existing subdivision controls, the block depth shall be platted to give lots with a depth-to-width ratio not more than two and one-half (2½) to one (1) and in no case more than four (4) to one (1), and the platting shall be such that the block width or depth generally shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet nor be less than two hundred fifteen (215) feet. When possible, the block width and length shall be such of two (2) tiers of lots back-to-back to an alley. 
(4)  Pedestrian sidewalks not less than four (4) feet wide shall be provided around the perimeter of all blocks and shall be installed as the property is improved, and shall be of the width and located as provided in this section; provided, however, sidewalks shall not be required to be installed on substandard streets and roads where the permanent grade has not been fixed at the time said sidewalks are to be installed. 
(b)  Blocks shall generally not exceed twelve hundred (1200) feet in length. Generally no cul-de-sac shall be developed which exceeds five hundred (500) feet in length measured from the centerline of the street with which it intersects to the center point of the cul-de-sac. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, II(XIX), 3-25-86)  
Sec. 20-21. - Lots. 
(a)  Lots shall conform to the minimum requirements of the established zoning district. Each lot shall face on a public street. 
(b)  Where corner lots face the frontage street and also other lots face the side street, the corner lot shall have a front building line on both streets, except when an alley is constructed between the lots. Lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet the frontage requirements of the appropriate zoning district. 
(c)  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome a specified disadvantage of topography and orientation. Where lots have double frontage, a front building line shall be established for each street. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, II(XX), 3-25-86)  
Sec. 20-22. - Development requirements. 
(a)  Storm drainage. Storm drainage shall be designed in accordance with the standard specifications for public works construction. 
(1)  Residential developments: 
a.  An adequate storm sewer system consisting of inlets, pipes, and/or excavated channels or natural creeks and other drainage structures shall be constructed. Excavated channels and natural creeks shall meet the requirements of e., f. and g. below. 
b.  The developer shall be responsible for all costs of the storm drainage systems. 
c.  The developer shall bear the cost of all channel excavation, inlets, laterals, headwalls, manholes, junction structures, and all other items required to complete the system. 
d.  In general, underground drainage shall be constructed in streets and alleys. 
e.  Creeks may remain in open natural condition or excavated channels may be constructed provided they meet the criteria of the standard specifications for public works construction. 
f.  When a creek or excavated channel is to remain open or in its natural condition, it shall meet one (1) of the following requirements: 
1.  The creek or drainageway shall be dedicated to the city. The city council may waive this dedication requirement only for replats which were originally platted prior to the dedication requirement. 
2.  Creeks or drainage ways may be owned and maintained by a city approved maintenance entity. This entity shall maintain the property on an ongoing basis. The property shall revert to the city should the entity fail to satisfactorily maintain it. Adequate floodway easements shall be required. 
3.  Where the city has designated a floodway or floodplain as a part of the city park system, the following shall be provided: 
(i)  Parallel streets fronting along the park. 
(ii)  Cul-de-sacs which provide public access fronting on the park. 
(iii)  Loop streets which provide public access fronting on the park. 
g.  The developer must provide sufficient access on each side of creeks or drainage ways for maintenance purposes. The location and size of the accessways shall be determined by the city engineer and the director of public services. The minimum width of the accessway shall be fifteen (15) feet. Permanent physical markers, the type and locations of which are to be determined by the city engineer, shall be placed along the boundaries of the accessway and private property. This accessway shall be included in the dedication requirements of f., above. 
h.  Temporary erosion control methods will be used to abate sediment runoff from construction sites in conformance with NCTCOG's Storm Water Quality Best Management Practices for Construction Activities. 
(2)  Nonresidential developments: 
a.  An adequate storm drainage system shall be constructed, consisting of inlets, pipes, underground drainage structures, and/or excavated channels, or natural creeks. Excavated channels and natural creeks shall meet the requirements of (1)e., f. and g. above. 
b.  In general, underground drainage shall be constructed in streets and alleys. If approved by the city engineer, the developer may dedicate, at his own expense, a right-of-way of sufficient width to permit excavation and maintenance of an open channel or pipe/open channel system of satisfactory depth and width. The developer shall excavate the channel at his own expense and shall construct a reinforced concrete pilot channel if deemed necessary by the city engineer. The developer shall sod or seed the channel to prevent erosion. A creek may remain open in its natural condition, provided the requirements of (1)e., f. and g. above shall apply. Location, type of construction and city participation in the cost of open channels shall be as approved by the city engineer. 
c.  Lakes, detention ponds, and retention ponds will be constructed in all areas provided they are approved by the city engineer as prescribed by city ordinance. The city may assume maintenance responsibilities for this type of facility, if approved by the city council; however, easements shall be provided to ensure protection of these areas for maintenance purposes. 
d.  Other innovative drainage concepts will be considered if approved by the city engineer. 
e.  Grading plans shall be provided for nonresidential developments, if deemed necessary by the city engineer. 
(b)  Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be designed in accordance with the standard specifications of the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) for public works construction. Sanitary sewer facilities shall be provided to adequately service the addition or subdivision and conform to the city's sewer master plans. 
(1)  Sewer pipe shall have a minimum internal diameter of eight (8) inches. The sewer main shall be located in the center of the right-of-way or approximately six (6) feet from property line opposite the water main. Construction and materials shall conform to the standard specifications for public works construction of the city or as determined by grade as approved by the city engineer. Upper ends of mains five hundred (500) feet or less in length may be six-inch internal diameter. 
(2)  Sewer services for each lot shall be carried to the property line. 
(3)  Should the subdivision or addition abut and use a sewer main of the city, the developer shall pay the city a pro rata charge, as prescribed by the pro-rata ordinance of the city, for the use of the same. 
(4)  The developer shall construct all manholes, cleanouts, and other appurtenances as required on the plans. 
(5)  Should a lift station, either temporary or permanent, be necessary to provide a sanitary sewer service to the subdivision, the developer shall construct the station and all appurtenances, at his own expense. If and when the lift station is no longer needed, the installation will, unless other provisions are made, remain the property of the city for reuse or disposal. 
(6)  The developer shall provide for future land development of abutting properties by installing lines according to the master sanitary sewer plan of the city. 
(7)  For city participation in oversizing see section 18-167 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(8)  Upon completion of PVC sanitary sewer pipe installation, the contractor shall pull a mandrel through the pipe to test for a maximum five (5) percent deflection. The mandrel shall be sized and constructed as listed on the applicable mandrel deflection table. 
(9)  In order to ascertain that the sanitary sewer piping shall perform to the function for which it was designed and constructed, all piping shall be visually inspected by photographic means. A video tape of the piping inspection shall be given to the city. Sanitary sewer piping will be inspected for grade change and roundness of pipe. 
(10)  Sanitary sewer piping that fails to pass mandrel testing or television testing shall be repaired or retested. 
(11)  The location of sewer services shall be shown by three-inch letters imprinted in the curb identifying the sewer service with an "S" directly over the service. 
(c)  Water system. The water system shall be designed in accordance with the standard specifications for public works construction and the TNRCC regulations. Water systems shall have a sufficient number of outlets and shall be of sufficient size to furnish an adequate domestic water supply, to furnish fire protection to all lots, and to conform to the city master water plan. 
(1)  Water pipes shall be a minimum of six-inch nominal internal diameter. The water main shall be located in the street right-of-way approximately six (6) feet from property lines. Construction and material shall conform to the standard specifications for public works construction of the city. 
(2)  Water services for each lot, unit, or building space shall be stubbed out with an angle stop to the location required as shown on the plans. A meter box conforming to the requirements of the standard specifications for public works construction shall be installed over the end of each service. 
(3)  Valves and fire hydrants shall be located and painted to satisfy the requirements of the public works construction and fire department. 
(4)  Should the subdivision or addition abut and use a water main of the city, the developer shall pay to the city a pro rata charge, as prescribed by the pro rata ordinance of the city, for use of the same. 
(5)  Reflective fire hydrant spotters shall be installed in all streets at a point adjacent to fire hydrants. The spotters shall conform to the public service director specifications. At corner locations, spotters shall be installed in both streets. 
(6)  The developer shall provide for future land development of abutting properties by installing lines according to the master water plan of the city. 
(7)  For city participation in oversizing see section 18-167 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(8)  The location of water services shall be shown by three-inch letters imprinted on the curb identifying the water service with a "W" directly over the service. 
(d)  Underground utilities. All residential and multifamily subdivision plats and site plans filed with and submitted to the city council for approval shall: 
(1)  Require all telephone and cable TV utility lines and all electric utility lateral and service lines and wires to be placed underground except as otherwise herein provided. In special or unique circumstances or to avoid undue hardships the city council may authorize variances and exceptions from this requirement and permit the construction and maintenance of overhead electric utility lateral or service lines and of overhead telephone and cable TV lines and may require any plat or site plan with such approved variances or exceptions. 
(2)  Where electrical service is to be placed underground, street or site lighting shall also be placed underground, except the street lighting standards. 
(3)  All electrical, cable TV and telephone support equipment (transformers, amplifiers, switching devices, etc.) necessary for underground installations in subdivisions shall be pad mounted or placed underground. 
(4)  That nothing herein set forth shall prohibit or restrict any utility company from recovering the difference between the cost of overhead facilities and underground facilities. Each utility whose facilities are subject to the provisions of this chapter shall develop policies and cost reimbursement procedures with respect to the installation and extension of underground service. 
(5)  The electric utility company may plan and construct overhead feeders and/or lateral lines on perimeters of subdivisions or property without obtaining a variance or exception. Telephone and cable TV lines may be constructed overhead where overhead electric utility lines are permitted. 
(6)  Anything in his chapter notwithstanding, temporary construction service may be provided by overhead utility lines and facilities without obtaining a variance or exception. 
All installations regulated by the provisions set forth herein shall be in conformance with the intent of this chapter and shall conform to any regulations and/or specifications that the various public utility companies may have in force from time to time. 
(e)  Other facilities. 
(1)  The developer shall furnish all easements and right-of-way necessary for construction of electrical, gas, cable, and telephone service to the subdivision. 
(2)  The developer shall pay for the number of streetlights required in the subdivision as determined by the city. The distance between streetlights shall be approximately five hundred (500) feet. Streetlights shall be so placed to provide illuminated lighting at all street intersections meeting the approval of the city engineer, director of public services and the fire chief. All streetlight fixtures and poles shall be approved by Texas Utilities. After acceptance of the development, service charges for electricity will be paid by the city. 
(3)  The utility contractor shall be responsible for all damage to improvements caused during installation of utilities. 
(f)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed for all lots adjoining dedicated streets, except within areas zoned for industrial purposes. The city council, however, may require sidewalks in areas zoned for industrial purposes should they determine that sidewalks are necessary for safe pedestrian movement. Sidewalks shall be constructed along major thoroughfares, where lots do not adjoin the street, across powerline easements and in other areas where pedestrian walkways are necessary. All sidewalks shall be constructed with the other improvements to the subdivision except for sidewalks adjacent to single family and duplex lots, which may be delayed until development of lots. However, where sidewalks within these residential areas would extend across land not adjacent to single family or duplex lots, or across bridges or culverts, the sidewalk shall be constructed with the other improvements to the subdivision. The director of public services may, where the roadway is not constructed to current standard specifications, require monies to construct sidewalks be escrowed with the city in lieu of it's construction. Sidewalks adjacent to screening walls shall generally be placed against the screening walls to the subdivision and shall be a minimum of five (5) feet. Routing to clear poles, trees or other obstacles shall be subject to approval by the director of public services. Concrete sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of the street as approved by the city and shall be of the width, location, and construction as hereafter provided, to wit: 
(1)  A minimum width of four (4) feet, except where a sidewalk is to be located adjacent to the curb, or less than two (2) feet from the back of the curb or pavement, the sidewalk shall not be less than five (5) feet in width. 
(2)  A minimum depth of four (4) inches. 
(3)  A minimum strength of two thousand five hundred (2,500) psi reinforced with #3 rebar on twenty-four (24) inch centers both ways, and 
(4)  Be constructed on a six (6) inch base of backfill compacted to ninety-five (95) percent standard proctor. 
(g)  Screening and entryways. 
(1)  Screening. Where subdivisions are platted so that the rear yards of residential lots are adjacent to a dedicated roadway by an alley or service road, the developer shall provide screening walls at his sole expense. All forms of screening shall conform to the requirements of the ordinances of the city governing the sight distance for traffic safety and other city ordinances. Screening to be provided shall be as follows unless otherwise specifically approved by the city council: A structural concrete wall, a minimum of six (6) feet in height, shall be located in the street right-of-way adjacent to the right-of-way line. The color of the wall shall be limited to earth-tone colors, excluding gray, green and white. The color of the wall shall be uniform on each side of a thoroughfare for the entire length of the thoroughfare, unless otherwise approved by the city. When walls are built in sections, the colors of each section shall be as closely similar as possible, but shall in no case be incompatible. Finish of the wall shall be consistent on all surfaces. Plans and specifications for the wall shall be approved by the city. The developer may, at his option, install planter beds, minimum size four hundred (400) square feet per bed (unless a smaller size is approved by the director of parks and recreation), adjacent to the wall. In such event, the developer shall provide total maintenance for the beds for a minimum of two (2) years. The developer shall install automatic irrigation bubblers or other means of irrigation approved by the parks and recreation department. Plant material shall be either crepe myrtle, Boston ivy, or Virginia creeper, or other plants approved by the director of parks and recreation. The developer shall pay a sum of four dollars ($4.00) per square foot of planter bed for a landscaping maintenance fund to be paid prior to the time the subdivision is accepted by the city. If no alley is constructed adjacent to the wall, a five-foot wide wall maintenance easement shall be platted adjacent to the wall, on residential lots. If no alley is constructed, all utility lines shall be placed in the street right-of-way. 
(2)  Entryways. Residential lots may be utilized for landscaped entryways. Entryways may utilize walls and landscaping anywhere on the lot, except within the required visibility easement at the intersection of two (2) streets. The requirement for construction of sidewalks shall continue in effect. The required screening at the rear of the lot, as required by subparagraph (g)(1) of this section, may be waived in lieu of the landscaped entryway. If the landscaped entryway is removed, such required screening shall be placed on the lot. All landscaped entryways shall be maintained by the developer, property owner, or a viable homeowner's association. Any association which shall maintain a landscaped entryway may at the discretion of the city be required to maintain a substantial amount of additional open space, recreation facilities, or other common-use land or facilities. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, II(XXI), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 94-194, §§ 17—23, 9-27-94; Ord. No. 2000-30, § 1, 6-27-00)  
Sec. 20-23. - Other requirements. 
(a)  All lot corners shall be located and marked with a three-eighths-inch minimum reinforcing bar, twelve (12) inches minimum in length, and shall be placed flush with the ground or counter sunk, if necessary, in order to avoid being disturbed. 
(b)  Iron rods, one (1) inch in diameter and twelve (12) inches minimum length shall be placed on all boundary corners, block corners, curve points, and angle points in public rights-of-way. 
(c)  All developments shall provide for fire protection, as approved by the fire chief, prior to the issuance of any building permits issued by the code enforcement department. 
(d)  Within the corporate limits of the city, street signs will be installed by the city at each intersection and the subdivider shall pay to the city for the installation of street and traffic signs throughout the subdivision. Such price shall include the cost of sign poles, placards assembly and installation. In subdivisions lying beyond the corporate limits of the city, street name signs shall be placed by the subdivider at all intersections within or abutting the subdivisions. Such signs shall be a type approved by the city and shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the city. The developer shall pay such sum as computed by the director of public services for street signs as set out herein at the time at which the developer submits for final acceptance of the subdivision for approval, and this sum shall be in addition to the filing fee set forth hereinabove. 
(e)  Site, street or development grading shall not commence unless authorized by the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(XXII), 3-25-86)  
Sec. 20-24. - Enforcement. 
Any subdivision of land being developed in violation of the terms and provisions of the regulations set out in this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the appropriate officers of the city are hereby authorized to institute any action which may be necessary to restrain or abate such violation. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(XXIII), 3-25-86)  
Sec. 20-25. - Variances. 
The city council may authorize a variance from these regulations when in its opinion undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the city council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or desirable to the public interest and making the findings hereinbelow required. The city council shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land involved and existing uses of the land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such variances upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No variance will be granted unless the city council finds: 
(1)  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary hardship to the applicant. 
(2)  That the variances are necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant, that the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to other property in the area. 
(3)  That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other lands in the area in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such finding of the city council together with the specific facts on which such findings are based shall be incorporated under the official minutes of the city council meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this chapter so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
(4)  The city council may not authorize a variance that would constitute a violation of any other valid ordinance of the city. 
(5)  The procedures and standards of this section 20-25 do not apply to an appeal to the city council granted pursuant to section 20-28 of these subdivision regulations, or to any relief granted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(XXIV), 3-25-86; Ord. No. 2005-249, § 8, 8-30-05)  
Sec. 20-26. - Conflicts. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, with the exception of the building code and comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city, which are inconsistent or in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. Where the building code or zoning ordinance of the city contains regulations which are more restrictive than the regulations contained in this chapter, the ordinance which is more restrictive shall control. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(XXV), 3-25-86)  
Sec. 20-27. - Exceptions. 
Plats of subdivisions which received preliminary approval by the city council prior to April 22, 1986, shall be excepted from the requirements of this chapter; provided that, one (1) or more sections of the final plat of such subdivision was approved and filed for record within one (1) year from March 25, 1986. 
(Ord. No. 86-846, § II(XXVI)(1), 3-25-86)  
Sec. 20-28. - Expiration dates for certain land studies and preliminary plats. 
(a)  Any application for a land study or preliminary plat, or portion thereof, that was approved or filed before, but that was not subject to an expiration date on, May 11, 2000, pursuant to Chapter 20 of the Cedar Hill Code of Ordinances, or pursuant to any predecessor subdivision regulations, shall expire at 5:00 p.m. on May 26, 2004. 
(b)  The owner of the land subject to a land study or preliminary plat that expires under subsection A may petition the city council to reinstate such land study or preliminary plat by filing a written petition of the expiration date. The petition shall clearly state the grounds for reinstatement, and shall be accompanied by documentation of one of the following: 
(1)  As of May 11, 2000, one of the following events had occurred: 
a.  A final plat application for all or part of the land subject to the approved land study or preliminary plat was approved, or was filed and subsequently approved; 
b.  An application for a preliminary plat or final plat was submitted for all or part of the land subject to the approved land study or preliminary plat, but such application was rejected on grounds of incompleteness; 
c.  Costs for development of the land subject to the land study or preliminary plat, including but not limited to costs associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five (5) percent of the most recent appraised market value of the land; 
d.  Fiscal security was posted to ensure performance of an obligation required for all or a part of the land subject to the approved land study or preliminary plat; or 
e.  Utility connection fees or impact fees for all or part of the land subject to the approved land study or preliminary plat were paid. 
(2)  After May 11, 2000 but before the expiration date specified in subsection (a), one of the following events had occurred: 
a.  A final plat was approved for all or part of the land subject to the approved land study or preliminary plat, and remained in effect for such land on such expiration date; or 
b.  A complete application for approval of all or part of the land subject to the approved land study or preliminary plat was pending for decision on such expiration date. 
(c)  The city council may take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Reinstate the expired land study or preliminary plat without an expiration date, if it finds that the petitioner has met any one of the criteria listed in subsection (b)(1). 
(2)  Reinstate the expired land study or preliminary plat for all or part of the land subject thereto, if it finds that the petitioner has met any one of the criteria listed in subsection (b)(2), subject to such expiration dates or other conditions that assure that the remaining land that is not subject to an approved or pending final plat application will be developed in a timely fashion. In granting relief under this provision, the council may require that development of such remaining land is subject to standards enacted after initial approval of the land study or preliminary plat. 
(3)  Deny the petition, if it finds that the petitioner has failed to meet any of the criteria in subsection (b). 
(4)  Reinstate the land study or preliminary plat for only that part of the land subject to a pending final plat application, if it finds that the petitioner has met the criteria in subsection (b)(2)b. and the pending plat application subsequently was approved, and deny the petition for the remaining land within the expired land study or preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 2004-205, § 1, 5-25-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-105, § 1, adopted May 25, 2004, was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been included as § 20-28 at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 20-29. - Proportionality appeal. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Public infrastructure improvement means a water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park facility that is a part of one or more of the city's public facilities systems, development. 
(2)  Public facilities system means the collection of water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park facilities owned or operated by or in behalf of the city for the purpose of providing services to the public, including existing and new developments. 
(b)  Purpose, applicability and effect. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of a proportionality appeal is to assure that a requirement to dedicate, construct or pay a fee for a public infrastructure improvement imposed on a proposed plat as a condition of approval does not result in a disproportionate cost burden on the property owner, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the demands created by the proposed development on the city's public facilities systems. 
(2)  Applicability. An appeal under this section may be filed by a property owner to contest any requirement to dedicate land, to construct improvements or to pay development fees, other than impact fees, for a public infrastructure improvement, which requirement is imposed under the city's subdivision regulations to a plat application pursuant to this chapter 20, whether the requirement is applicable under uniform standards, or is imposed pursuant to an individual evaluation of the proposed subdivision. 
(c)  Proportionality determination by city engineer. Prior to a decision by the planning and zoning commission on a master land plan application or a preliminary plat application, or if no preliminary plat application is required, on a final plat application, filed under this chapter 20, the city engineer shall prepare a report affirming that each public infrastructure improvement to be imposed as a condition of plat approval is roughly proportionate to the demand created by the development on the city's public facilities systems, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the development proposed. 
(1)  In making his proportionality determination, the city engineer may rely upon categorical findings pertaining to on-site improvements; the proposed or potential use of the land; the timing and sequence of development in relation to availability of adequate levels of public facilities; impact fee studies or other studies that measure the demand for services created by the development and the impact on the city's public facilities systems; the function of the public infrastructure improvements in serving the proposed development; the degree to which public infrastructure improvements to serve the subdivision are supplied by other developments; the anticipated participation by the city in the costs of such improvements; any reimbursements for the costs of public infrastructure improvements for which the proposed development is eligible; or any other information relating to the mitigating effects of the public infrastructure improvements on the impacts created by the development on the city's public facilities systems. 
(2)  Based upon his proportionality determination, the city engineer shall affirm that the public infrastructure improvement requirements of the subdivision regulations do not impose costs on the developer for such improvements that exceed those roughly proportionate to those incurred by the city in providing public facilities to serve the development. 
(3)  The city engineer may promulgate any application requirements that may assist in making the proportionality determination required by this subsection. 
(d)  Commission determination. The city planning and zoning commission shall take into account the city's engineer's report concerning the proportionality of public infrastructure improvement requirements to be applied to a proposed master, preliminary or final plat application, as the case may be, in making its decision on the plat application, and shall identify any variation to the requirements that are to be included as conditions to plat approval. 
(e)  Appeals. 
(1)  Who may appeal. An appeal to the city council under this section may be filed by a property owner or the applicant for a master, preliminary or final plat, in which a requirement to dedicate land for, construct or pay a fee, other than an impact fee, for a public infrastructure improvement has been applied or attached as a condition of approval, or as grounds for denying the plat application. 
(2)  Time for filing and request for extension of time. The appeal shall be filed in writing within ten (10) days of the date the planning and zoning commission takes action applying the public infrastructure improvement requirement to the plat application. The appeal shall be filed with the city secretary and shall be forwarded to the city council for consideration in conjunction with its deliberations on the plat application. The applicant may request postponement of consideration of the plat application by the city council pending preparation of the study required by subsection (4), in which case the applicant shall also waive the statutory period for deciding plats for the time needed to decide the appeal by the city council. 
(3)  Form of appeal. An appeal under this section shall allege that application of the standard or the imposition of conditions relating to the dedication, construction or fee requirement is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on the city's public facilities systems, or does not reasonably benefit the proposed development. 
(4)  Study required. The applicant shall provide a study in support of the appeal that includes the following information within thirty (30) days of the date of appeal, unless a longer time is requested: 
a.  Total capacity of the city's water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park system to be utilized by the proposed development, employing standard measures of capacity and equivalency tables relating the type of development proposed to the quantity of system capacity to be consumed by the development. If the proposed development is to be developed in phases, such information also shall be provided for the entire development proposed, including any phases already developed. 
b.  Total capacity to be supplied to the city's water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park facilities system by the dedication of an interest in land, construction of improvements or fee contribution. If the plat application is proposed as a phased development, the information shall include any capacity supplied by prior dedication, construction or fee payments. 
c.  Comparison of the capacity of the city's public facilities system(s) to be consumed by the proposed development with the capacity to be supplied to such system(s) by the proposed dedication of an interest in land, construction of improvements, or fee payment. In making this comparison, the impacts on the city's public facilities system(s) from the entire development shall be considered. 
d.  The amount of any city participation in the costs of oversizing the public infrastructure improvement to be constructed in accordance with the city's requirements. 
e.  Any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality between the impacts created by the proposed development and the dedication, construction or fee requirement imposed by the city. 
(f)  Land in extraterritorial jurisdiction. Where the subdivision or the public infrastructure improvements are located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city and are to be dedicated to a county under an interlocal agreement under Texas Local Government Code, Ch. 242, an appeal or study in support of the appeal shall not be accepted as complete for filing by the planning and zoning administrator unless the appeal or study is accompanied by verification that a copy has been delivered to the county in which the facilities are to be located. 
(g)  Processing application. 
(1)  Responsible official. The city engineer is the responsible official for evaluation and processing of an appeal under this section. Where the appeal is for relief from dedication of rights-of-way for or construction of a facility in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction that is to be dedicated to a county under an interlocal agreement under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 242, the city engineer shall coordinate a recommendation with the county responsible for reviewing plats in the county. 
(2)  Evaluation, recommendation. The city engineer shall evaluate the appeal and supporting study and shall make a recommendation to the city council based upon the information contained in the study, any comments received from the county, and the city engineer's analysis based upon the same factors considered in making his original proportionality determination. 
(h)  Decision. The city council shall decide the appeal in conjunction with its decision on the plat application. The council shall base its decision on the criteria listed in subsection (i), and may take one (1) of the following actions. 
(1)  Deny the appeal, and impose the standard or condition on the plat application in accordance with the city engineer's recommendation or the planning and zoning commission's decision on the plat; or 
(2)  Deny the appeal, upon finding that the proposed dedication, construction or fee requirements are inadequate to offset the impacts of the subdivision on the public facilities system for water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park improvements, and either deny the plat application or require that additional public infrastructure improvements be made as a condition of approval of the application; or 
(3)  Grant the appeal, and waive in whole or in part any dedication, construction or fee requirement for public infrastructure improvements to the extent necessary to achieve proportionality; or 
(4)  Grant the appeal, and direct that the city participate in the costs of acquiring land for or constructing the public infrastructure improvement under standard participation policies. 
(i)  Criteria for approval. In deciding an appeal under this section, the city council shall determine whether the application of the standard or condition requiring dedication of an interest in land for, construction of, or payment of a fee for public infrastructure improvements is roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed subdivision on the city's public facilities systems for water, wastewater, roadway, drainage or park facilities, and reasonably benefits the development. In making such determination, the council shall consider the evidence submitted by the applicant, the city engineer's report and recommendation, considering in particular the factors identified in subsection (c), and, where the property is located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, any recommendations from the county. 
(j)  Action following decision. If the relief requested under the proportionality appeal is granted in whole or in part by the city council, the dedication, construction or fee requirement initially imposed by the planning and zoning commission as a condition of plat approval shall be modified accordingly, and the standards applied or the conditions attached to commission's approval of the plat application shall be conformed to the relief granted. Thereafter, the applicant shall resubmit the plat application to the city council within ninety (90) days of the date relief under the appeal is granted, in whole or in part, showing conformity with the city council's decision on the appeal. 
(k)  Expiration of relief. If an applicant for plat approval prevails on a proportionality appeal, but fails to conform the plat to the relief granted by the city council with the ninety-day period provided, the relief granted by the city council on the appeal shall expire. 
(1)  The council may extend the time for filing the revised plat application for good cause shown, but in any event, the expiration date for the relief granted shall not be extended beyond one year from the date relief was granted on the appeal. 
(2)  If the plat application is modified to increase the number of residential units or the intensity of non-residential uses, the responsible official may require a new study to validate the relief granted by the city council. 
(3)  If the plat application for which relief was granted is denied on other grounds, a new petition for relief shall be required on any subsequent application. 
(Ord. No. 2005-249, § 9, 8-30-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-249, § 9, adopted August 30, 2005, set out provisions intended for use as section 20-28. For purposes of numerical order, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as section 20-29.  
Sec. 20-30. - Adequate public facilities requirements. 
(a)  Policy. Land proposed for subdivision or development in the city and in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction must be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, including water facilities, wastewater facilities, roadway and pedestrian facilities, drainage facilities and park facilities. Land shall not be approved for platting or development unless and until adequate public facilities necessary to serve the development exist or provision has been made for the facilities, whether the facilities are to be located within the property being developed or offsite. 
(1)  New development must be supported by adequate levels of public facilities and services. 
(2)  It is necessary and desirable to provide for dedication of rights-of-way and easements for capital improvements to support new development at the earliest stage of the development process. 
(3)  Requirements for dedication and construction of public infrastructure improvements to serve a proposed new development should be attached as conditions of approval of any development application that contains a specific layout of the development. 
(4)  There is an essential nexus between the demand on public facilities systems created by a new development and the requirement to dedicate rights-of-way and easements and to construct capital improvements to offset such impacts. 
(5)  The city desires to assure both that development impacts are mitigated through contributions of rights-of-way, easements and construction of capital improvements, and that a development project contribute not more than its proportionate share of such costs. 
(b)  Conformance to plans. Proposed capital improvements serving new development shall conform to and be properly related to the city's master plans for public facilities and services, and applicable capital improvements plans, and shall meet the service levels specified in such plans. 
(c)  Adequacy of specific facilities. 
(1)  Water. All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall be connected to a public water system which has capacity to provide water for domestic use and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. Additional standards and requirements are defined in section 20-22. 
(2)  Wastewater. All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. The city engineer shall be responsible for determining the approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. The city may require the phasing of development and/or improvements in order to maintain adequate wastewater capacity. Additional standards and requirements are defined in section 20-22. 
(3)  Roads. Proposed roads serving new development shall provide a safe, convenient and functional system for vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian circulation and shall be properly related to the applicable master thoroughfare plan and any amendments thereto, and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed subdivision or development. New developments shall be supported by a thoroughfare network having adequate capacity, and safe and efficient traffic circulation. Each development shall have adequate access to the thoroughfare network. Additional standards and requirements are defined in section 20-20. 
(4)  Drainage. Drainage improvements serving new development shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area under developed conditions and shall be designed to prevent overloading the capacity of the downstream drainage system. The city may require the phasing of development, the use of control methods such as retention or detention, the construction of off-site drainage improvements, or drainage impact fees in order to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development. Additional standards and requirements are defined in section 20-22. 
(d)  City options. In order to maintain prescribed levels of public facilities and services for the health, safety and general welfare of its citizens, the city may require the dedication of easements and rights-of-way for or construction of on-site or off-site public infrastructure improvements for water, wastewater, road, drainage or park facilities to serve a proposed development, or require the payment of fees in lieu thereof. If adequate levels of public facilities and services cannot be provided concurrent with the schedule of development proposed, the city may deny the development until the public facilities and services can be provided, or require that the development be phased so that the delivery of facilities and services coincides with the demands for the facilities created by the development. The city may impose any conditions relating the provision of public infrastructure specified by an ordinance establishing or amending the zoning for the property. In the city's sole discretion, the city may accept escrow funds in lieu of construction requirements on the written request of a subdivider. 
(e)  Property owner's obligation. 
(1)  Dedication and construction of improvements. The property owner shall dedicate all rights-of-way and easements for, and shall construct, capital improvements within the rights-of-way or easements for those water, wastewater, road or drainage improvements needed to adequately serve a proposed development consistent with the applicable master facilities plans, whether the facilities are located on, adjacent to or outside the boundaries of the property being developed. 
(2)  Adjacent road improvements. In the case of adjacent or abutting roads, the city may require that the entire right-of-way be dedicated and improved to city design standards, depending on factors such as the impact of the development on the road, the timing of development in relation to need for the road, and the likelihood that adjoining property will develop in a timely manner. In the case of frontage or service roads for state and federally designated highways, the entire abutting right-of-way of the frontage or service road shall be dedicated and improved to applicable design standards. 
(3)  Substandard road improvements. Notwithstanding any other provision of these subdivision regulations, where an existing road that does not meet the city's right-of-way or design standards abuts a proposed development, the city may require the property owner to dedicate the right-of-way for a standard width, and to improve the street according to the dimensions and specifications in the applicable thoroughfare plan, depending on factors such as the impact of the development on the thoroughfare, the timing of development in relation to the need for the thoroughfare, and the likelihood that adjoining property will develop in a timely manner. 
(4)  Facilities impact studies. The city may require that a property owner prepare a comprehensive traffic impact study, drainage study or other public facilities study in order to assist the city in determining whether a proposed development will be supported with adequate levels of public facilities and services concurrent with the demand for the facilities created by the development. The study shall identify at a minimum the adequacy of existing facilities and the nature and extent of any deficiencies, and the capital improvements needed to meet the adopted level of service assuming development at the intensity proposed in the development application. The study shall be subject to approval by the city engineer. The city also may require, at the time of approval of a subordinate development application, an update of a public facilities study approved in connection with a priority development application. 
(f)  Timing of dedication and construction. 
(1)  Initial provision for dedication or construction. The city shall require an initial demonstration that a proposed development shall be adequately served by public facilities and services at the time for approval of the first development application that portrays a specific plan of development, including but not limited to a petition for establishing a planned development zoning district, or other overlay zoning district; a petition for an annexation agreement or a development agreement; an application for a subdivision master land plan, or an application for a preliminary or final subdivision plat. As a condition of approval of the development application, the city may require provision for dedication of rights-of-way or easements for, and construction of, capital improvements to serve the proposed development. 
(2)  Deferral of obligation. The obligation to dedicate rights-of-way for or to construct one or more capital improvements to serve a new development may be deferred until approval of a subsequent phase of the subdivision, at the sole discretion of the city engineer, upon written request of the property owner, or at the city's own initiative. As a condition of deferring the obligation, the city may require that the developer enter into a capital improvements agreement, specifying the time for dedication of rights-of-way for or construction of capital improvements serving the development. 
(Ord. No. 2005-249, § 10, 8-30-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-249, § 10, adopted August 30, 2005, set out provisions intended for use as section 20-29. For purposes of numerical order, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as section 20-30.  
Sec. 20-31. - Vested rights determination. 
(a)  Vested rights petition. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of a vested rights petition is to determine whether one (1) or more standards of these subdivision regulations should not be applied to a preliminary or final plat application by operation of state law, or whether certain plats are subject to expiration. 
(2)  Applicability. A vested rights petition may be filed with an application for a master land plan, preliminary plat or final plat application. 
(3)  Effect. Upon granting of a vested rights petition in whole or in part, the plat application shall be decided in accordance with the standards specified in the relief order based on prior subdivision requirements or development standards, or the approved plat otherwise subject to expiration shall be extended. 
(b)  Petition requirements. 
(1)  Who may petition. A vested rights petition may be filed by a property owner or the owner's authorized agents, including the applicant, with a master, preliminary or final plat application. 
(2)  Form of petition. The vested rights petition shall allege that the petitioner has a vested right for some or all of the land subject to the plat application under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute, or pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, Section 43.002 or successor statute, that requires the city to review and decide the application under standards in effect prior to the effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall include the following information and documents: 
a.  A narrative description of the grounds for the petition; 
b.  A copy of each approved or pending development application which is the basis for the contention that the city may not apply current standards to the plat application which is the subject of the petition; 
c.  The date of submittal of the plat application, or of a development plan pursuant to which the plat was subsequently filed, if different from the official filing date established under section 20-6. 
d.  The date the project for which the application for the plat was submitted was commenced. 
e.  Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the plat application from which relief is sought; 
f.  Identification of the standards which the petitioner contends apply to the plat application; 
g.  Identification of any current standards which petitioner agrees can be applied to the plat application at issue; 
h.  A copy of any prior vested rights determination by the city involving the same land; and 
(3)  Time for filing petition. A vested rights petition shall be filed with a plat application for which a vested right is claimed. 
(c)  Processing of petition and decision. 
(1)  Responsible official. The planning director shall process the vested rights petition. A copy of the petition shall be forwarded to the city attorney following acceptance. 
(2)  Decision by commission on petition. The commission shall render a decision on the vested rights petition in conjunction with its decision on the plat application, based upon the report and recommendation of the administrator. 
(3)  Appeal of decision on petition. The petitioner or any interested person may appeal the commission's decision on the vested rights petition within ten (10) working days of the date of such decision to the city council. 
(4)  Decision by city council. The city council on appeal shall decide the vested rights petition, after considering the director's report and the decision by the planning and zoning commission, with its decision on the plat application. 
(d)  Action and order on petition. 
(1)  Action on the petition. The decision-maker on the vested rights petition may take any of the following actions: 
a.  Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the plan application shall be reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards; 
b.  Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the plat application shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in identified prior subdivision regulations; or 
c.  Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards shall be applied to the plat application, while standards contained in identified prior subdivision regulations also shall be applied. 
(2)  Order on petition. The administrator's report and each decision on the vested rights petition shall be memorialized in an order identifying the following: 
a.  The nature of the relief granted, if any; 
b.  The approved or filed plat application(s) or other development application(s) upon which relief is premised under the petition; 
c.  Current standards which shall apply to the plat application for which relief is sought; 
d.  Prior standards which shall apply to the plat application for which relief is sought, including any procedural standards; 
e.  The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part on the petition. 
(e)  Criteria for approval. The decision-maker shall decide the vested rights petition based upon the following factors: 
(1)  The nature and extent of prior plat or other development applications filed or approved for the land subject to the petition; 
(2)  Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the petition; 
(3)  Whether any prior approved applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in accordance with law; 
(4)  Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current subdivision regulations from which the applicant seeks relief; 
(5)  Whether any prior approved plat or other development applications relied upon by the petitioner have expired. 
(f)  Application following relief order. Following the city's final decision on the vested rights petition, the property owner shall conform the plat application for which relief is sought to such decision. If the plat application on file is consistent with the relief granted on the vested rights petition, no revisions are necessary. Where proceedings have been stayed on the plat application pending referral of the vested rights petition to the city council, proceedings on the application shall resume after the council's decision on the vested rights petition. 
(g)  Expiration. Relief granted on a vested rights petition shall expire on occurrence of one of the following events: 
(1)  The petitioner or property owner fails to submit a required revised plat application consistent with the relief granted within thirty (30) days of the final decision on the petition; 
(2)  The plat application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition is denied under the criteria made applicable through the relief granted on the petition; or 
(3)  The plat application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition expires. 
(Ord. No. 2005-249, § 11, 8-30-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-249, § 11, adopted August 30, 2005, set out provisions intended for use as section 20-30. For purposes of numerical order, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as section 20-31.  
Sec. 20-32. - Provisions regarding House Bill 3167. 
(a)  Suspension of conflicting regulations. The city council hereby acknowledges the provisions of the Act [HB 3167] and suspends the application of any ordinance or process contained in the subdivision ordinance, as it now exists or as it may be amended, that conflict with the provisions and requirements of the Act [HB 3167] after its effective date. 
(b)  Processing of applications. The city council further directs the city's planning and zoning commission, staff and outside consultants to process, approve, approve with conditions or deny all plats and subdivision construction plans, as defined in the Act [HB 3167], in accordance with the provisions and requirements of the Act [HB 3167]. 
(Ord. No. 2019-685, §§ 2, 3, 8-27-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-685, §§ 2, 3, adopted Aug. 27, 2019, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 20-32, was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 20-33—20-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARK LAND DEDICATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 86-888, §§ 1—8, adopted Dec. 16, 1986, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as Ch. 20, Art. II, §§ 20-41—20-47 at the discretion of the editor to facilitate classification and reference. See also the editor's note to Art. I of this chapter. Subsequently, Ord. No. 2000-17, adopted Feb. 22 2000, provided for the amendment of Ch. 20, Art. II to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; trench safety program, § 4-311 et seq.; landscape regulations, § 4-331 et seq. 
 
Sec. 20-41. - Purpose. 
(a)  This article is adopted to provide recreational areas and amenities in the form of neighborhood parks as a function of subdivision development in the City of Cedar Hill. This article is enacted in accordance with the Home Rule powers of the City of Cedar Hill, granted under the Texas Constitution and statutes of the State of Texas, including, without limitation, Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code § 51.071 et seq. and § 212.001 et seq. It is hereby declared that by the City Council of the City of Cedar Hill that recreational areas, in the form of neighborhood parks and related amenities and improvements, are necessary and in the public welfare, and that the only adequate procedure to provide for same is by integrating such a requirement into the procedure for planning and developing property of a residential subdivision in the City of Cedar Hill, whether such development consists of new construction on previously vacant land or rebuilding and redeveloping existing residential areas. 
(b)  Neighborhood parks are those parks providing for a variety of outdoor recreational opportunities and within convenient distances from a majority of the residences to be served thereby, the standards for which are set forth in the Cedar Hill Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan, or neighborhood areas. The park zones established by the Cedar Hill Parks and Recreation Department and shown on the official Cedar Hill Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan, or neighborhood areas, shall be prima facie evidence that any park located therein is within such a convenient distance from the majority of residences to be served thereby. The cost of the neighborhood parks should be borne by the ultimate residential property owners who, by reason of the proximity of their property to such parks, shall be the primary beneficiaries of such facilities. Therefore, the following requirements are adopted to effect such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2000-17, § 1, 2-22-00)  
Sec. 20-42. - General requirement: dedication of land and payment of park development fee. 
(a)  Prior to a plat being filed with the County Clerk of Dallas County, Texas, or with the County Clerk of Ellis County, Texas, for a development of a residential area within the City of Cedar Hill and in accordance with the planning and zoning ordinances of the City of Cedar Hill, such plat shall contain a clear fee simple dedication of one (1) acre of land for each fifty (50) proposed dwelling units. As used in this article, a "dwelling unit" means each individual residence, including individual residences in a multi-family structure, designed and/or intended for inhabitation by a single family. 
Any proposed plat submitted to the City of Cedar Hill for approval shall show the area proposed to be dedicated under this section. The required land dedication of this section may be met by a payment in lieu of land where permitted by the City of Cedar Hill or required by other provisions in this article. 
In the event a plat is not required, the dedication of land required under this section shall be met prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  The City Council of the City of Cedar Hill declares that development of an area less than five (5) acres for neighborhood park purposes is impractical. Therefore, if fewer than two hundred fifty (250) dwelling units are proposed by a plat filed for approval, the city council may require the developer to pay the applicable cash in lieu of land amount, as provided in section 20-43 hereto. 
(c)  In addition to the required dedication of land, as set forth above, there shall also be a park development fee paid to the City of Cedar Hill as a condition to subdivision plat approval or issuance of a building permit. Such park development fee shall be set from time to time by ordinance of the City Council of the City of Cedar Hill sufficient to provide for the development of amenities and improvements on the dedicated land to meet the standards for a neighborhood park to serve the area in which the subdivision is located. Unless and until changed by resolution of the City Council of the City of Cedar Hill, the park development fee shall be calculated on the basis of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) per dwelling unit. 
(d)  In lieu of payment of the required park development fee, a developer shall have the option to construct the neighborhood park amenities and improvements. All plans and specifications for the construction of such amenities and improvements must be reviewed and approved by the City of Cedar Hill. The developer shall financially guarantee the construction of the amenities and improvements, and the City of Cedar Hill must approve same, prior to the filing of a plat in the case of platted subdivisions. Once the amenities and improvements are constructed, and after the City of Cedar Hill has accepted such amenities and improvements, the developer shall deed and convey such amenities and improvements to the City of Cedar Hill. 
(e)  In instances where land is required to be dedicated, the City of Cedar Hill shall have the right to accept or reject the dedication after consideration of the recommendation of the parks and recreation board or the planning and zoning commission, and to require a cash payment in lieu of land in the amount provided under section 20-43 hereto, if the City of Cedar Hill determines that sufficient park area is already in the public domain for the area of the proposed development, or if the recreation potential for that area would be better served by expanding or improving existing neighborhood parks. 
(f)  When two (2) or more developments will be necessary to create a neighborhood park of sufficient size in the same area, the parks and recreation board, at the time of preliminary plat approval, will work with the developers to define the optimum location of the required dedication within the respective plats. Once a park site has been determined, adjacent property owners who develop around the park site shall dedicate land and cash to the existing site unless otherwise determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2000-17, § 1, 2-22-00; Ord. No. 2019-694 , § 1, 9-24-19)  
Sec. 20-43. - Cash in lieu of land. 
(a)  A developer responsible for land dedication under this article shall be required, at the city council's option, to meet the dedication requirements in whole or in part by a cash payment in lieu of land, in the amount set forth below. Such payment in lieu of land shall be made prior to filing the final plat for record, or prior to the issuance of a building permit where a plat is not required. 
The cash payment in lieu of land dedication shall be met by the payment of a fee set from time to time by ordinance of the city council sufficient to acquire neighborhood park land. Unless and until changed by the city council, such fee shall be computed on the basis of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per dwelling unit. 
A cash payment in lieu of land dedication, as set forth in this section, does not relieve the developer of its obligation to pay the park development fee set forth in section 20-42(c) above. The cash payment in lieu of land dedication is in addition to the required park development fee. 
(b)  The City of Cedar Hill may from time to time decide to purchase land for parks in or near the area of actual or potential development. If the city does purchase park land in a park zone, subsequent park land dedications for that zone shall be in cash only, the calculation of which is set forth in section 20-43(a) above. Such cash payment is in addition to the payment of the required park development fee. 
(Ord. No. 2000-17, § 1, 2-22-00; Ord. No. 2019-694 , § 2, 9-24-19)  
Sec. 20-44. - Special fund, right to refund. 
(a)  All funds collected by this dedication process will be deposited in the City of Cedar Hill's Park Development Fund and used solely for the purchase or leasing of park land and the development of same. All expenditures from the said fund will be reviewed and approved by the city council. 
(b)  The City of Cedar Hill shall account for all sums paid into the park development fund with reference to the individual plats involved. Any monies paid into the said fund must be expended by the City of Cedar Hill within ten (10) years from the date received by the city. Such funds shall be considered to be spent on a first in, first out basis in a particular park zone. If not so expended within the ten (10) year period, the owners of the property will, on the last day of such period, be entitled to a refund of the remaining fees. The current owners of the property within the subdivision must request such a refund within one (1) year of entitlement, in writing, or such right is waived. 
(Ord. No. 2000-17, § 1, 2-22-00)  
Sec. 20-45. - Prior dedication, absence of prior dedication. 
(a)  If a dedication requirement arose prior to the passage of this article, that dedication requirement shall be controlled by the ordinance in effect at the time such obligation arose, except that additional dedication shall be required if the actual number of dwellings units constructed upon property is greater than the former assumed or planned number of dwelling units. Additional dedication shall be required only for the increase in the number of dwelling units and shall be based upon the land dedication and park development fee requirements set forth hereinabove. 
(b)  At the discretion of the city, any former gift of land to the city may be credited on a per acre basis toward eventual land dedication requirements imposed on the donor of such lands. The city council shall consider the recommendations of the parks and recreation board and the planning and zoning commission in exercising its discretion under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2000-17, § 1, 2-22-00)  
Sec. 20-46. - Additional requirements, definitions. 
(a)  Any land dedicated to the city under this article must be suitable for park and recreation uses. The following characteristics of a proposed area are generally unsuitable: 
(1)  Any area primarily located in the 100-year flood plain. 
(2)  Any areas of unusual topography or slope which renders same unusable for organized recreational activities. 
The above characteristics of a park land dedication area may be grounds for refusal of any plat. 
(b)  Drainage areas may be accepted as part of a park if the channel is constructed in accordance with city engineering standards, if no significant area of the park is cut off from access by such channel, if not less than five (5) acres of the site is above the 100-year flood plain, or if the dedication is in excess of ten (10) acres, not less than fifty (50) percent of the site should be included in the 100-year flood plain. 
(c)  Each park must have ready access to a public street. 
(d)  Unless provided otherwise herein, an action by the city shall be by the city council, after consideration of the recommendations of the parks and recreation board and the planning and zoning commission. Any proposal considered by the planning and zoning commission under this section shall have been reviewed by the parks and recreation board and its recommendation given to the said commission. 
(e)  Any preliminary plat approved prior to the effective date of this article shall be exempt from these requirements set forth herein; however, when such preliminary approval expires, any resubmission of such plat shall meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-17, § 1, 2-22-00)  
Sec. 20-47. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent or in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2000-17, § 1, 2-22-00)  
Secs. 20-48—20-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ESCARPMENT DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 20-66. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the escarpment development regulations shall be to promote the following objectives: 
(1)  To maintain the equilibrium of steep slope areas to control problems of erosion, slumping, and other earth movement. 
(2)  To minimize the increased runoff that accompanies the development of slopes, especially during the construction phase when large tracts of land are disturbed. 
(3)  To minimize the long-term effects of slope development including downstream flooding and the siltation of area streams and lakes. 
(4)  To minimize soil erosion by limiting activities that unnaturally expose the subsoils such as cuts, stripping off topsoil, and major regrading. 
(5)  To reduce the hazards associated with slope development including flash flooding, landslides, mudslides, and rock falls. 
(6)  To minimize the scarring effects of grading and to protect and retain the natural character of the escarpment. 
(7)  To provide a factor of safety against unstable slopes or slopes subject to erosion and deterioration in order to protect human lives and property. 
(8)  To ensure that development is planned to fit the topography, soils, geology, hydrology, and other conditions existing on the proposed site. 
(9)  To ensure a safe means of ingress and egress for vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and within the slope areas and to provide access for emergency vehicles necessary to serve the slope areas. 
(10)  To minimize the high cost of public improvements and maintenance associated with the development of slopes including the need for increased flood control and storm water management measures. 
(Ord. No. 94-198, § 1, 11-8-94)  
Sec. 20-67. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be determined in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. 
Austin chalk is a geologic formation composed of alternating beds of chalk and marl. The appearance is fractured, mainly white to buff on weathered surfaces but bluish gray when exposed. 
Beyond is a distance past, measured horizontally from an imaginary line passing vertically through a point. 
City engineer shall mean that person or group of persons or consultants or any employee thereof that has been appointed as city engineer by the city council. 
Civil engineer is a registered professional engineer trained in general civil engineering principles and registered in the State of Texas. 
Crest is that point above the escarpment line where the slope becomes flatter than 4:1. 
Developer is anyone, including a person, partnership, or corporation submitting a plan for development in the escarpment zone. 
Development is any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to grading, excavating, filling, dumping, removing of vegetation, or erecting of structures. 
Eagle Ford Shale Formation is a soil formation typically characterized by several feet of dark brown or dark grayish brown soils overlying a tan to olive tan and gray to olive gray, jointed and fissured, relatively dry, residual clay, as shown on the Geologic Map of Dallas County, Texas published by the Dallas Geologic Society, Inc. A copy of the map may be obtained at their offices at One Energy Square, Suite 170, 4925 Greenville Avenue, Dallas, Texas 75206 or by calling (214) 373-8614. Eagle Ford Shale Formation also is shown on the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service publication "Soil Survey of Dallas County" which identifies it as the Heiden series, Houston Black series, Lewisville series, Ovan series, Trinity series, Vertel series, and Eddy-Brackett complex. 
Engineer shall mean a person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering. 
Escarpment zone is an environmentally fragile bluff having a slope of 4:1 or slopes located immediately above and below the exposed contact line between the Austin chalk and the Eagle Ford shale. The zone is a linear corridor, whose width is described as the distance: 
(1)  The greater of one hundred twenty-five (125) horizontal feet above chalk and shale contact, or thirty-five (35) horizontal feet beyond the crest (that point above the escarpment line where the slope becomes flatter than 4:1); and 
(2)  The greater of eighty-five (85) horizontal feet below the chalk and shale contact, or ten (10) horizontal feet beyond the toe (that point below the escarpment line where the slope becomes flatter than 4:1). 
Factor of safety is a combination of factors which, when considered together, indicate whether the slope is stable at a slip surface location. The factor of safety (Fs) is determined using the equation: 
Fs = CR L + N tan Or / T 
where CR is the residual cohesive strength; Or is the residual angle of internal friction; L is the length of the slip surface; T is the total driving force tending to cause the slope failure; and N is the total normal force acting perpendicularly to the slip surface. The factor of safety should be completed using this basic equation in conjunction with generally accepted and recognized state of the art methods for slope stability studies. 
Geotechnical engineer is a registered professional engineer trained in geotechnical engineering (soils engineering), has experience in Eagle Ford shale, escarpment zones and is registered in the State of Texas. 
Grading is any excavation, filling, clearing or combination thereof. 
Person is a natural person, heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership, or corporation, its or their successors or assigns, or the agent of the aforesaid. 
Slope, 4:1 is a slope with an angle described by four (4) horizontal feet to one (1) vertical foot. 
Stable condition shall mean the slope stability factor of safety as required by this article. 
Structural engineer is a registered professional engineer, generally civil, with special training in structural and foundation design and registered in the State of Texas. 
Structure is that which is built or constructed, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Toe is the point below the escarpment line where the slope becomes flatter than 4:1. 
(Ord. No. 94-198, § 1, 11-8-94)  
Sec. 20-68. - Applicability. 
(a)  Compliance required. Except as otherwise herein provided, in the escarpment zone, no clearing of natural vegetation, excavation, storage, filing, dumping or other development shall be conducted except when done in compliance with an escarpment development plan submitted pursuant to these regulations. 
(b)  Development plan. Prior to the acceptance for filing of any application for final approval of a development in the escarpment zone, including but not limited to an application for planned unit development, subdivision plat, site plan, developmental plan or building permit, an escarpment development plan that meets the requirements of this article must be approved by the city. If an escarpment development plan has been previously approved for the property, the applicant may rely upon such plan only if the plan addresses the nature and extent of the development proposed. 
(c)  Exceptions. The escarpment development regulations shall not apply to the following types of development. An applicant for development may appeal a determination that the application does not qualify for an exception herein listed, or may request a different exception, by filing such appeal or request with the city council in the manner provided in section 20-74. 
(1)  For an existing single-family dwelling, the following types of development are exempt provided that each of the following standards is met: 
a.  Regrading property by cutting or filling by less than four (4) feet in height. 
b.  Removing less than one hundred (100) square feet of ground cover. 
c.  Increasing the size of an existing structure by less than fifty (50) percent. 
(2)  Any pending application for a subdivision plat or phase thereof which was accepted for filing prior to the effective date of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 94-198, § 1, 11-8-94)  
Sec. 20-69. - Application for approval of escarpment development plan. 
(a)  Application. Any person desiring to develop property in the escarpment zone shall submit an escarpment development plan to the city. The application may be submitted simultaneous with another application for development in the escarpment zone, and where allowed by other provisions of the city code, may be processed with such other application. The city may require that information pertaining to the escarpment development plan be included in other development applications within the escarpment zone. 
(b)  Pre-application conference. Upon request of a developer, or upon request for approval of one (1) of the items listed in section 20-68(b), a preapplication conference between the developer and representatives from the city shall be conducted. The purpose of this meeting shall be to inform the developer as to what information he shall be required to submit for evaluation by the various city departments and the number of copies which must be submitted. Additionally, a tentative timetable for the submission of all requested information shall be determined. 
(Ord. No. 94-198, § 1, 11-8-94)  
Sec. 20-70. - Submission requirements for an escarpment development plan. 
An escarpment development plan shall include the following information, reports and plans: 
(1)  General requirements. The following general information, maps and drawings: 
a.  The name and address of the developer and a statement of the developer's interest in the proposed development. 
b.  The name and address of any person holding or claiming an ownership interest in the property if different from a. above. 
c.  The name and address of the person preparing the items submitted. 
d.  A general vicinity map of the proposed site on a scale of 1;inch = 200'. 
e.  A brief description of the proposed development. 
f.  A map outlining the proposed development site within the escarpment zone and showing the contours of the property at a minimum of two-foot intervals with details of the terrain and area drainage on a minimum horizontal scale of 1? = 100' and a vertical scale of 4:1. 
g.  A drawing which shows cross sections for every one hundred (100) linear feet of the property on a minimum scale of 1" = 50'. 
(2)  Soils engineering report. A soils engineering report, which shall include: 
a.  A description of the geology of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, and opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of the site prepared by a geotechnical engineer. 
b.  A slope stability analysis including slope stability calculations for each new structure proposed to be erected within the escarpment zone and soil tests taken of representative locations within the site to adequately describe the existing geotechnical conditions. All soil tests and calculations for new development within the escarpment zone shall be performed under supervision and sealed by a geotechnical engineer. The structural foundations for all new developments shall be designed and sealed by a structural engineer. The following information shall be submitted along with the slope stability analysis for review by the city: 
1.  Boring locations; 
2.  Driller's logs of borings; 
3.  Table of engineering tests including, but not limited to, shear strength tests, moisture content tests, Atterberg limits and swell tests; 
4.  Calculations of slope stability analysis indicating shape of slip surface(s), location of slip surface(s), and corresponding factor(s) of safety. 
c.  Design recommendations which include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of the existing soils; conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures; design criteria for corrective measures when necessary; and opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of the site. The design recommendations shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer. 
(3)  Grading plan. A grading plan for any proposed grading in the escarpment zone which will result in permanent cut or fill slopes greater than 4:1. The grading plan shall incorporate recommendations from the soils engineering report and contain all necessary information concerning plans for surface and subsurface drainage devices including a drainage area map with drainage calculations prepared by a civil engineer. 
(4)  Soil erosion plan. A soil erosion control plan prepared by a civil engineer complying with NCTCOG's Storm Water Quality Best Management Practices for Construction Activities. The plan shall include, but is not limited to, the following information: 
a.  Type of soil cover (as mapped by the soil conservation service). 
b.  Erodability of mapped soils. 
c.  Existing and proposed development. 
d.  A timing schedule indicating anticipated starting and completion dates of the development sequence and time of exposure of each area prior to completion of control measures. 
e.  All measures to be taken to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation of existing soils during and after construction. 
f.  A detailed site plan which shows existing vegetative patterns and proposed vegetation removal within the escarpment zone. 
(5)  Restoration plan. An estimate prepared by a civil engineer of the cost to restore that portion of the development site which is in the escarpment zone to a stable condition. 
(Ord. No. 94-198, § 1, 11-8-94)  
Sec. 20-71. - Escarpment development plan review and approval. 
(a)  Distribution and review. Upon submission to the city of a completed escarpment development plan, the city engineer shall forward copies of the plan to the public service, fire and park departments and any other interested departments for their review. Outside consultants may be employed to review all or portions of the escarpment development plan where such is deemed necessary by the city engineer. Where a consultant is utilized, the city engineer shall inform the developer of the consultant's name and address. 
(b)  City departments. After reviewing all information, reports and plans of the escarpment development plan, the various city departments shall submit their evaluations in writing to the city engineer. 
(c)  Decision by city engineer. The city engineer shall review all information, reports and plans submitted by the developer together with the city department evaluations to determine whether the escarpment development plan meets the standards set forth in section 20-72. The city engineer shall have twenty (20) working days from the date the complete escarpment development plan application is submitted to review the escarpment development plan and either approve it as submitted, approve it with conditions, or deny it and provide the developer with a list of written objections. This time period may be extended for fifteen (15) days upon written notice to the developer by the city engineer stating the reason for the extension. The city engineer's failure to act within twenty (20) days, or thirty-five (35) days if extended, however, shall constitute approval of the plan as submitted. 
(d)  Acceptance of conditions. If the escarpment development plan is approved with conditions pursuant to section 20-72, the developer shall have ten (10) days to file a notice of acceptance of these conditions, or the plan shall be deemed denied. If the developer accepts the conditions, the developer must submit a plan revised in accordance with these conditions to the city engineer within thirty (30) days of the city engineer's approval, unless the developer gives the city engineer written notice of a need for additional time. 
(e)  Amended plan. If the city engineer denies the escarpment development plan application, the city engineer shall provide the developer with a list of written objections. The developer will then have an opportunity to amend his plan. In all cases, the developer shall have twenty (20) days to respond to the written objections from the city engineer. If the developer does not respond to any written objections and receive approval for an amended plan, the plan shall be deemed denied. 
(f)  Action on amended plan. If the city engineer submits written objections to the plan to the developer and the developer responds with an amended plan, the city engineer shall have fifteen (15) days to review the amended plan and either approve it, approve it with conditions, or submit additional written objections, or the plan shall be deemed approved. This time period for response to the amended plan may also be extended for fifteen (15) days upon written notice to the developer by the city engineer stating the reason for the extension. 
(Ord. No. 94-198, § 1, 11-8-94)  
Sec. 20-72. - Standards and conditions. 
(a)  Approval standards. The city engineer, or the appeals board or city council, on appeal, shall take action on the escarpment plan in accordance with the following general standards: 
(1)  No structure, cut or fill shall be constructed or placed where the slope stability factor of safety is less than 1.5. 
(2)  Development shall be fitted to the topography, soils, geology, and hydrology of the site. 
(3)  Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected wherever possible. 
(4)  When land is exposed during development, the exposure shall be kept to the shortest practical period of time and to as small an area as possible at any one (1) time. 
(5)  Sediment basins or other approved installations shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development. 
(6)  Discharge of storm water over the escarpment face shall be minimized with no concentrations greater than that in the existing state. 
(7)  Collection and routing shall be implemented through the use of stilling basins, retention basins or flow retardant vegetation. No ponding of water in the escarpment zone will be allowed. 
(8)  Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate all increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. 
(9)  Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect areas exposed during development. 
(10)  Erosion control planning and methods shall be in conformance with NCTCOG's Storm Water Quality Best Management Practices for Construction Activities. 
(11)  Shrub borders shall be maintained around woodlands. 
(12)  Preferred landscape plantings shall be indigenous plant species (list published by the Dallas Nature Center). 
(13)  Grading shall be planned so as to have the least disturbances on the area's natural topography, watercourses, vegetation, and wildlife. 
(14)  Topsoil shall be stockpiled and respread on areas where vegetation will be grown after the grading is completed, and methods to ensure maintenance of these areas until vegetation is established shall be implemented. 
(b)  Conditions. The city engineer, or the appeals board or city council, on appeal, may attach such conditions to the approval of an escarpment development plan as are necessary to carry out the intent and purposes of these escarpment development regulations, based upon the approval standards set forth in subsection (a) above. Conditions may include, but are not necessarily limited to, restrictions on the types and intensity of uses, or the design of structures, that may be placed on the development site; restrictions on the placement or design of roadway and drainage improvements and utilities for the development site; structural improvements to assure the stability of the site or of individual lots or improvements; preservation of existing vegetation or revegetation of the development site; and temporary improvements to insure the stability of the development site during construction. 
(Ord. No. 94-198, § 1, 11-8-94)  
Sec. 20-73. - Appeal to the appeals board. 
(a)  Appeal. Where an escarpment development plan is denied, or is deemed denied after the developer fails to accept attached conditions, the developer may appeal this decision by giving written notice of appeal to the city council. This written notice must be filed with the city secretary's office within fifteen (15) days from the day the escarpment development plan is approved with conditions or denied. The city secretary shall forward this notice to the city council. 
(b)  Constitution of board. Upon appeal of a case, an appeals board consisting of three (3) persons shall be formed. Within fourteen (14) days of the notice of appeal, both the City Council and the developer shall name one (1) member of this board by giving written notice to the other. The third member of the board will be selected jointly from a list prepared by the city and the developer. 
(c)  Qualifications of board members. Appeal board members must meet the following qualifications: 
(1)  A board member may not be a current employee, agent, or consultant hired by or receiving any remuneration from either the city or the developer. 
(2)  A board member may not have any direct or indirect financial interest in the project. 
(3)  A board member should have some training or experience in the fields of civil, geotechnical engineering or geology. 
(4)  A board member does not have to be resident of the city. 
(d)  Costs. All expenses incurred by board members shall be reimbursed by the developer. 
(e)  Rules. The appeal board shall select one (1) of its members to act as chairman. The board may adopt reasonable rules of procedure. 
(f)  Hearing and record. Within fourteen (14) days of naming all members of the appeal board, the board shall set a time and place for a hearing on the case. Prior to the hearing, all materials previously filed with the city engineer by the developer and all written reports by city departments and the city engineer as well as the city engineer's findings and objections shall be submitted to the board. All appeal hearings shall comply with the Texas Open Meeting Law. 
(g)  Decision. Upon closing of the hearing, no additional information or evidence may be submitted to the appeal board by any party. The board shall reach its decision within fourteen (14) days of closing the hearing. The board may act to: 
(1)  Approve the escarpment development plan as submitted by the developer; 
(2)  Approve the developer's escarpment development plan with conditions in accordance with section 20-72; or 
(3)  Deny the developer's escarpment development plan for specified reasons. 
(h)  Report. The appeal board shall adopt a written report reflecting the action taken, which resolution shall be forwarded to the city council and to other city departments in accordance with section 20-74. This resolution shall be filed with the city secretary for delivery to the city council and the necessary city departments within five (5) days of its adoption and a copy forwarded to the developer. 
(i)  Acceptance of conditions. If the escarpment development plan is approved with conditions by the appeals board the developer shall have ten (10) days to file a notice of acceptance of these conditions, or the plan shall be deemed denied. If the developer accepts the conditions, the developer must submit plans revised in accordance with these conditions to the city engineer within thirty (30) days of the board action, unless the developer gives the city engineer written notice of a need for additional time. If the developer takes no action within thirty (30) days of the board action, the plan shall be deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 94-198, § 1, 11-8-94)  
Sec. 20-74. - Appeal to the city council. 
(a)  Appeal. Where an escarpment development plan is denied, or is deemed denied after the developer fails to accept attached conditions by an appeals board pursuant to section 20-73, the developer may appeal such decision to the city council alleging that the denial or conditions imposed deprives him of a vested property right to develop his land free from one (1) or more requirements contained in these escarpment development regulations and that the imposition of such requirements deprives him of the economical use of all of the property, by giving written notice of appeal to the city council. This written notice must be filed with the city secretary's office within fifteen (15) days from the day the escarpment development plan is denied by the appeals board or is deemed denied. The application shall state the basis for the appeal with particularity and shall identify any conditions which the developer believes should be modified or standards which should be relaxed in order to provide relief. The city secretary shall forward this notice to the city council. 
(b)  Record and hearing. Prior to the hearing, all materials previously filed with the city engineer by the developer, all written reports by city departments, the city engineer, and the appeals board, as well as the city engineer's and appeals board's findings and objections shall be submitted to the city council. All appeal hearings shall comply with the Texas Open Meeting Law. 
(c)  Standards. In deciding whether to grant relief to the applicant based upon such appeal, the city council shall take into consideration the following: 
(1)  The prospective harm to the public's health, safety and welfare if such relief is granted; 
(2)  The extent to which development within the escarpment zone on the proposed development site would constitute a public or private nuisance; 
(3)  The extent to which relief can be provided through redesign of the project; 
(4)  The types and numbers of development permits for the project previously obtained by the applicant; 
(5)  Any construction of structures in reasonable reliance on prior development permits; 
(6)  The installation of infrastructure or issuance of bonds to finance such infrastructure to serve development within the escarpment zone; 
(7)  The total expenditures made in connection with the proposed development in reliance on prior development permits, and whether such expenditures were made in connection with the entire project or a particular portion or phase; 
(8)  Any fees reasonably paid in connection with the project; 
(9)  Any representations made by the city concerning the project and reasonably relied upon to the detriment of the applicant. 
(d)  Decision. Upon closing of the hearing, no additional information or evidence may be submitted to the city council by any party. The city council shall reach its decision within fourteen (14) days of closing the hearing. The city council may act to: 
(1)  Modify the decision of the appeals board on developer's escarpment development plan, in order to avoid a deprivation of all economic use of the property. If such action is taken, the city council shall modify conditions or authorize variation from standards contained in this article only to the extent necessary to prevent the deprivation of all economic use. 
(2)  Deny the developer's escarpment development plan for specified reasons. 
Any relief granted by the city council pursuant to such appeal shall be the minimum deviation from ordinance requirements necessary to prevent deprivation of a vested property right. 
(e)  Report. The city council shall adopt a written report reflecting the action taken. A copy of this resolution shall be forwarded to the developer. The action of the city council shall be final and binding on all parties. 
(f)  Expiration of approval. Development which is authorized pursuant to such appeal by the city council shall expire, and all claims pertaining to vested rights shall be deemed waived, forfeited and void, if the following conditions occur: 
(1)  An application for a development permit approval is not filed within thirty (30) days of the city council's granting of such relief; or 
(2)  Substantial construction pursuant to such development permit, including site grading and the pouring of permanent foundations, is not completed within one (1) year of the issuance of a building permit, or as otherwise provided by the city. 
(g)  Resubmission. If the escarpment development plan is denied by the city council, the developer must begin the process over by submitting a different escarpment development plan to the city engineer if the developer wishes to develop the property. 
(h)  Acceptance of conditions. If the escarpment development plan is approved with conditions by the city council, the developer shall have ten (10) days to file a notice of acceptance of these conditions, or the plan shall be deemed denied. If the developer accepts the conditions, the developer must submit plans revised in accordance with these conditions to the city engineer within thirty (30) days of the city council's action, unless the developer gives the city engineer written notice of a need for additional time. 
(Ord. No. 94-198, § 1, 11-8-94)  
Sec. 20-75. - Approved escarpment development plans. 
(a)  Performance bond. Upon approval of an escarpment development plan, the city engineer shall require the submission of a performance bond in an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the estimated cost to restore that portion of the development site which is in the escarpment zone to a stable condition. The performance bond shall guarantee completion of the site development plan. This performance bond shall not represent a guarantee of safety or the cost to restore structures, buildings, etc., above, below, or in the escarpment zone. In determining the amount of the required bond, the cost estimate submitted by the developer may be used, but it is not binding. This bond shall be in the form of a corporate surety bond, underwritten by a licensed insurance company from the State of Texas, a cash bond or a letter of credit from a bank or savings and loan association acceptable to the city. Upon satisfactory completion of all work described in the escarpment development plan within the escarpment zone, the bond will be surrendered. The bond must be submitted and approved by the city engineer before any work may begin at the site. 
(b)  Single-family dwelling exception. Construction of single-family dwellings shall be excluded from these bonding requirements. Any development activity which damages property and is not repaired is subject to repair by the city. A lien will be filed on the property for all cost incurred by the city. 
(c)  Action on subdivision plat. If the escarpment development plan was submitted as a result of a request for approval of a subdivision plan, the city engineer shall notify the planning and zoning commission of the grant of approval of the escarpment development plan. The planning and zoning commission shall then require that the existence of the plan and required compliance with these escarpment development regulations be recorded on the subdivision plat. The approved escarpment development plan may not be altered or changed except upon written approval of the city engineer. 
(d)  Action on building permit. If the escarpment development plan was submitted as a result of a request for a building permit, the plan shall then become a part of the building plans and may not be changed or altered in any way except upon written approval of the city engineer. 
(e)  Lapse. If actual development does not begin on the site within two (2) years of approval of the escarpment development plan, the escarpment development plan shall expire, unless the developer submits a report to the city engineer signed by a geotechnical engineer stating that there has been no change in existing conditions which requires amending the approved plans, in which case the escarpment development plan may be extended for a period not to exceed one (1) additional year. 
(f)  Maintenance bond. A maintenance bond which is required for the development by the subdivision ordinance shall include the costs of any improvements required by this article. 
(g)  Before final approval of an escarpment development, the developer is required to submit an affidavit signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas. The affidavit shall read as follows: 
"I _______ (Engineer's name) do hereby state that I and/or trained personnel under my direct supervision, made sufficient site visits to the _______ (project) during construction to confirm that the construction was done in general compliance with the plans and specifications. The necessary laboratory testing required for quality control was performed by _______ (testing lab). I have reviewed all testing reports, and there are no incorrect deficiencies. After the completion of the construction, I personally made a final inspection of _______ (project) on _______ (date) and all known deficiencies have been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 94-198, § 1, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 96-288, § 1, 8-13-96)  
Sec. 20-76. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any person conducting development in the escarpment zone without an escarpment development plan, or any person owning, leasing or occupying property in the escarpment zone on which development is being conducted without an escarpment development plan shall be considered to be in violation of this article. 
(b)  Each day that development is conducted in the escarpment zone without an escarpment development plan shall be considered a separate violation. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or shall fail to comply, therewith or with any requirement thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine, and upon conviction of any such violation in an amount to not exceed that allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 94-198, § 1, 11-8-94)  
Sec. 20-77. - Relationship to other regulations. 
The escarpment development regulations established by this article are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land. Such development regulations are intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of the city's master plan, subdivision regulations, comprehensive zoning code, building code, and all other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to manage the development of land and protect the environment. 
(Ord. No. 94-198, § 1, 11-8-94)  
Chapter 21 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Provisions relating to budget and taxation, art. VI, § 17, art. X, § 1 et seq.; provisions relating to borrowing money and issuing bonds, art. XI, § 1 et seq.; provisions relating to contracts, art. IV, § 26. 
Cross reference— Administration generally, Ch. 2; licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10. 
State Law reference— Authority of home-rule city to levy general and special ad valorem taxes, V.A.C.S. arts. 1175(7), 1026 et seq.; authority of a city to levy and collect a sales tax, V.A.C.S. art. 1066c; budgets of cities and towns, V.A.C.S. arts. 689a-13 to 689a-16; depositing, disbursing, etc., of city funds, V.A.C.S. art. 2559 et seq.; bidding on contracting public works and purchase of supplies, materials, and equipment, V.A.C.S. arts. 2367a, 2368a. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Property tax exemption for elderly. 
(a)  All persons living within the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, who are sixty-five (65) years of age or older are hereby entitled to an exemption of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) from the assessed value of their residence homesteads as such homesteads are defined by Section 11.13(j), (k) and (l), Property Tax Code, as amended. 
(b)  The eligibility for, amount of, and application for such residence homestead exemption shall be governed by Section 11.41, et seq., Property Tax Code, as may hereinafter be amended. 
(c)  The first taxable year in which any individual may qualify for the exemption herein stated is the taxable year beginning January 1, 1994. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-11, 6-12; Ord. No. 84-721, §§ 1, 2, 8-14-84; Ord. No. 94-174, §§ 1—3, 1-25-94) 
State Law reference— Authority, V.T.C.A. Tax Code, § 11.13.  
Sec. 21-2. - Delinquent tax penalties and collection costs. 
(a)  Whenever any accounts for delinquent property taxes owed to the city are given to its tax attorney for collection, on or after July 1 of the year they become delinquent, the city shall be entitled to, and shall collect, an additional penalty of fifteen (15) percent of the delinquent taxes and penalty at the time of collection, either before or after suit and/or foreclosure sale, as provided by section 33.07 of the state Property Tax Code. 
(b)  In addition to the collection expenses provided for in paragraph (a) of this section, whenever a delinquent tax suit is filed the city shall be entitled to recover reasonable expenses, subject to the approval of the court, that are incurred by the city in determining the name, identity, and location of necessary parties and in procuring necessary legal descriptions of the property on which a delinquent tax is due, as provided by Section 33.48(a)(1), (2) and (3) of the state Property Tax Code. 
(c)  The city council of the city adopts an additional fifteen (15) percent penalty to defray the costs of collection of delinquent taxes as authorized by Sections 33.07 and 33.08 of the Texas Tax Code. 
(Ord. No. 85-873, §§ 1, 2, 4-23-85; Ord. No. 99-450, 9-28-99)  
Sec. 21-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-354, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 1998, repealed former section 21-3 in its entirety which pertained to a tax on "freeport goods" and derived from Ord. No. 89-1052, 12-12-89; Ord. No. 90-012, 3-13-90.  
Sec. 21-4. - Tax on leased vehicles. 
The city chooses not to exempt leased vehicles and will assess and levy ad valorem taxes on said vehicles as authorized by Texas Tax Code, § 11.252. 
(Ord. No. 2001-89, 12-11-01) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-89, adopted Dec. 11, 2001, was not specifically amendatory of the Code and has been included as section 21-4 at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 21-5. - Property tax exemption for disabled. 
(a)  All persons living within the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, who are disabled are entitled to an exemption of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) from the assessed value of their residence homesteads as such homesteads are defined by Section 11.13(j), (k) and (l), Property Tax Code, as amended. 
(b)  The eligibility for, amount of, and application for such disabled exemption shall be governed by Section 11.41, et seq., Property Tax Code, as may hereinafter be amended. 
(c)  The first taxable year in which any individual may qualify for the exemption herein stated is the taxable year beginning January 1, 2002. 
(Ord. No. 2001-65, §§ 1—3, 4-10-01)  
Sec. 21-6. - Good-in-transit subject to property taxation. 
Beginning tax year 2012, and continuing thereafter until further action is taken by the city council, "Goods-in-Transit," as defined by V.T.C.A. Tax Code, § 11.253, shall be subject to property taxation by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-462, § 1, 10-25-11)  
Secs. 21-7—21-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC LANDMARK ZONE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Board of development, § 2-101 et seq.; capital improvement board, § 2-121 et seq.; parks and recreation, Ch. 15; planning, Ch. 16; subdivision regulations, Ch. 20; zoning code, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference— Authority, V.T.C.A. Tax Code, § 11.24. 
 
Sec. 21-16. - Area designated; term; renewal. 
(a)  As provided by law, the city council hereby designates as a historic landmark zone that area designated on Exhibit "A" attached to Ordinance 99-424 on file in the office of the city secretary and made a part hereof for all purposes. The zone is hereby declared to be eligible for residential or commercial tax exemption under the terms and conditions of this article. 
(b)  The designation of the zone herein expires five (5) years from the effective date this section [Ordinance No. 99-424] and may be renewed by subsequent ordinance of the city council. The expiration of the zone shall not affect an agreement entered into prior to the zone's expiration. 
(Ord. No. 85-829, § III, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 99-424, § 2, 4-13-99)  
Sec. 21-17. - Agreements under article subject to council approval. 
Any agreement to be entered into under the provisions of this article must be approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the city council. On approval by the city council, the agreement shall be executed by the mayor, or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 85-829, § II, 12-17-85)  
Sec. 21-18. - Agreement conditions. 
The city council is hereby authorized to agree in writing with the owner of any taxable property located in the historic landmark tax abatement zone hereby to exempt from taxation one hundred (100) percent of the value of the property equal to such improvement being made for a period of five (5) years on the following conditions: 
(1)  The agreement shall list the kind, number, and location of all proposed improvements of the property. 
(2)  During the five-year term of designation of the zone, any owner may apply to the city council to enter into such an agreement. In connection with the application, the owner shall submit a comprehensive site plan; must provide a plan detailing the construction means and costs involved. 
(3)  The agreement shall provide that city employees shall have access to the property for inspection to ensure that the improvements or repairs are made according to the specifications and conditions of the agreement. 
(4)  The agreement must limit the uses of the property to be consistent with the general purpose of encouraging development or redevelopment of the zone during the period of abatement, provided that any improvement, development or redevelopment pursuant to such an agreement must conform to the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city. 
(5)  The agreement shall provide that any property tax revenue lost as a result of the agreement shall be recaptured from the owner of the property or shall constitute a tax lien on the property itself if the owner of the property fails to make the improvements or repairs provided by the agreement. 
(6)  The agreement may include provisions for improvements by the city to streets, sidewalks, and utility services or contain other provisions not inconsistent with the state law. 
(7)  The value of the improvements to be made by the property owner must be equal to or greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the current value of the property according to the tax rolls. 
(8)  The agreement must require the applicant to begin construction within twelve (12) months after approval of the agreement by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 85-829, § IV, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 99-424, § 3, 4-13-99)  
Sec. 21-19. - Preservation committee. 
(a)  There is hereby created a committee to be known as the historic landmark preservation committee of the city, composed of five (5) members appointed by the city council. All members shall have knowledge and/or experience in the field of history, art, or architecture of Cedar Hill. Members of the committee shall serve for a term of two (2) years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term only. The committee members shall serve without compensation for their service. The committee shall designate a chairman and a vice chairman from the appointed members. 
(b)  Three (3) members present shall constitute a quorum and issues shall be decided by a simple majority vote of the members present. 
(Ord. No. 85-829, § V, 12-17-85)  
Sec. 21-20. - Criteria to be used in determining appropriateness of benefits of article. 
The historic landmark preservation committee shall use the following criteria in reviewing appropriateness for benefits of this article: 
(1)  These buildings are to be restored to their original condition. Any existing addition to the original structure shall be restored to be architecturally compatible with the rest of the building. 
(2)  Whether the building is of such old or unusual or uncommon design, texture, and material that it could be reproduced or be reproduced only with great difficulty. 
(3)  If retention of the buildings would help protect an historic place or area of historic interest in the city. 
(4)  If retention of the building would promote the general welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values, generating business, creating new positions, attracting tourists, attracting new residents, encouraging study and interest in American history, stimulating interest and study in architecture and design, educating citizens in American culture and heritage, or making the city a more attractive and desirable place in which to live. 
(Ord. No. 85-829, § V, 12-17-85)  
Sec. 21-21. - Application for tax exemption—Generally. 
For each assessment year for which the owner of property desires such property to be partially tax exempt pursuant to provisions of this article, the owner shall file with the historic landmark preservation commission a sworn application, not later than February first, setting forth the fact that the requirements of this article concerning the preservation and maintenance of the subject structure were being fully satisfied as of January first of the year for which application for exemption is being sought. Application forms are to be available at the city tax collection office. The application shall affirmatively set forth the owner's authorization for the city to visit and inspect the historic property and books and records as necessary to certify whether or not the property was being preserved and maintained as required herein and to determine what new construction or modifications have been completed. 
(Ord. No. 85-829, § VI, 12-17-85)  
Sec. 21-22. - Same—Review; property, structural and health standards. 
Upon receipt of the sworn application, the city, or its designee, shall inspect the historic property and review the books and records as necessary to certify whether or not the historic landmark, as of January first of the subject year, is being preserved and maintained in accordance with the city code and in substantial accordance with certain minimum property, structural and health standards, to wit: 
(1)  Any well, cesspool or cistern shall be securely covered or closed; 
(2)  Dead trees and tree limbs that are reasonably capable of causing injury to a person shall be removed; 
(3)  Any structure or portion of a structure which is vacant shall be securely closed so as to prevent unauthorized entry; 
(4)  Paint or other coatings shall be applied at reasonable intervals so as to protect the exterior surfaces of a structure which are subject to decay; 
(5)  The exterior grounds shall be maintained free of excessive rubbish, garbage, junk or refuse; 
(6)  Screens and shutters existing at the time of historic designation or added subsequent thereto shall be maintained in good repair; 
(7)  Broken windows shall be replaced or reglazed; 
(8)  Exterior doors and doorways shall be maintained in good repair and operable condition; 
(9)  Skirting around the structure, if any shall be maintained in good repair; 
(10)  Porch flooring and supports shall be maintained in a sound condition, capable of bearing an imposed load safely; 
(11)  Railings and handrails of exterior stairs, steps, balconies, porches and other exterior features shall be maintained in a sound condition so as to afford safety; 
(12)  Rotted exterior wood shall be replaced and repainted; 
(13)  Broken or partially missing gutters or downspouts shall be replaced or repaired; 
(14)  Loose bricks or stones in the exterior of a structure shall be reestablished or replaced and all joints weatherproofed by proper maintenance of pointing; 
(15)  Fences and the exterior of accessory buildings shall be maintained in reasonable repair, including painting if applicable; 
provided, however, that, if deficiencies from the above standards are in the process of being corrected or if restoration of the historic landmark which will correct such deficiencies is scheduled, and if the historic landmark preservation commission is satisfied that such work is in process or scheduled restoration will adequately correct such deficiencies within a reasonable time, then the historic landmark preservation commission may certify the historic landmark as being in compliance herewith if it finds that the general health, safety and welfare and the public interest in preserving historic landmarks is served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 85-829, § VII, 12-17-85)  
Sec. 21-23. - Same—Preservation committee's recommendation. 
The historic landmark preservation commission shall certify the facts to the city council not later than March fifteenth of the subject year, along with the historic landmark preservation commission's recommendation for approval or disapproval of the application for exemption. The historic landmark preservation commission shall note on the application form the following: Any new construction or modification to the structure that has been made after the first year for which the property has received an exemption under this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-829, § VII, 12-17-85)  
Sec. 21-24. - Appraisal of property; effect of disapproval. 
(a)  The chief appraiser shall appraise the historical property in accordance with such partial exemption and determine that portion of the land which is reasonably necessary for access to and use of the historic structure. All excess land shall be assessed for taxation in the same equal and uniform manner as all other taxable properties in the city. The applicant for exemption shall cause a copy of the ordinance, applications for exemption, and certifications from the historic landmark preservation commission to be forwarded to the chief appraiser not later than May first of the subject year. 
(b)  The provisions of this article pertaining to partial exemption of historic properties do not change the provisions of any other article of the city code pertaining to taxation, and the applicant's properties shall be rendered and assessed in the same manner as any other property in the event the city council elects to disapprove the application for exemption. 
(c)  It shall be the burden and sole responsibility of the property owner to apply and re-certify annually with the appropriate appraisal district for the exemption provided for by section 11.24 of the Texas Property Tax Code for each year that the property qualifies for the exemption under this section. Failure of the property owner to apply or re-certify for the exemption with the appraisal district under the provisions of the Texas Property Tax Code shall not result in any liability on the city. 
(Ord. No. 85-829, §§ VIII, IX, 12-17-85; Ord. No. 99-424, § 4, 4-13-99)  
Sec. 21-25. - Appraiser to make annual notations as to exempted property. 
Each year during which the historic landmark property is granted a tax exemption pursuant to provisions of this article, the chief appraiser shall note on his record the assessments which would have been made had the property not qualified for tax exempt status under this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-829, § X, 12-17-85)  
Secs. 21-26—21-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Hotel occupancy tax, V.A.C.S. art. 1269j-4.1, § 3a, b, d. 
 
Sec. 21-41. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Consideration means the cost of a room in a hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping, and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying the room for occupancy, and shall not include any tax assessed by any other governmental agency for occupancy of the room. 
Convention center complex means public structures, such as civic centers, civic center buildings, auditoriums, exhibition halls, coliseums, or other city buildings, that are suitable for use as convention and exposition facilities, and parking facilities, located at or in the immediate vicinity of the public structures, to be used in connection with those public structures for off-street parking or storage of motor vehicles or other conveyances. 
Director means the director of finance of the city. 
Hotel means any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include bed and breakfasts, hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, trailer motels, railroad pullman cars parked on a siding or other area and used for sleeping accommodations not involving the transportation of travelers, dormitory space where bed space is rented to individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by permanent residents, and/or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration. "Hotel" does not include hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes. 
Occupancy means the use of possession, or the right to use or possession of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession or right to use or possession extends for a period of less than thirty (30) days. 
Occupant means anyone, who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping. 
Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
Tax means the hotel occupancy tax levied in this article. 
(Ord. No. 84-734, § 2, 9-25-84; Ord. No. 98-388, § 1, 8-25-98) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 21-42. - Levy; amount; disposition of revenue; exemptions. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any sleeping room furnished by any hotel where the cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day. The tax is equal to seven (7) percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of the sleeping room to the hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. 
(b)  Disposition of revenues collected from the seven (7) percent hotel occupancy tax shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of V.T.C.A, Tax Code, Subtitle D, Chapter 351 which includes funding programs which promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry and; establish, improve or maintain a convention center or visitor information center; pay the administrative cost for facilitating convention registration; pay the cost for tourism-related advertising and promotions of the City or its vicinity; fund programs which enhance the arts; fund historical restoration or preservation programs; or any other programs authorized under V.T.C.A., Tax Code, Subtitle D, Chapter 351. 
(c)  The tax may not be imposed upon a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(Ord. No. 84-734, § 3(A), (B), (D), 9-25-84; Ord. No. 98-388, § 2, 8-25-98)  
Sec. 21-43. - Collection. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax for the city. 
(Ord. No. 84-734, § 4, 9-25-84)  
Sec. 21-44. - Reports, payments, fees. 
(a)  On the twentieth day of the month, or the first business day following the twentieth if the twentieth is a non-business day, following each quarter in which a tax is due, every person or corporation required by this article to collect the tax shall file a report with the director showing: 
(1)  The consideration paid for all occupations in the quarter; 
(2)  The amount of tax collected on behalf of the city from the occupancies; and 
(3)  Any other information the director may reasonably require. 
(b)  Every person required by this article to collect the tax shall pay the tax due on all occupancies of the quarter to the city at the time of filing the report required under subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 84-734, § 5, 9-25-84; Ord. No. 99-423, § 1, 3-23-99)  
Sec. 21-45. - Rules and regulations. 
The director shall have the power to make any rules and regulations necessary to effectively collect the tax. The director shall, upon giving reasonable notice, have access to all books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under this article. 
(Ord. No. 84-734, § 6, 9-25-84)  
Sec. 21-46. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  A person commits an offense under this article if he: 
(1)  Fails to collect the tax levied by this article; 
(2)  Fails to file a report as required by this article; 
(3)  Fails to pay the director the tax levied by this article when payment is due; or 
(4)  Files a false report. 
(b)  An offense committed under paragraph (a) of this section is punishable as provided in section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  In addition to any penalties imposed under paragraph (b) of this section, a person failing to pay the tax to the director within the time required shall forfeit ten (10) percent of the tax due as a penalty. An additional ten (10) percent of the tax due shall be forfeited thirty (30) days later if the tax is not paid. The penalty provided by this paragraph may never be less than five dollars ($5.00). Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per year beginning sixty (60) days from the date the tax is due. 
(d)  Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall upon conviction in the municipal court be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  In addition to the penalties imposed above, the city may also impose any other penalty authorized under Chapter 351 of the Tax Code (V.T.C.A.) 
(Ord. No. 84-734, § 8, 9-25-84; Ord. No. 98-388, § 3, 8-25-98)  
Secs. 21-47—21-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SALES AND USE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— At a special election held December 16, 1967, pursuant to Ordinance No. 252, the voters of the city adopted a one-percent local sales and use tax as authorized by V.A.C.S. art. 1066c. 
 
Sec. 21-61. - Definition. 
The term "residential use," means the use in a family dwelling, multifamily dwelling, an apartment, a housing complex or building or portion of a building occupied used as a home or residence. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2; Ord. No. 78-499, § 2, 8-22-78) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 21-62. - Levied on residential use of gas and electricity. 
The city shall continue to impose a city sales tax of one (1) percent on residential use of gas and electricity in and throughout the corporate limits of the city and it is hereby ordered that a city sales tax of one (1) percent be imposed on all residential use of gas and electricity within the city limits. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1; Ord. No. 78-499, § 1, 8-22-78)  
Sec. 21-63. - To be for sole use of city. 
The sales tax on the residential use of gas and electricity levied under this article within the corporate limits of the city shall be for the sole benefit of the city, a home rule city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3; Ord. No. 78-499, § 3, 8-22-78)  
Sec. 21-64. - State comptroller of public accounts authorized to collect, etc. 
The city council hereby authorizes the state comptroller of public accounts to collect and to institute legal action on behalf of the city on those occasions whereby the comptroller seeks to collect sales tax from delinquent taxpayers. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4; Ord. No. 78-499, § 4, 8-22-78) 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ordinance No. 78-499 of August 22, 1978, provided that such ordinance would take effect on September 3, 1978.  
Sec. 21-65. - Tax on telecommunications services. 
(a)  The exemption from the taxes imposed under the authority of article 1066c, Revised Civil Statutes, known as the Local Sales and Use Tax Act, on the receipts from the sale within the city of telecommunications services be and the same is hereby repealed. For purposes of this section, "telecommunications services" means the electronic or electrical transmission, conveyance, routing or reception of sounds, signals, data or information utilizing wires, cable, radio waves, microwaves, satellites, fiber optics, or any other method now in existence or that may be devised, and shall include all of such services which, but for the exemption repealed hereby, would be taxable by the city under the provisions of article 1066c. 
(b)  The city secretary is directed to forward to the state comptroller of public accounts, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a certified copy of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(Ord. No. 87-911, §§ 1, 2, 5-20-87) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-911, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 20, 1987, being not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been included as § 21-65 at the discretion of the editor.  
Chapter 22 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 10; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 11; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 19. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-16. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Driver: An individual who drives or operates a taxicab. 
Holder: A person who is granted an annual operating permit to operate a taxicab service under the provisions of this article. 
Operate: To drive or be in control of a taxicab. 
Operating permit: Permission granted by the city to operate a taxicab service inside the city for a period of one (1) year, renewable under the provisions of this article. 
Operator: The driver of a taxicab, the owner of a taxicab or the holder of an annual operating permit. 
Person: An individual, corporation, agency, trust, partnership, or two (2) or more persons having a joint or common economic interest. 
Taxicab: A chauffeured motor vehicle used to transport persons for hire on a call or demand basis upon the streets of the city, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  A vehicle being operated pursuant to a permit issued by the city, or pursuant to a franchise or permit legally issued by the railroad commission of the state, or pursuant to permission duly granted by the proper authority of the city for a vehicle to operate over a regular route, upon a set schedule or pursuant to any permission duly granted by the city council, or a vehicle being operated as a chartered bus under a contract to carry twelve (12) or more passengers; 
(2)  Vehicles being used as ambulances; 
(3)  Vehicles rented or leased for self-operation by the person actually driving the same, unless such a vehicle is transporting for compensation persons other than the one who actually rented or leased the same. 
Taxicab driver's license: A license issued to a person by the city authorizing that person to operate a taxicab in the city. 
Taxicab service: A passenger transportation service operated for hire that uses taxicabs in the operation of the service and includes, but is not limited to, a facility from which the service is operated, taxicabs used in the operation, and a person who owns, controls, or operates the service. 
Taximeter: A device that automatically computes a taxi fare based upon the distance traveled or the time the taxicab is engaged or both. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(A), 1-26-86) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-3.  
Sec. 22-17. - Conduct of drivers. 
While on duty, a taxicab driver shall conduct himself in a reasonable, prudent and courteous manner. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(C)(4), 1-26-86)  
Sec. 22-18. - Inspection and qualification of taxicabs. 
Before being allowed to operate upon the streets of the city, each taxicab shall be inspected and approved annually by the chief of police or his representative. No taxicab shall be driven or operated upon the streets of the city unless the same is in safe condition and free from mechanical defects and it must further meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Have a current valid state inspection sticker and be in compliance with the safety requirements of the state motor vehicle code, as amended; and 
(2)  Be not more than five (5) years old when it is initially qualified for service and, when it is over five (5) years old, be capable of passing an inspection which determines that the paint and body condition, interior, seating and upholstery, as well as all safety and mechanical equipment are in good condition before it can continue to serve as a taxicab; and 
(3)  Have a seat belt for each passenger; and 
(4)  Have an operating heater and air conditioner; and 
(5)  Have a two-way radio on the holder's dispatch frequency; and 
(6)  Have a current valid taxicab sticker issued by the city affixed to the windshield; and 
(7)  Have painted on both sides the trade name of the organization under whose operating permit such taxicab is being operated, the taxicab unit number, and the business telephone number of the holder of the operating permit. Such letters and numbers shall not be less than three (3) inches high with one-half-inch stroke, painted on each taxicab with permanent, nonwashable paint of a color sharply contrasting to the color of the taxicab so that the same will be readily apparent. Each holder of an operating permit for taxicab service in the city shall cause each taxicab to be painted in such a manner as to properly distinguish it from private vehicles and taxicabs operated by different taxicab services. The color combinations to be used shall be filed with the city secretary; and no two (2) such taxicab services shall be permitted to use the same or similar color combinations. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(C)(5), 1-26-86; Ord. No. 88-984, § 1(A), 8-9-88)  
Sec. 22-19. - Size and design of taximeter. 
(a)  Every taxicab operating under an operating permit granted by the city shall have affixed thereto a taximeter which shall calculate fares in accordance with services rendered and rates established by the city council. 
(b)  The rates to be charged for taxicab service in the city shall be established by the city council as it may from time to time determine by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(D)(1), 1-26-86)  
Sec. 22-20. - Refusal to convey passengers. 
(a)  While operating a taxicab, a driver shall not refuse to convey a person who requests service unless: 
(1)  The person is disorderly; or 
(2)  The driver is engaged in answering a previous request for service; or 
(3)  The driver is in fear of his personal safety. 
(b)  While operating a taxicab, a driver shall not refuse service requested by a radio dispatcher when the location of the taxicab is within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(D)(2), 1-26-86)  
Secs. 22-21—22-30. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OPERATING PERMIT 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Required. 
No person shall drive, operate or cause to be operated, nor shall any person employ, permit or allow another to drive, operate or cause to be operated, any taxicab upon any street in the city for the purpose of transporting a passenger or passengers for compensation, nor shall any person accept compensation for the transportation of passengers without first having obtained from the city under the provisions of this article, an operating permit authorizing such operation and acts, except a vehicle which is lawfully transporting a passenger or passengers from a point outside the city to a destination within the city, or, after discharging such passenger within the city, is returning empty by the most direct route to its regular place of business outside the city; provided, however, that, no such vehicle without such operating permit shall solicit or accept a passenger or passengers from any point within the city for transportation to any destination whatsoever, and no such vehicle without such operating permit shall remain waiting for more than five (5) minutes at any point in the city for a passenger brought in by it for the purpose of continuing the journey of such passenger or for any other purpose except to have repairs made upon it at a garage or other place where automobile repairs are customarily made. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(B)(1), 1-26-86)  
Sec. 22-32. - Application. 
(a)  To obtain a taxicab operating permit, a person shall file written application with the city secretary in the manner prescribed by this section. That applicant must be the person who will own, control, or operate the proposed taxicab service. An applicant shall file with the city secretary a written verified application containing the following: 
(1)  The form of business of the applicant; if the business is a corporation or association, a copy of the documents establishing the business and the name, address and citizenship of each person with a direct interest in the business; 
(2)  Name, address and verified signature of the applicant; 
(3)  An actual or pro forma income statement and balance sheet showing the assets, liabilities and the equity of the business; 
(4)  Description of any past business experience of the applicant, particularly in providing passenger transportation services, identification and description of any revocation or suspension of a franchise or permit held by the applicant or business before the date of filing the application; 
(5)  The number of vehicles and description of the vehicles the applicant proposes to use in the operation of the taxicab service; the description of the operations of the proposed taxicab services and the location of the fixed facilities to be used in the operation; 
(6)  The description of the proposed insignia and color scheme for the applicant's taxicabs; 
(7)  Documentary evidence from an insurance company, authorized to do business in the state, indicating a willingness to provide liability insurance required by this chapter; 
(8)  Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to be used in connection with the operation of the proposed taxicab service; 
(9)  Such additional information as the applicant desires to include to aid in the determination of whether the requested operation permit should be granted; and 
(10)  Such additional information as the city council considers necessary to assist or promote the implementation or enforcement of this chapter or the protection of the public safety. 
(b)  When an application for an operating permit containing the required information in full, properly verified, is filed with the city secretary, it shall be placed on the agenda of the city council for the next regular meeting of the city council following the filing of such application. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(B)(3), 1-26-86)  
Sec. 22-33. - Investigation of application by city council. 
(a)  After receiving any application for an operating permit, the city council shall make or cause to be made by its agents or employees, or by persons designated by it, such investigation as it may consider necessary. If such person has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor, the application shall be considered in accordance with article 6252-13c of the Revised Civil Statutes. The city council shall determine whether or not the public necessity and convenience requires the operation of such taxicabs and whether or not the applicant is fit and proper, qualified and able to officially conduct such business and render such service to the public, but the operating permit will not be granted unless the holder of the operating permit: 
(1)  Provides taxicab service to the entire city with a minimum of three (3) taxicabs registered for service; and 
(2)  Provides taxicab service between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week; and 
(3)  Provides dispatch service to taxicabs between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., seven (7) days a week; and 
(4)  Provides proof of minimum insurance for each taxicab as follows: 
a.  Bodily injury, two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) each person; five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) each occurrence; 
b.  Property damage, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) each occurrence; and 
(5)  The holder of an operating permit pays an annual operating permit fee based on a rate as the city council may determine from time to time by resolution. 
(b)  An operating permit may not be granted for a period longer than one (1) year; however, the annual operating permit is automatically renewed; provided, however, the holder thereof is in full compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(B)(4), 1-26-86; Ord. No. 88-984, § 1(B), 8-9-88)  
Sec. 22-34. - Public hearings on application. 
No permit to operate a taxicab service in the city shall be granted until a public hearing shall have been held before the city council on such request at a regular meeting of the city council. Upon approval of an application for a taxicab operating permit by the city council, the permit will be granted in the manner prescribed by this article, containing such terms or conditions as are included by the city council. Unless the permit expressly indicates otherwise, the provisions of this article shall apply to the permit and are deemed to be part of each permit as if the provisions of this article were expressly set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(B)(5), 1-26-86)  
Sec. 22-35. - Transferability. 
An operating permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may not be transferred to another person unless such transfer is approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(B)(2), 1-26-86)  
Sec. 22-36. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city council may revoke a taxicab operating permit if it determines that the holder has done any of the following: 
(1)  Failed to comply with any provision of this article; 
(2)  Breached any of the terms of the operating permit; 
(3)  Failed to pay city ad valorem taxes on the holder having taxable situs in the city, used directly or indirectly in connection with the taxicab service; 
(4)  Failed to pay the annual permit fee when due. 
(b)  If the city council desires to revoke an operating permit, it shall deliver to the holder of the operating permit notice in writing of the reasons for such revocation; and after a hearing, may revoke and cancel such operating permit. In the event of such revocation, the operating permit shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(B)(6), 1-26-86)  
Secs. 22-37—22-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER'S LICENSE 
 
Sec. 22-51. - Required. 
(a)  A person may not drive a taxicab inside the city unless he has a valid taxicab driver's license issued to him under the provisions of this division. 
(b)  A holder may not employ or contract with a driver or otherwise allow a person to drive for hire a taxicab owned, controlled, or operated by the holder unless the person has a valid taxicab driver's license issued to him under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(C)(1), 1-26-86)  
Sec. 22-52. - Qualifications. 
To qualify for a taxicab driver's license, an applicant must: 
(1)  Be a legal resident of the United States; 
(2)  Hold a valid chauffeur's license issued by the state; 
(3)  Be able to communicate in the English language; 
(4)  Not have been convicted of more than four (4) moving traffic violations arising out of separate transactions, nor involved in more than two (2) automobile accidents in which it could be reasonably determined that he was at fault, within a twelve-month period during the preceding thirty-six (36) months; 
(5)  Not have been under indictment or convicted of any crime involving murder, theft, burglary, robbery, prostitution, promotion of prostitution, public lewdness, a sexual offense or a drug related offense, unless five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date. If a person has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, the application shall be considered in accordance with article 6252-13c of the Revised Civil Statutes; 
(6)  Not have been convicted of, or discharged by probation or defined or deferred adjudication for, driving while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs; 
(7)  Have completed a defensive driving course approved by the National Safety Council within the last twelve (12) months; 
(8)  Pay a taxicab driver's license permit fee annually based on a rate as determined by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(C)(2), 1-26-86)  
Sec. 22-53. - Revocation. 
The city may revoke a taxicab driver's license if it determines that the licensee has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. The revocation of the taxicab driver's license is effective immediately upon notification in writing to the driver or the holder of the annual operating permit. The licensee may appeal the revocation to the city council within five (5) calendar days of receipt of the notice of revocation of the taxicab driver's license. 
(Ord. No. 86-838, § 1(16)(C)(3), 1-26-86)  
Chapter 23 - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Ordinance No. 2001-64, as adopted on March 27, 2001. Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-684, §§ 1—6, adopted Aug. 27, 2019, laid out provisions regarding compliance with House Bill 2439 affecting materials used in construction or renovation of residential and commercial buildings, but did not specify manner of inclusion. Therefore, at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been included as Ch. 4, Art. XXII, §§ 4-461—4-465. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
DIVISION 1.1. - ENACTING CLAUSE 
THAT THE COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF CEDAR HILL, TEXAS, AS PASSED AND APPROVED ON THE 11TH DAY OF JANUARY, 1977, TOGETHER WITH ALL AMENDMENTS THERETO IS HEREBY AMENDED AND REPLACED IN ITS ENTIRETY TO READ AS FOLLOWS:  
DIVISION 1.2. - PURPOSE 
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with an adopted comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city. They have been designed to protect and preserve places and areas of historical, cultural or architectural importance and significance in the city. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to ensure adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, wastewater treatment, schools, parks, and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the district, and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.  
DIVISION 1.3. - ZONING DISTRICT MAP 
The boundaries of zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon a zoning district map of the city, adopted as part of this ordinance as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail. 
One original of the zoning district map shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and labeled as Ordinance Number 2001-64. This copy shall be the official zoning district map and shall bear the signature of the mayor and attestation of the city secretary. This copy shall not be changed in any manner. In case of any question, this copy, together with amending ordinances, shall be controlling. 
A copy of the original zoning district map shall be placed in the office of the planning and zoning director. The copy shall be used for reference and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all subsequent amendments. Reproductions for informational purposes may be made of the official zoning district map or this copy.  
DIVISION 1.4. - ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 
The district boundary lines shown on the zoning district map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines, or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerline. 
(b)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(c)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
(d)  Boundaries indicated, as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the right-of-way lines. 
(e)  Boundaries indicated as following the centerline of all creeks, streams or drainage-ways shall be construed to follow such centerline, and in the event of change in the centerline, shall be construed to move with such centerline. 
(f)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (a) through (e) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning maps shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(g)  Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official action of the city council or whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley, or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley, or way and all areas so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
(h)  The zoning classification applied to a tract of land adjacent to a street shall extend to the centerline of the street, unless as a condition of zoning approval, it is stated that the zoning classification shall not apply to the street. 
(i)  Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information shown on the official zoning district map or when there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of subsections (a) through (h), the property shall be considered as classified, "RR" rural residential, in the same manner as provided for newly annexed territory. 
(j)  Zoning changes, which are still valid, made between January 11, 1977 and the dates of passage of this chapter are indicated in approximate locations on the zoning district map. For exact legal descriptions, refer to adopting ordinances for each particular zoning change.  
DIVISION 1.5. - COMPLIANCE REQUIRED 
All land, buildings, structures or appurtenances thereon located within the City of Cedar Hill, Texas which are hereafter occupied, used, constructed, erected, removed, placed, demolished, or converted shall be occupied, used, erected, altered, removed, placed, demolished or converted in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located as hereinafter provided or subject to penalties as per section 23-6.3.1 of this chapter. All of the standards and regulations prescribed herein shall be considered as the minimum requirement unless explicitly stated otherwise. No building permit will be issued or no occupancy or construction of any project shall commence, until the land area for the building or project is permanently zoned for the intended use(s). 
It shall be a violation of this chapter to engage in any use of land which is prohibited by state law or which operates in excess of state or national environmental or pollution standards as determined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Texas Air Control Board, Texas State Department of Health, or The Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission, as the case may be. 
No new uses shall be established on any land parcel unless the property is platted in accordance with the platting and subdivision regulations and standards of the city.  
DIVISION 1.6. - ZONING UPON ANNEXATION 
All territory hereinafter annexed to the City of Cedar Hill shall be classified as "RR" rural residential (see section 23-2.3.10) until other zoning is established as deemed appropriate by the city. The procedure for establishing zoning for annexed territory shall conform to the procedure set forth in division 2.3 of this chapter. 
1.6.1 Following annexation, the planning and zoning director shall schedule public hearings to zone the recently annexed land. 
1.6.2 In an area classified as "RR" rural residential, no construction or use of land shall commence other than a permit which will allow the construction of a building or use permitted in the "RR" district, unless and until such area has been classified in a zoning district for which the proposed use is permitted, by the city council in the manner prescribed by division 2.3. 
1.6.3 No application for a building permit or approval of a site plan shall be submitted until permanent zoning has been established by the city in accordance with division 2.3 of this chapter.  
DIVISION 1.8. - COMPLETE APPLICATION PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 23-1.8.1. - Completeness determination. 
Every application for a zoning permit authorized by this zoning ordinance shall be subject to a determination of completeness by the official responsible for processing the application. No application shall be accepted by the responsible official for processing unless it is accompanied by all documents required by and prepared in accordance with the requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 8-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.8.2. - Incompleteness as grounds for denial. 
The processing of an application by any city official or employee prior to the time the application is determined to be complete shall not be binding on the city as the official acceptance of the application for filing, and the incompleteness of the application shall be grounds for denial or revocation of the application. A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.8.3. - Pre-application conference. 
A property owner may request a pre-application conference with the administrator for purposes of identifying requirements that are applicable to a zoning permit. The request shall be made in writing on a form prepared by the administrator and shall state that any proposed development concept discussed at the pre-application conference is not intended as a plan of development or application for zoning permit approval. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.8.4. - Responsible official. 
A determination of completeness shall be made by the official responsible for processing the application in writing not later than the tenth business day after the date the application is submitted to the official. The determination shall specify the documents or other information needed to complete the application and shall state the date the application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.8.5. - When deemed complete. 
An initial permit application that is filed on or after April 28, 2005, or any subsequent application filed after approval of such initial zoning permit, shall be deemed complete on the 11th business day after the application has been received, if the applicant has not otherwise been notified that the application is incomplete. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.8.6. - Time for completing application. 
If an application is not completed on or before the 45th day after the application is submitted to the official responsible for processing the application in accordance with the official's written notification, the application will be deemed to have expired and it will be returned to the applicant together with any accompanying documents. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.8.7. - Sequence of applications. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this zoning ordinance to the contrary, an application for a zoning permit, or an application to the board of adjustment for a variance or special exception, shall not be considered complete unless accompanied by a copy of the zoning ordinance or other certification verifying that the proposed use for which the application is submitted is authorized by the zoning district in which the property is located. No application for a building permit shall be considered complete unless accompanied by an approved site plan or other zoning permit that applies standards to the property required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.8.8. - Vested rights. 
For purposes of determining a vested rights petition pursuant to division 1.9, no vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has expired pursuant to this section, or from the filing of a complete initial application that is subsequently denied. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.8.9. - Official filing date. 
The time period established by state law or this zoning ordinance for processing or deciding an application shall commence on the date that a complete application has been accepted for filing, which date shall be deemed the official filing date. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
DIVISION 1.9. - DETERMINATION OF VESTED RIGHTS 
 
Sec. 23-1.9.1. - Vested rights petition. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of a vested rights petition is to determine whether one (1) or more standards of this zoning ordinance should not be applied to a zoning permit application by operation of state law, or whether certain permits are subject to expiration. 
(b)  Definition. For purposes of this division 1.9, the term "zoning permit" means any of the following types of applications, authorized pursuant to Ordinance No. 2001-64, as amended: Conditional use permits and associated site plans; in planned development districts, development plans or site plans, site plans for overlay zoning districts; landscaping plans or site plans; building permits; or certificates of occupancy. 
(c)  Applicability. A vested rights petition may be filed with an application for a zoning permit. A vested rights petition may not be filed with a request to amend the text of the zoning regulations or the zoning map, or with a request for approval of a conditiona use permit. 
(d)  Effect. Upon granting of a vested rights petition in whole or in part, the zoning permit application shall be decided in accordance with the standards specified in the relief order based on prior ordinance requirements or development standards. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.9.2. - Petition requirements. 
(a)  Who may petition. A vested rights petition may be filed by a property owner or the owner's authorized agents, including the applicant, with any zoning permit application. 
(b)  Form of petition. The vested rights petition shall allege that the petitioner has a vested right for some or all of the land subject to the zoning permit application under V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, Ch. 245 or successor statute, or pursuant to V.T.C.A. Local Government Code, § 43.002 or successor statute, that requires the city to review and decide the application under standards in effect prior to the effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall include the following information and documents: 
(1)  A narrative description of the grounds for the petition; 
(2)  A copy of each approved or pending zoning permit or other development application which is the basis for the contention that the city may not apply current standards to the zoning permit application which is the subject of the petition; 
(3)  The date of submittal of the application for the permit, or of a development plan pursuant to which the permit was subsequently filed, if different from the official filing date. 
(4)  The date the project for which the application for the zoning permit was submitted was commenced. 
(5)  Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the zoning permit application from which relief is sought; 
(6)  Identification of the standards which the petitioner contends apply to the zoning permit application; 
(7)  Identification of any current standards which petitioner agrees can be applied to the zoning permit application at issue; 
(8)  A narrative description of how the application of current standards affect proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree preservation, open space, or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size shown on the development application for which the petition is filed; 
(9)  A copy of any prior vested rights determination involving the same land; and 
(c)  Time for filing petition. A vested rights petition shall be filed with a zoning permit application for which a vested right is claimed. Where more than one (1) zoning permit application is authorized to be filed by this zoning ordinance, the petition may be filed simultaneously for each application. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.9.3. - Processing of petition and decision. 
(a)  Responsible official. The official responsible for processing the zoning permit application shall process the vested rights petition. A copy of the petition shall be forwarded to the city attorney following acceptance. 
(b)  Official's decision. If the responsible official is the decision maker on the zoning permit application, the official shall determine whether the relief requested in the vested rights petition should be granted in whole or in part, and shall formulate a written report summarizing the official's reasoning and setting forth the decision on the petition, which shall be delivered to the applicant within ten (10) days of the date the vested rights petition is accepted for filing. 
(c)  Decision by commission on petition. If the zoning permit application is to be decided by the planning and zoning commission, the planning director shall submit a report in the form of a recommendation to the decision maker. The commission shall render a decision on the vested rights petition in conjunction with its decision on the zoning permit application. 
(d)  Appeal of decision on petition. The petitioner or any interested person may appeal the responsible official's or the commission's decision on the vested rights petition within ten (10) working days of the date of such decision to the city council. An appeal under this subsection stays acceptance of filing of any related development applications. 
(e)  Decision by city council. Where the city council is the final decision maker on the zoning permit application, or upon appeal, the city council shall decide the vested rights petition. The request must be accompanied by a waiver of the time for decision on the application imposed under this zoning ordinance pending decision by the council, which shall stay further proceedings on the application. The council shall decide the petition, after considering the responsible official's report and any decision by the planning and zoning commission with its decision on the zoning permit application or within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the responsible official's report, or the notice of appeal, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.9.4. - Action on petition and order. 
(a)  Action on the petition. The decision-maker on the vested rights petition may take any of the following actions: 
(1)  Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the zoning permit application shall be reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards; 
(2)  Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the zoning permit application shall be reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in identified prior regulations; or 
(3)  Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards shall be applied to the zoning permit application, while standards contained in identified prior regulations also shall be applied; or 
(4)  For petitions filed pursuant to section 28-13, determine whether the zoning permit(s) should be terminated, or specify the expiration date or the conditions of expiration for such permit(s). 
(b)  Order on petition. The responsible official's report and each decision on the vested rights petition shall be memorialized in an order identifying the following: 
(1)  The nature of the relief granted, if any; 
(2)  The approved or filed zoning permit or other development application(s) upon which relief is premised under the petition; 
(3)  Current standards which shall apply to the zoning permit application for which relief is sought; 
(4)  Prior standards which shall apply to the zoning permit application for which relief is sought, including any procedural standards; 
(5)  The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part on the petition. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.9.5. - Criteria for approval. 
(a)  Factors. The decision-maker shall decide the vested rights petition based upon the following factors: 
(1)  The nature and extent of prior zoning permit or other development applications filed or approved for the land subject to the petition; 
(2)  Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the petition; 
(3)  Whether any prior approved applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in accordance with law; 
(4)  Whether current standards adopted after commencement of the project affect proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree preservation, open space, or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size based upon the proposed development application; 
(5)  Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current Zoning Regulations from which the applicant seeks relief; 
(6)  Whether any prior approved zoning permit or other development applications relied upon by the petitioner have expired; 
(b)  Conditions. If the claim of vested rights under a petition is based upon a pending zoning or other development application subject to standards that have been superseded by current standards under this zoning ordinance, the decision maker may condition any relief granted on the petition on the approval of the application under such prior standards. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.9.6. - Application following relief order. 
Following the city's final decision on the vested rights petition, the property owner shall conform the zoning permit application for which relief is sought to such decision. If the zoning permit application on file is consistent with the relief granted on the vested rights petition, no revisions are necessary. Where proceedings have been stayed on the zoning permit application pending referral of the vested rights petition to the city council, proceedings on the application shall resume after the council's decision on the vested rights petition. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 1, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-1.9.7. - Expiration. 
Relief granted on a vested rights petition shall expire on occurrence of one of the following events: 
(a)  The petitioner or property owner fails to submit a required revised zoning permit application consistent with the relief granted within thirty (30) days of the final decision on the petition; 
(b)  The zoning permit application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition is denied under the criteria made applicable through the relief granted on the petition; or 
(c)  The zoning permit application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition expires. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 2, 08-30-05)  
ARTICLE 2. - ZONING PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION  
DIVISION 2.1. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION (P&Z) 
 
Sec. 23-2.1.1. - General. 
The planning and zoning commission shall function according to article III, planning and zoning commission, section 16-41—16-43, in the Cedar Hill Code of Ordinances, which establishes membership and operating procedures. The powers and duties of the planning and zoning commission are further defined in division 2.3 of this chapter and in chapter 16 in the city's Code of Ordinances.  
Sec. 23-2.1.2. - Created; membership; officers. 
There is hereby created, in accordance with V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 211.007 and the City Charter, a planning and zoning commission which shall consist of seven (7) citizens from the City of Cedar Hill. Members shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. The city council shall select replacements for the planning and zoning commission members whose terms have expired. Vacancies and unexpired terms shall be appointed by the council for the remainder of the term. Members of the commission may be removed from office by the city council after public hearing and for cause set forth in writing. All members shall serve without compensation. All members shall serve in accordance with article III, planning and zoning commission, section 16-41—16-43, in the Cedar Hill Code of Ordinances pertaining to attendance and tenure requirements. The planning and zoning director shall keep minutes of all meetings held by the planning and zoning commission and full record of all recommendations to be made by the planning and zoning commission to the city council. A chairman and vice-chairman shall be elected by the planning and zoning commission from its membership.  
Sec. 23-2.1.3. - Quorum; voting. 
Four (4) members of the planning and zoning commission shall constitute a quorum, and all members, including the presiding chairman, shall have the right of one (1) vote each, a quorum being present. All actions by the planning and zoning commission shall be by a majority vote of those members present and an affirmative vote of four (4) members shall be necessary for the passage of any recommendation to the city council. If any member has a conflict of interest in review of any item on the Commission's agenda, he or she shall remove themselves from the room and refrain from voting only on the item for which a conflict exists.  
Sec. 23-2.1.4. - Meetings. 
The planning and zoning commission shall meet at such times in the council chambers at the City Hall or other specified locations as may be designated by the chairman or vice chairman in the absence of the chairman, and at such intervals as may be necessary to orderly and properly transact the business of the commission but not less than once each month. But in the case that no agenda item is submitted for the commission to review no meeting shall be required.  
Sec. 23-2.1.5. - Powers and duties. 
The planning and zoning commission shall be an advisory body to the city council and shall make recommendations regarding amendments to the comprehensive plan, changes of zoning and zoning to be given to newly annexed areas, and shall make recommendations regarding the approval of the plats of subdivisions as may be submitted to it for review and other planning related matters. The planning and zoning commission shall conduct an annual review of the city's comprehensive plan and be prepared to make such recommendations to the city council as deemed necessary to keep the city's comprehensive plan current with the needs and uses of the city. The planning and zoning commission shall serve in an advisory capacity on any planning related item(s) in the city.  
Sec. 23-2.1.6. - Procedure on zoning hearings. 
The procedure and process for zoning changes and/or amendments shall be in accordance with division 2.3 of this chapter.  
DIVISION 2.2. - ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS (ZBA)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-678, § 1, adopted July 9, 2019, amended Div. 2.2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2.2, §§ 23-2.2.1—23-2.2.6, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from original source material and Ord. No. 2004-201, § 1, adopted April 13, 2004. 
 
Sec. 23-2.2.1. - Creation. 
There is hereby created a zoning board of adjustments to be composed of five (5) members who shall be residents and qualified voters of the City of Cedar Hill and shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 1, 7-9-19)  
Sec. 23-2.2.2. - Members and terms of office. 
The zoning board of adjustments shall consist of five (5) regular members who shall be appointed by the city council. The members shall serve for a period of two (2) years or until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. The city council shall provide for the appointment of up to two (2) alternate board members to serve in the absence of the regular members as requested by the city manager. The council shall select replacements for the zoning board of adjustment members whose terms have expired. All members will be appointed by a majority vote of the city council. Members may be removed by a majority vote of the members of the city council, for cause on a written charge after a public hearing. Board members may be appointed to succeed themselves. An alternate member, as appointed by the city council, may fill a vacancy for the unexpired term of a member whose term becomes vacant. Any member absent from three (3) regular consecutive meetings shall be deemed to have vacated such office unless such absences were due to sickness of the member or the member's family with leave being first obtained from the chairman or city manager. 
All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. All cases to be heard by the zoning board of adjustments will always be heard by a minimum number of four (4) members. The members of the board shall regularly attend meetings and public hearings of the board and shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 1, 7-9-19)  
Sec. 23-2.2.3. - Authority of board. 
(a)  The zoning board of adjustments shall have the authority, subject to the standards established in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 211.008 to 211.011 and those established herein, to exercise the following powers and perform the following duties: 
(1)  Hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter; 
(2)  Hear and decide special exceptions as authorized by this section; 
(3)  Authorize in specific cases a variance to regulations as authorized by this section if the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the regulation would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter is observed and substantial justice is done; 
(4)  Establish an expiration date for a nonconforming use, reinstate a nonconforming use, authorize the expansion of a nonconforming use or a change from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use. 
(b)  In exercising its authority under this section, the board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for that purpose the board has the same authority as the administrative official. 
(c)  The concurring vote of four (4) members of the board is necessary to: 
(1)  Reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official; 
(2)  Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the board is required to review under this zoning chapter; or 
(3)  Authorize a variance or special exception as permitted by this section. 
(d)  The board shall have no power to: 
(1)  Grant a variance authorizing a use other than those permitted in the district with the exception of a change from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Grant or modify conditional use authorizations as described in this chapter; 
(3)  Grant a zoning amendment; or 
(4)  Take any action not specifically authorized by this chapter or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 1, 7-9-19)  
Sec. 23-2.2.4. - Appeals. 
(a)  An appeal may be taken from the decision of an administrative official in the enforcement of this chapter by an applicant for the permit on which the decision is rendered, by any person or persons directly aggrieved by the decision or by any officer, department, board or office of the municipality affected by the decision. 
(b)  The appellant must file with the board and the official against whom the appeal is taken a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal within fifteen (15) days after the administrative official's decision has been rendered. The officer to whom the appeal is made shall forthwith transmit to the board all papers constituting the record of the action that is appealed. 
(c)  An appeal shall not authorize the denied activity and stays the appellant from proceeding in furtherance of the appeal unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certified in writing to the board that facts supporting the official's opinion that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case, the proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the board or a court of record on application, after notice to the official, if due cause is shown. 
(d)  The appellant party may appear at the appeal hearing in person or by agent or attorney. 
(e)  The board shall hear the appeal within forty-five (45) days after it is filed and continue such hearing from time to time as is reasonably necessary. The board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken, and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination. 
(f)  Accessory buildings. Authorization to exceed the maximum allowed floor area subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The cumulative floor area of the accessory buildings does not exceed the floor area of the main building(s). 
(2)  The accessory buildings are constructed of the same materials as the main building(s) or are visually obstructed from adjoining property and existing and future rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 1, 7-9-19; Ord. No. 2019-683, § 1, 8-27-19)  
Sec. 23-2.2.5. - Special exceptions. 
The zoning board of adjustments may grant a special exception to the following development standards subject to the associated criteria enumerated in this subsection if the board finds it will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property within the area. 
(a)  Off-Street parking. Authorization of a reduction in the number of off-street parking spaces required by this chapter if the board finds that the parking demand generated by the use does not warrant the number of off-street parking spaces required, and the special exception would not create a traffic hazard or increase traffic congestion on adjacent or nearby streets. The maximum reduction authorized shall be in accordance with the following land uses: 
(1)  Commercial amusement (indoor): Seventy-five (75) percent of the required number of parking spaces or provide one (1) space, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Industrial/manufacturing: Seventy-five (75) percent of the required number of parking spaces or provide one (1) space, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Office: Thirty-five (35) percent of the required number of parking spaces or provide one (1) space, whichever is greater. 
(4)  All other uses: Twenty-five (25) percent of the required number of parking spaces or provide one (1) space, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Minimum yard requirements for main buildings. Limited to a maximum encroachment of two (2) feet due to a field, survey, or construction error. 
(c)  Minimum lot area, lot width and lot depth: Limited to parcels that became nonconforming as a result of zoning, platting, property acquisition, or roadway or utility construction initiated by the city, state, county or federal government. 
(d)  Alternative surface to concrete paving. Authorization of an alternative surface to concrete paving subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  If the surface is utilized in areas for required parking or required access for emergency vehicles, then it shall be of a type that can be striped or marked or be designed to support the load of an emergency vehicle. 
(2)  The surface shall be contained in a manner so that it does not create additional drainage runoff of sediments or similar debris. 
(3)  Surfaces that emit heat shall include landscape islands consistent with the requirements for concrete parking lots. 
(4)  A schedule for the maintenance of the surface. 
(5)  Historic utilization of materials compatible with the surrounding area if the property is located within the old town district. 
(e)  Garage requirements or placement, on property ten (10) acres or larger, if the primary structure's adjacency to other uses will not impact vehicle storage on or near right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 1, 7-9-19)  
Sec. 23-2.2.6. - Variances. 
(a)  The zoning board of adjustments may grant a variance to the front yard setback, side yard setback, rear yard setback, lot width, lot depth, lot coverage, height, off-street parking or off-street loading, screening of garage bays and mechanical equipment, or landscape regulations. 
(b)  In order to grant a variance, the zoning board of adjustments shall find that an undue hardship exists utilizing each of the following criteria: 
(1)  That literal enforcement of the regulation will create practical difficulty in the development of the affected property; 
(2)  That the situation is not self-imposed, self-created, nor based solely on economic gain or loss to the applicant; 
(3)  That the relief sought neither affects all or most property in the same zoning district nor injures the permitted use of adjacent conforming property; 
(4)  That the granting of a variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of this chapter; and 
(5)  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(c)  The applicant bears the burden of proof in establishing the facts justifying a variance. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 1, 7-9-19)  
Sec. 23-2.2.7. - Expiration date for nonconforming uses. 
(a)  The city council may request that the zoning board of adjustments consider establishing an expiration date for a nonconforming use. Upon receiving such a request, the board shall hold a public hearing. Based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, the board shall consider each of the following factors in determining whether continued operation of the nonconforming use will have an adverse effect on nearby properties: 
(1)  The character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(2)  The degree of incompatibility of the use with the zoning district in which it is located. 
(3)  The manner in which the use is being conducted. 
(4)  The hours of operation of the use. 
(5)  The extent to which continued operation of the use may threaten public health or safety. 
(6)  The environmental impacts of the use's operation, including but not limited to the impacts of noise, glare, dust, and odor. 
(7)  The extent to which public disturbances may be created or perpetuated by continued operation of the use. 
(8)  The extent to which traffic or parking problems may be created or perpetuated by continued operation of the use. 
(9)  Any other factors relevant to the issue of whether continued operation of the use will adversely affect nearby properties. 
(b)  If the board determines that continued operation of the nonconforming use will have an adverse effect on nearby properties, it shall, in accordance with the law, provide a compliance date for the nonconforming use under a plan whereby the owner's actual investment in the use before the time that the use became nonconforming can be amortized within a definite time period. The following factors must be considered by the board in determining a reasonable amortization period: 
(1)  The owner's capital investment in structures, fixed equipment, and other assets (excluding inventory and other assets that may be feasibly transferred to another site) on the property before the time the use became nonconforming. 
(2)  Any costs that are directly attributable to the establishment of a compliance date, including demolition expenses, relocation expenses, termination of leases, and discharge of mortgages. 
(3)  Any return on investment since inception of the use, including net income and depreciation. 
(4)  The anticipated annual recovery of investment, including net income and depreciation. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 1, 7-9-19)  
Sec. 23-2.2.8. - Reinstatement of nonconforming uses. 
The zoning board of adjustments may reinstate a nonconforming use that has been abandoned as described in this chapter if it finds that: 
(a)  Another use has not been established on the property; 
(b)  The owner proves there was no clear intent to abandon the use; 
(c)  It does not prolong the life of the nonconforming use; and 
(d)  Will not have an adverse effect on the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 1, 7-9-19)  
Sec. 23-2.2.9. - Expansion of nonconforming uses. 
The board may authorize the expansion of a nonconforming use if it finds that the nonconforming use: 
(a)  Is limited to a maximum of ten (10) percent of the gross floor area of the interior or exterior to the structure where the nonconforming use is occupied, a maximum of ten (10) percent of the impervious coverage on the property where the nonconforming use is occupied, or a maximum of ten (10) percent of any other area designated for the nonconforming use; 
(b)  Does not increase the number of residential units as a result of the expansion of a nonconforming use; 
(c)  Does not prolong the life of the nonconforming use; 
(d)  Would have been permitted under the zoning regulations that existed when the current use was originally established by right; and 
(e)  Will not have an adverse effect on the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 1, 7-9-19)  
Sec. 23-2.2.10. - Changing from a nonconforming use to another nonconforming use. 
The board may authorize a change from one nonconforming use to another nonconforming use if it finds that the change to a new use: 
(a)  Does not prolong the life of the nonconforming use; 
(b)  Would have been permitted under the zoning regulations that existed when the current use was originally established by right; 
(c)  Is similar in nature to the current use; and 
(d)  Will not have an adverse effect on the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 1, 7-9-19)  
Sec. 23-2.2.11. - Procedures. 
(a)  Application and fee. An application for consideration by the board of adjustment shall be in writing using forms provided by the city accompanied by a fee. 
(b)  Notice and hearing. The zoning board of adjustment shall hold public hearings on all applications no later than forty-five (45) days after the date the application is filed. Notice of public hearings shall be provided to all property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the affected property at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing and also published in the official local newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing. 
(c)  Judicial review. Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by a decision of the board of adjustment, or any taxpayer, the city, or any officer, department, or board of the city may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality, as stated in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.011. Such petition must be presented within ten (10) days after the date the decision is filed in the planning and zoning office. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 1, 7-9-19)  
DIVISION 2.3. - CHANGES, AMENDMENTS AND ADMINISTRATION PROCEDURES FOR ALL ZONING ORDINANCES AND DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 23-2.3.1. - Declaration of policy and review criteria. 
The city declares the enactment of these regulations governing the use and development of land, buildings, and structures as a measure necessary to the orderly development of the community. Therefore, no change shall be made in these regulations or in the boundaries of the zoning districts except: 
(a)  To correct any error in the regulations or map. 
(b)  To recognize changed or changing conditions or circumstances in a particular locality. 
(c)  To recognize changes in technology, the style of living, or manner of conducting business. 
(d)  To change the property to uses in accordance with the approved comprehensive plan. 
(e)  To make changes in order to implement policies within the comprehensive plan. 
In making a determination regarding a requested zoning change, the planning and zoning commission and city council shall consider the following factors: 
(f)  Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change will be appropriate in the immediate area concerned and their relationship to the general area and the city as a whole. 
(g)  Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing public schools, streets, water supply, sanitary sewers, and other utilities to the area, and shall note the findings. 
(h)  The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar development in the vicinity and elsewhere in the city, and any special circumstances, which may make a substantial part of such vacant land unavailable for development. 
(i)  The recent rate at which land is being developed in the same zoning classification as the request, particularly in the vicinity of the proposed change. 
(j)  How other areas designated for similar development will be, or are unlikely to be, affected if the proposed amendment is approved. 
(k)  Any other factors which will substantially affect the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare.  
Sec. 23-2.3.2. - Authority to amend ordinance. 
The city council may from time to time, after receiving a final report thereon by the planning and zoning commission and after public hearings required by law, amend, supplement, or change the regulations herein provided and amend the zoning ordinance text, zoning district classifications, or the boundaries of the zoning districts specified on the zoning map. Any ordinance regulations or zoning district boundary amendment may be ordered for consideration by the city council, be initiated by the planning and zoning commission, or be requested by the owner of real property, or the authorized representative of an owner of real property. 
Consideration for a change in any district boundary line or special zoning regulation may be initiated only with written consent of the property owner, or by the planning and zoning commission or city council on its own motion when it finds that public benefit will be derived from consideration of such matter. In the event the ownership stated on an application and that shown on the city records are different, the applicant shall submit proof of ownership. 
No person who owes delinquent taxes, delinquent paving assessments, impact fees, or any other delinquent debts or obligations to the City of Cedar Hill, and which are directly attributable to a piece of property requested for zoning shall be allowed to submit a zoning request until the taxes, assessments, debts, or obligations directly attributable to said property and owed by the owner or previous owner thereof shall have been first fully discharged by payment, or until an arrangement satisfactory to the city has been made for the payment of such debts or obligations. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide evidence or proof that the taxes have been paid.  
Sec. 2.3.3. - Application. 
Each application for zoning or for an amendment or change to the existing provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be made in writing on an application form available at the city, filed with the city and shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate fee as established by the city council. Processing fees charged for the subdivision of land for the City of Cedar Hill, Texas are set in section 20-5 of the City of Cedar Hill Code of Ordinances, as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 1, 1-10-06)  
Sec. 23-2.3.4. - Processing fee. 
In order to defray administrative costs, each application made with the City of Cedar Hill requested a change, amendment or variance to the zoning ordinance shall be accompanied by the following mandatory fee: 
Zoning change 	$500.00 plus $5.00 per acre 
Appeal of P&Z zoning recommendation 	$250.00 plus 2.50 per acre 
Planned development district 	$1,000.00 plus $5.00 per acre 
Planned development amendment 	$1,000.00 plus $5.00 per acre 
Planned development—Development plan 	$300.00 plus $5.00 per acre 
Planned development—Site plan 	$300.00 plus $5.00 per acre 
Conditional use permit 	$500.00 plus $5.00 per acre 
Alcoholic beverage site plan district 	$500.00 
Zoning board of adjustment 	$125.00 for residential property 
	$250.00 for nonresidential property 
Zoning verification letter 	$50.00 
Site plan 	$250.00 plus $10.00 per acre 
Public hearing signage 	$50.00 refundable upon return of sign 
 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 1, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 2008-345, § 1, 1-08-08)  
Sec. 23-2.3.5. - Public hearing and notice. 
(a)  For zoning/rezoning requests involving real property, the planning and zoning commission shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on each zoning application, as per applicable state law (V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 211, as may be amended). For proposed changes to zoning district boundaries (including rezoning requests), notice of the planning and zoning commission hearing shall be accomplished by publishing the purpose, time and place of the public hearing in the official newspaper of the city not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing. Written notice of the public hearing to occur before the planning and zoning commission shall also be sent to all owners of property, as indicated by the most recently approved city tax roll, that is located within the area of application and within two hundred (200) feet of any property affected thereby, said written notice to be sent not less than ten (10) days before such hearing is held. Such notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on the most recently approved tax roll and depositing the notice, with first class postage paid, in the United States mail. 
(b)  For requests involving proposed changes to the text of the zoning ordinance, notice of the planning and zoning commission hearing shall be accomplished by publishing the purpose, time and place of the public hearing in the official newspaper of the city not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing. Changes in the ordinance text which do not change zoning district boundaries, or which do not involve specific real property, do not require written notification to individual property owners. 
(c)  The city may, at its option, establish additional rules and procedures for public notification of proposed zoning changes or development proposals (such as site plans, plats, developer agreements, etc.) which may include, but not be limited to, the posting of a sign(s) on any property that is proposed for a zoning change and/or development by the applicant or its agent(s). Adherence to such rules and procedures, if so established by the city, shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be required as part of a zoning change or development application. 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 1, 1-10-06)  
Sec. 23-2.3.6. - Failure to appear. 
Failure of the applicant or his representative to appear before the planning and zoning commission or city council for more than one (1) hearing without an approved delay by the planning and zoning administrator shall constitute sufficient grounds for the planning and zoning commission or the city council to table or deny the application. 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 1, 1-10-06)  
Sec. 23-2.3.7. - Planning and zoning commission consideration and report. 
The planning and zoning commission shall function in accordance with both chapter 16, article III of the City of Cedar Hill Code of Ordinances and division 2.1 of this chapter. The planning and zoning commission, after the public hearing is closed, shall prepare its report and recommendations on the proposed change stating its findings, its evaluation of the request and of the relationship of the request to the comprehensive plan. The planning and zoning commission may defer its report for not more than ninety (90) days from the time it is posted on the agenda or until it has had an opportunity to consider other proposed changes which may have a direct bearing thereon unless a postponement is requested by the applicant. If the planning and zoning commission has not acted, the request shall be sent to the city council as a recommendation to deny. 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 1, 1-10-06)  
Sec. 23-2.3.8. - Planning and zoning commission recommendation to deny. 
If the planning and zoning commission recommends denial of the zoning change request, it shall offer reasons to the applicant for the denial, if requested by the applicant. The planning and zoning commission, at its discretion, may recommend to the city council the zoning change request be denied with prejudice. The planning and zoning chairman shall inform the applicant of the right to receive reasons for the denial. 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 1, 1-10-06)  
Sec. 23-2.3.9. - City council consideration. 
(a)  Applications forwarded from the planning and zoning commission to the city council. 
(1)  Every application or proposal which is recommended for approval (or approval with conditions) by the planning and zoning commission shall be automatically forwarded (along with the commission's favorable recommendation) to the city council for setting and holding of public hearing thereon. The city council may then approve the request, approve it with conditions, or disapprove it by a simple majority vote of the council members present and voting. 
(2)  An application which is recommended by the planning and zoning commission for denial shall not be forwarded to the city council unless the applicant files a written appeal with the city secretary within ten (10) days after the commission's decision. And be accompanied by one-half of the original application fee payable to the city. Said appeal will, in that instance, be forwarded to the city council along with the commission's reasons for denial of the request. The appeal shall be scheduled for the next possible city council agenda, following appropriate public notification as prescribed in section 23-2.3.5. 
(3)  Approval of the request which was recommended for denial by the planning and zoning commission, shall require a three-fourths (¾) majority vote of the city council members present and voting. No zoning change, however, shall become effective until after the adoption of an ordinance for same and its publication, as required by law. 
(b)  City council action on zoning/rezoning or text amendment requests. After a public hearing is held before the city council regarding the zoning application, the city council may approve the request in whole or in part, deny the request in whole or in part, table the application to a future meeting, specifically citing the future meeting to which it is tabled, or it may refer the application back to the planning and zoning commission for further study. 
(1)  If the city council approves the request, then subsection 23-2.3.9(e) will apply. 
(2)  If the city council denies the request, then the same or a similar zoning application may not be filed for any portion of the subject tract of land (or for that portion of the zoning ordinance, in the case of a text amendment request submitted by a property owner or citizen) for a waiting period of one (1) year following the denial. A different zoning change request can be filed at any time. In the instance that the request was initiated by the city and involved a proposed amendment to the text of the zoning ordinance, then there is no waiting period before the request can be reconsidered. 
(3)  The city council may, at its option, waive the one-year waiting period if, after due consideration of the matter at a scheduled and posted meeting, it is determined that denial of the request was based upon erroneous or omitted information, or if substantial new information pertaining to the request is discovered. 
(c)  City council hearing and notice for zoning changes. Notice of the city council public hearing for zoning/rezoning and for zoning ordinance text amendment requests shall be given by publishing the purpose, time and place of such hearing in the official newspaper of the city not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the public hearing. 
(d)  Protests. A favorable vote of three-fourths (¾) of all members of the city council shall be required to approve any proposed change in a zoning regulation or zoning district boundary when written objections are received from twenty (20) percent or more of the land area covered by the proposed change, or the land area within two hundred (200) feet of the subject property, in compliance with the provisions of V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 211.006 (commonly referred to as the "twenty percent rule"). If a protest against such proposed amendment, supplement or change has been filed with the city secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more, either of the area of the land included in such a proposed change or those immediately adjacent to the area thereof extending two hundred (200) feet therefrom, such amendments shall not become effective except by a three-fourths (¾) vote of the city council. 
(e)  Final approval and ordinance adoption. Upon approval of the zoning request by the city council, the applicant shall submit all related material with revisions, if necessary, to the city for the preparation of the amending ordinance. A metes and bounds description of all property and appropriate exhibits must be submitted with the zoning change request application. The amending ordinance will not be approved until a correct description has been prepared. The zoning request shall be approved at the time the city council makes a decision to approve the request as submitted or with certain conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 1, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 2008-345, § 2, 1-8-08)  
Sec. 23-2.3.10. - Joint public hearings. 
As authorized in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code § 211.007, the city council may, by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote, prescribe the type of notice to be given of the time and place of a public hearing held jointly by the city council and planning and zoning commission. If the notice provisions are different than section 23-2.3.5 above, then the provisions of section 23-2.3.5 do not apply. 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 1, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 2008-345, § 3, 1-8-08)  
Sec. 23-2.3.11. - Procedure for newly annexed land. 
As soon as reasonable after an annexation ordinance is approved by the city council, the city manager or designated city official shall prepare an application for zoning the newly annexed property to "RR" rural residential unless the property owner, city council or planning and zoning commission determines another zoning district is more appropriate. The application shall be placed on the planning and zoning commission's agenda. All procedures as set forth in this section shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 1, 1-10-06)  
Sec. 23-2.3.12. - Overlay zoning district procedures. 
(a)  Purpose and applicability. From time to time, the city council may establish overlay zoning districts. An overlay zoning district is a zoning district that establishes regulations that combine with the regulations of the underlying (base) zoning district. The overlay district may prohibit uses otherwise allowed in the base district, or establish additional or different standards and conditions for all or some of such uses allowed in the base district. Adoption of the overlay district does not effect repeal of the base zoning district and all regulations contained in the base zoning district shall remain applicable to the uses allowed in the overlay district, except as expressly stated in the regulations of the overlay zoning district. 
(b)  Text amendments to create overlay zoning districts. The city council, upon recommendation from the planning and zoning commission, may amend the text of the comprehensive zoning ordinance from time to time to provide for new overlay zoning districts, in accordance with the procedures of this section. The council shall specify for each text amendment the following information for the overlay zoning district: 
(1)  The intent and purpose of the district; 
(2)  The types of districts with which the overlay zoning district may be combined; 
(3)  Minimum standards applicable within the district; 
(4)  Uses otherwise permitted within the base district, which are prohibited, limited or restricted within the overlay zoning district, and the standards and conditions constituting such limitations or restrictions. 
(c)  Procedures for overlay zoning district map amendments. 
(1)  Overlay zoning districts initially shall be established on the zoning map by the city council, upon recommendation of the planning and zoning commission, in accordance with the procedures for zoning amendments in this section. The boundaries of the overlay zoning district shall be designated with particularity in relation to the base district or districts upon which the district is overlaid. 
(2)  The zoning map may be amended to extend or contract the boundaries of an overlay zoning district in accordance with the procedures for zoning amendments in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 1, 1-10-06)  
DIVISION 2.4. - CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY AND COMPLIANCE 
 
Sec. 23-2.4.1. - Certificates of occupancy shall be required for any of the following. 
(a)  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered. 
(b)  Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification. 
(c)  Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification. 
(d)  Change in occupant or business within a building. 
No such use, or change of use, shall take place until such time as, the building official issues a certificate of occupancy. A fee shall be established by separate ordinance.  
Sec. 23-2.4.2. - Procedure for new or altered buildings. 
Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which is to be altered shall be made at the same time as the application for the building permit for such building. Said certificate shall be issued after the building official orders the building or structure inspected and finds no violations of the provisions of this ordinance or other regulations, which are enforced by the building official. The building official or his agent, shall issue the said certificate after the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.  
Sec. 23-2.4.3. - Procedure for vacant land or a change in building use. 
Written application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land, a change in the use of land or a change in the use of a building, or for a change from a nonconforming use to a conforming use, shall be made to the said building official or his agent. If the proposed use is a conforming use, as herein provided, written application shall be made to the said building official. If the proposed use is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, including parking requirements, the certificate of occupancy shall be issued after the application for same has been made and all required inspections are completed and approved by the building official. If parking requirements are not found in conformity, the applicant shall submit a site plan showing all parking in conformance with use and pavement type requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2004-201, § 2, 4-13-04)  
Sec. 23-2.4.4. - Contents. 
Every certificate of occupancy shall contain the following: 1) building permit number, 2) the address of the building, 3) the name and address of the owner, 4) a description of that portion of the building for which the Certificate is issued, 5) a statement that the described portion of the building has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of the Uniform Building Code, group and division of occupancy, 6) the name of the building official, 7) use (uses) allowed, and 8) issue date of certificate of occupancy.  
Sec. 23-2.4.5. - Reserved.  
Sec. 23-2.4.6. - Posting. 
The certificate of occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall not be removed except by the building official or his authorized agent.  
Sec. 23-2.4.7. - Revocation. 
The building official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a certificate of occupancy issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever the certificate is issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or when it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provision of this chapter or the building code and other codes adopted by the city, and any amendments thereto. Appeal of the building official's decision shall be to the board of adjustment.  
DIVISION 2.5. - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 23-2.5.1. - Intent of provisions. 
(a)  Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments thereto, there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this ordinance was enacted, amended or otherwise made applicable to such lots, structures or uses, but which do not now conform to the regulations of the district in which they are located. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit such nonconforming uses to continue, as long as the conditions within this section and other applicable sections are met. 
(b)  It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, and not be used as a basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible with the permitted uses in the districts involved.  
Sec. 23-2.5.2. - Nonconforming status. 
(a)  Any use, platted lot or structure which does not conform with the regulations of this zoning ordinance on the effective date hereof or any amendment hereto, except as expressly provided in subsection (c) below, shall be deemed a nonconforming use, lot or structure provided that: 
(1)  Such use, platted lot or structure was in existence under and in compliance with the provisions of the immediately prior zoning ordinance; or 
(2)  Such use, platted lot or structure was a lawful, nonconforming use, lot or structure under the immediately prior zoning ordinance; or 
(3)  Such use, platted lot or structure was in existence at the time of annexation to the city, was a legal use of the land at such time, and has been in regular and continuous use since such time. 
(b)  Any other use, platted lot, or structure which does not conform with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located on the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, and except as provided in subsection (c) below, shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter, and the city shall be entitled to enforce fully the terms of this ordinance with respect to such use, platted lot, or structure. 
(c)  The following types of platted lots shall be deemed in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding the fact that such lot does not meet the standards of this chapter in the district in which it is located: 
(1)  Any vacant lot that conformed to the city's zoning district regulations at the time that it was platted; or 
(2)  Any lot occupied by a single-family dwelling authorized under the zoning district regulations in which the lot is located. 
(d)  A lot of record that is nonconforming may be occupied by a single-family dwelling.  
Sec. 23-2.5.3. - Continuing lawful use of land and structures. 
(a)  A nonconforming use or structure may continue to be used, operated or occupied in accordance with the terms of the zoning regulations by which it was established, or in the case of annexed property, in accordance with the regulations under which it was created. 
(b)  A nonconforming structure occupied by a nonconforming use may be re-occupied by a conforming use, following abandonment of the nonconforming use.  
Sec. 23-2.5.4. - Abandonment of nonconforming uses. 
(a)  If a nonconforming use is abandoned, any future use of the premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, as amended. 
(b)  A nonconforming use shall be deemed abandoned in the following circumstances: 
(1)  The use ceases to operate for a continuous period of six (6) months; 
(2)  Where the use occupies a structure, the structure remains vacant for a continuous period of six (6) months; or 
(3)  In the case of a temporary use, the use is moved from the premises.  
Sec. 23-2.5.5. - Changing nonconforming uses. 
(a)  A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(b)  A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use; provided that, once such change is made, the use shall not be changed back to a nonconforming use. 
(c)  A conforming use located in a nonconforming structure may be changed to another conforming use.  
Sec. 23-2.5.6. - Expansion of nonconforming uses. 
(a)  A nonconforming use shall not be expanded unless authorized by the zoning board of adjustments pursuant to the provisions enumerated in this chapter. 
(b)  If the nonconforming use is residential, the number of dwelling units shall not exceed the number of dwelling units existing at the time the use became nonconforming. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 3, 7-9-19)  
Sec. 23-2.5.7. - Expansion of nonconforming structures. 
No alteration shall be made to a nonconforming structure that increases the degree of nonconformity, except those required by law to preserve the integrity of the structure or those permitted by right in other sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 4, 7-9-19) 
Editor's note— The former § 23-2.5.7 pertained to restoration of nonconforming structure and has been renumbered per § 2 of Ord. No. 2019-678, adopted July 9, 2019, as § 23-2.5.8.  
Sec. 23-2.5.8. - Restoration of nonconforming structure. 
(a)  If more than sixty (60) percent of the total appraised value of a nonconforming structure, as determined from the records of the Dallas County Central Appraisal District, has been destroyed (total destruction), it may be rebuilt only in conformity with the standards of this chapter. 
(b)  If less than sixty (60) percent of the total appraised value of a nonconforming structure is destroyed (partial destruction), it may be reconstructed to its original dimensions. 
(c)  If a nonconforming structure that is totally or partially destroyed was occupied by a nonconforming use, the nonconforming use may be re-established subject to the limitations on expansion set forth in section 23-2.5.6. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 2, 7-9-19) 
Editor's note— The former § 23-2.5.8 pertained to right to proceed preserved and has been renumbered per § 2 of Ord. No. 2019-678, adopted July 9, 2019, as § 23-2.5.9.  
Sec. 23-2.5.9. - Right to proceed preserved. 
Nothing contained in this division 2.5 is intended to alter any rights that may have accrued to proceed under prior regulations, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.002, or §§ 245.001 to 245.006. 
(Ord. No. 2019-678, § 2, 7-9-19)  
DIVISION 2.6. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
 
Sec. 23-2.6.1. - Site plan review. 
(a)  Purpose. This section establishes a site plan review process for proposed nonresidential and multi-family residential developments. The purpose of the review is to ensure efficient and safe land development, harmonious use of land, compliance with appropriate design standards, safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and loading, and adequate water supply, drainage and stormwater management, sanitary facilities, and other utilities and services. 
(b)  Applicability. Site plan review and approval shall be required for the following: 
(1)  Any nonresidential development. 
(2)  Any multi-family development or manufactured/mobile home park. 
(3)  Any development with two (2) or more buildings per platted lot. 
(4)  Any development in a planned development district or subject to a conditional use permit (public hearings may also be required, see divisions 3.19 and 3.20). 
(5)  Any change in use from a residential use to a nonresidential use. 
(6)  Any modification to a site that involves increased parking requirements or a change in the front or side wall footprint. 
No site plan application shall be considered complete unless the application is accompanied by verification that a final plat for the lot has been recorded and the zoning for the property has been approved. No application for a building permit shall be considered complete for any of the above developments unless the application is accompanied by an approved site plan and all required engineering/construction plans that have been approved by the city. No building shall be occupied until all construction and development conforms to the site plan and engineering/construction plans, as approved by the city. A public hearing on a site plan is not required unless a site plan is prepared in conjunction with a zoning request for a planned development or a CUP. 
(c)  Exemptions and exceptions. Site plan review shall not be required for State parks or single-family (attached or detached) except as provided in subsection (b)(4) above, unless the proposed subdivision will include a private amenity/facility comprised of one (1) or more buildings (e.g., a private recreation/swimming facility, etc.) or a golf course, or unless the proposed subdivision will have private (i.e., not public) streets. In these instances, site plan submission and approval (in accordance with this section) will be required for the private amenity/facility, the golf course clubhouse/hospitality area, and the gated (i.e., restricted access) entrances. 
(d)  Site plan submission requirements. The site plan submission shall be comprised of the following (all required items/information must be received by the planning and zoning administrator, or his designee, in order for a site plan/development review submission to be considered complete — incomplete submissions will not be reviewed until all deficient items/information has been received): 
(1)  Application form (to be provided by the city) signed by the owner or his designated representative (if the applicant is not the owner of the subject property, then he shall submit verification in the form of a notarized statement that he is acting as an authorized agent for the property owner). 
(2)  Filing fee (as established within appendix A-6 of this chapter). 
(3)  Verification that all taxes and assessments on the subject property have been paid (see subsection (e) below). 
(4)  Copies of the site plan (on 24? × 36? sheet, and drawn to a known engineering scale that is large enough to be clearly legible), the quantity of which shall be determined by the planning and zoning administrator, or designee. 
(5)  Complete sets of engineering/construction plans (including the site plan and plat) for all site work and for all required public improvements (e.g., water, wastewater, grading/storm drainage, streets, alleys, fire lanes and hydrants, etc.), the quantity of which shall be determined by the planning and zoning administrator, or designee. 
(6)  Final plat/replat submission (as per the subdivision ordinance), if the property has not yet been platted, or if additional easements or rights-of-way will need to be established for the proposed development. 
(7)  Landscaping and irrigation plans, the quantity of which shall be determined by the planning and zoning administrator, or designee. 
(8)  Building facade (i.e., elevation) plans, the quantity of which shall be determined by the planning and zoning administrator, or designee. 
(9)  Any additional information/materials (i.e., plans, maps, exhibits, legal description of property, information about proposed uses, etc.) as deemed necessary by the planning and zoning administrator, or designee, in order to ensure that the request is understood. 
(e)  Taxes. No person who owes delinquent taxes, delinquent paving assessments, impact fees, or any other delinquent debts or obligations to the City of Cedar Hill, and which are directly attributable to a piece of property shall be allowed to submit an application for site plan/development review until the taxes, assessments, debts, or obligations directly attributable to said property and owed by the owner or previous owner thereof shall have been first fully paid, or until an arrangement satisfactory to the city has been made for the payment of such debts or obligations. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide evidence or proof that the taxes have been paid. 
(f)  Site plan details. The site plan and accompanying engineering/construction plans shall contain sufficient information relative to site design and construction to clearly show the extent of the proposed development/ construction, and shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  A site inventory analysis including major existing vegetation, natural watercourses, creeks or bodies of water, and an analysis of planned changes in such natural features as a result of the development. This shall include a delineation of any flood prone areas. 
(2)  Any existing and proposed public/private streets and alleys; building sites or lots; any areas reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility easements or school sites; any proposed street widening and street changes (i.e., median cuts and turn lanes); the points of ingress and egress from existing/proposed streets; location and description of existing and proposed utility services, including size of water and sewer mains and laterals, and storm drainage structures (including grading); the location and width for all driveway openings; topography at no more than two-foot contours; and existing development on all abutting sites and the zoning classification thereof. 
(3)  Placement of all buildings on the site, showing the building footprints and setback lines, and all property lines, street curb lines, alley lines, easements, screening walls, signage, any service/delivery areas for trucks, fire lanes, and parking areas (including parking space counts and a schedule of parking ratios used for the various proposed uses). 
(4)  A landscape plan showing turf areas, screening walls, ornamental plantings, any existing wooded areas and trees to be planted. 
(5)  Building facade (i.e., elevation) plans showing elevations with any attached (i.e., wall-mounted) signage to be used, as determined appropriate by the planning and zoning administrator, or designee. 
Provision of the above items shall conform to the principles and standards of this chapter. To ensure the submission of adequate information, the city is hereby empowered to maintain and distribute a separate list of specific requirements for site plan review applications. Upon periodic review, the planning and zoning administrator (or designee) shall have the authority to update such requirements for site plan/development review applications. 
(g)  Supplemental requirements. The city's staff may require other information and data for specific site plans. This data may include but is not limited to geologic information, water yields, flood data, environmental information, traffic impact analysis, road capacities, market information, economic data for the proposed development, hours of operation, elevations and perspective drawings, lighting, and similar information. Approval of a site plan may establish conditions for construction based upon such information. 
(h)  Principles and standards for site plan review and evaluation. The following criteria have been set forth as a guide for evaluating the adequacy of proposed development within the City of Cedar Hill, and to ensure that all developments are, to the best extent possible, constructed according to the city's codes and ordinances. 
The planning and zoning administrator, or designee, shall review the site plan for compliance with all applicable city ordinances and with the comprehensive plan; for harmony with surrounding uses and with long-range plans for the future development of Cedar Hill; for the promotion of the health, safety, order, efficiency, and economy of the city; and for the maintenance of property values and the general welfare. 
Site plan review and evaluation by the planning and zoning administrator, or designee, shall be performed with respect to the following: 
(1)  The site plan's compliance with all provisions of the zoning ordinance and other ordinances of the City of Cedar Hill including but not limited to off-street parking and loading, lighting, open space, and the generation of objectionable smoke, fumes, noise, odors, dust, glare, vibration, or heat. 
(2)  The impact of the development relating to the preservation of existing natural resources on the site and the impact on the natural resources of the surrounding properties and neighborhood. 
(3)  The relationship of the development to adjacent uses in terms of harmonious design, setbacks, maintenance of property values, and any possible negative impacts. 
(4)  The provision of a safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation system. 
(5)  The design and location of off-street parking and loading facilities to ensure that all such spaces are usable and are safely and conveniently arranged. 
(6)  The sufficient width and suitable grade and location of streets designed to accommodate prospective traffic and to provide access for fire fighting and emergency equipment to buildings. 
(7)  The coordination of streets so as to arrange a convenient system consistent with the thoroughfare plan of the City of Cedar Hill. 
(8)  The use of landscaping and screening to provide adequate buffers to shield lights, noise, movement, or activities from adjacent properties when necessary, and to complement and integrate the design and location of buildings into the overall site design. 
(9)  Exterior lighting to ensure safe movement and for security purposes, which shall be arranged so as to minimize glare and reflection upon adjacent properties. 
(10)  The location, size, and configuration of open space areas to ensure that such areas are suitable for intended recreation and conservation uses. 
(11)  Protection and conservation of soils from erosion by wind or water or from excavation or grading. 
(12)  Protection and conservation of watercourses and areas subject to flooding. 
(13)  The adequacy of water, drainage, sewerage facilities, solid waste disposal, and other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and occupants. 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 1, 7-21-01; Ord. No. 2005-250, § 3, 8-30-05)  
Sec. 23-2.6.2. - Approval process. 
(a)  The planning and zoning administrator (or designee) shall review and evaluate all site plan submissions, and shall make a recommendation to the planning and zoning commission to approve the site plan, to approve the site plan with conditions or stipulations, or to deny the site plan for certain reasons. The planning and zoning administrator, or designee, may prepare a written report/evaluation of the site plan/development application, which may include background information on the subject property, its zoning history, development and zoning patterns surrounding the site, discussion of any issues or concerns, and a staff recommendation as described above. The staff report/evaluation should be made available to members of the planning and zoning commission prior to the meeting date on which the application will be considered in order to allow time for review and for site visitation, if necessary. 
(b)  Site plan consideration. 
(1)  Planning and zoning commission. 
a.  The planning and zoning administrator, or designee, shall schedule consideration of the site plan on the regular agenda of the planning and zoning commission within thirty (30) days after the submission is received (or, in the case of an incomplete submission, after the submission is deemed complete). 
b.  By a simple majority of all members present and voting, the planning and zoning commission shall either recommend approval of the site plan, recommend approval of the site plan with conditions or stipulations, or recommend denial of the site plan. 
c.  If the site plan is denied by the planning and zoning commission, that denial is final and the site plan will not be forwarded to the city council unless the applicant wishes to appeal to the city council. 
i.  All requests for appeal must be made in writing to the planning and zoning administrator within thirty (30) calendar days following the commission's action. After the appeal is received, the planning and zoning administrator shall schedule the appeal on the city council's agenda within sixty (60) days following submission of the appeal. 
(2)  City council. 
a.  An application which is recommended by the planning and zoning commission for approval or approval with conditions will be forwarded to the city council at its next available meeting. City council will take into consideration the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission in making its decision. 
b.  It shall take a minimum of four (4) votes to approve a site plan. The city council shall have final approval authority over the site plan and shall either approve the site plan, approve the site plan with conditions or stipulations, or deny the site plan. All denials made by the city council are final. 
(c)  Lapse of site plan approval. Except as provided in section 23-3.19.10 (planned development site plan), if a building permit for a use subject to a site plan has not been issued within one (1) year of the date of final approval of the site plan by the planning and zoning commission (or the city council, if applicable), the site plan shall expire. Thereafter, a new site plan must be approved prior to development of the use under standards then in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2009-377, § 1, 1-13-09)  
Sec. 23-2.6.3. - Revisions to the approved site plan. 
(a)  Minor revisions/amendment. It is recognized that final architectural and engineering design may necessitate minor changes in the approved site plan. In such cases, the planning and zoning administrator, or his designee, shall have the authority to approve minor modifications to an approved site plan (which shall be submitted as an "amended site plan" which substantially conforms to the previously approved site plan), provided that such modifications do not materially change traffic circulation, building location(s) on the site, proximity of building(s) to nearby residential areas, the size or height (i.e., enlarge) of building(s), or any other conditions specifically attached as part of the planning and zoning commission's or city council's approval of the site plan. Submission materials and requirements for approval of an amended site plan shall be as determined by the planning and zoning administrator, or his designee. 
(b)  Major revisions. In the event of revisions that are more extensive in nature (i.e., do not conform to the description for minor amendments above), a "revised site plan" must be resubmitted, reviewed by the planning and zoning administrator (or his designee), and reconsidered by the planning and zoning commission or city council in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.  
ARTICLE 3. - ZONING DISTRICTS  
DIVISION 3.1. - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED 
The City of Cedar Hill, Texas is hereby divided into the following zoning districts. The use, height and area regulations as set out herein apply to each district. The districts established herein shall be known as: 
Abbreviated Designation 	Zoning District Name 
RR 	Rural Residential 
SF-E 	Single-family residential-estate - 43,560 square-foot lots 
SF-22 	Single-family residential - 22,000 square-foot lots 
SF-15 	Single-family residential - 15,000 square-foot lots 
SF-10 	Single-family residential - 10,000 square-foot lots 
SF-8.5 	Single-family residential - 8,500 square-foot lots 
SF-7 	Single-family residential - 7,000 square-foot lots 
TH 	Single-family attached residential (townhomes) 
MF 	Multiple-family dwelling district 
NS 	Neighborhood service district 
LR 	Local retail district 
OT 	Old Town District 
UT 	Uptown overlay district 
C 	Commercial District 
CC 	Corporate campus district 
IP 	Industrial park district 
I 	Industrial district 
PD 	Planned development 
HP 	High Pointe overlay district 
 
A summary of the area regulations of the following zoning districts is included in the appendix. 
Certain terms and definitions used this chapter can be found in division 5.8. 
All development standards as contained in article 5 of this chapter are intended to apply to all zoning districts unless specifically stated otherwise.  
DIVISION 3.2. - RR—RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 23-3.2.1. - Purpose. 
"RR", rural residential district is designed to preserve open spaces in the city by permitting the use of land for propagation and cultivation of crops and similar low intensity/density uses. Large lot single-family use may be appropriate for this district. It is anticipated that all annexed areas will be initially zoned "RR" and later may be changed to other suitable zoning classifications in accordance to the comprehensive plan.  
Sec. 23-3.2.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the RR - rural residential district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.2.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Minimum lot area 	2 acres 
	Minimum lot width 	200 feet 
	Minimum lot depth 	200 feet 
(b) 	Yard requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	50 feet 
	Minimum side yard (interior) 	20 feet 
	Minimum side yard (street side) 	30 feet 
	Minimum rear yard 	50 feet 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum lot coverage 	30% by main building and 50% including accessory buildings 
	Maximum height 	35 feet 
	Minimum living area 	2,500 square feet 
	Minimum exterior building materials 	100% of the front wall surface area and 80% of each additional wall surface area shall be finished with a primary building material, concrete panel construction or stucco; for additional standards, see division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	2-car garage or carport; for additional standards see division 5.1 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3 
(g) 	Supplemental requirements: 	See divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements: 	None, except for nonresidential uses allowed within residential districts; see division 2.6 
(i) 	Special requirements: 	None 
 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 2, 7-21-01; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 1, 10, 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.3. - SF-E—SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT—ESTATE 
 
Sec. 23-3.3.1. - Purpose. 
The "SF-E", estate district is designed to create areas of low density, contemporary detached single-family housing to be located on large lots - not less than one (1) acre, with large setbacks, which are protected from excessive noise, illumination, odors, visual clutter and other influences that are generally objectionable or not conducive to family living. This purpose should be achieved through curvilinear, well-landscaped and unified streetscaped streets. The intent of this district is to provide high quality larger single-family housing while maintaining the natural environment and open space in the city.  
Sec. 23-3.3.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the SF-E—Single-family residential—Estate district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.3.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Minimum lot area 	1 acre (43,560 square feet) 
	Minimum lot width 	125 feet 
	Minimum lot depth 	150 feet 
(b) 	Yard Requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	30 feet 
	Minimum side yard (interior) 	20 feet 
	Minimum side yard (street side) 	30 feet 
	Minimum rear yard 	30 feet 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum lot coverage 	40% main and accessory buildings 
	Maximum height 	35 feet 
	Minimum living area 	2,500 square feet 
	Minimum exterior building materials 	100% of the front wall surface area and 80% of each additional wall surface area shall be finished with a primary building material, concrete panel construction or stucco; for additional standards, see division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	2 enclosed parking spaces; for additional standards see division 5.1 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3 
(g) 	Supplemental regulations: 	See divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements: 	None, except for nonresidential uses allowed within residential districts; see division 2.6 
(i) 	Special requirements: 	None 
 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 2, 7-21-01; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 1, 10, 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.4. - SF-22—SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT—22,000 
 
Sec. 23-3.4.1. - Purpose. 
The "SF-22", single-family residential district is intended to provide for development of contemporary detached single-family housing of highest quality with large dwelling unit sizes and lot areas of not less than twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet and generous widths. Its purpose is to provide a peaceful, low density setting for quality housing in the city, which is protected from excessive noise, illumination, odors, visual clutter and other influences that are generally objectionable or not conducive to family living.  
Sec. 23-3.4.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the SF-22—Single-family residential—22,000 district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.4.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Minimum lot area 	22,000 square feet 
	Minimum lot width 	90 feet 
	Minimum lot depth 	120 feet 
(b) 	Yard requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	30 feet 
	Minimum side yard (interior) 	10 feet 
	Minimum side yard (street side) 	15 feet 
	Minimum rear yard 	30 feet 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum lot coverage 	40% main and accessory buildings 
	Maximum height 	35 feet 
	Minimum living area 	2,200 square feet 
	Minimum exterior building materials 	100% of the front wall surface area and 80% of each additional wall surface area shall be finished with a primary building material, concrete panel construction or stucco; for additional standards, see division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	Two enclosed parking spaces; for additional standards see division 5.1 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3 
(g) 	Supplemental requirements: 	See divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements: 	None, except for nonresidential uses allowed within residential districts; see division 2.6 
(i) 	Special Requirements: 	None 
 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 2, 7-21-01; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 1, 10, 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.5. - SF-15—SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT—15,000 
 
Sec. 23-3.5.1. - Purpose. 
The "SF-15", single-family residential district is intended to provide for development of contemporary detached single-family housing with lot areas of not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, average sized lot widths and dwelling units. Its purpose is to provide lower density housing protected from excessive noise, illumination, odors, visual clutter and other influences that are generally objectionable or not conducive to family living.  
Sec. 23-3.5.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the SF-15—Single-family residential—15,000 district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.5.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Minimum lot area 	15,000 square feet 
	Minimum lot width 	85 feet 
	Minimum lot depth 	110 feet 
(b) 	Yard requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	30 feet 
	Minimum side yard (interior) 	10 feet 
	Minimum side yard (street side) 	15 feet 
	Minimum rear yard 	30 feet 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum lot coverage 	45% main and accessory buildings 
	Maximum height 	35 feet 
	Minimum living area 	2,000 square feet 
	Minimum exterior building materials 	100% of the front wall surface area and 80% of each additional wall surface area shall be finished with a primary building material, concrete panel construction or stucco; for additional standards, see division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	Two enclosed parking spaces; for additional standards see division 5.1 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3 
(g) 	Other requirements: 	See divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements: 	None, except for non-residential uses allowed within residential districts; see division 2.6 
(i) 	Special requirements: 	None 
 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 2, 7-21-01; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 1, 10, 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.6. - SF-10—SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT—10,000 
 
Sec. 23-3.6.1. - Purpose. 
The "SF-10", single-family residential district is intended to provide for development of contemporary detached single-family housing with lot areas not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, average sized lot widths and dwelling units. Its purpose is to provide lower density housing protected from excessive noise, illumination, odors, visual clutter and other influences that are generally objectionable or not conducive to family living.  
Sec. 23-3.6.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the SF-10—Single-family residential—10,000 district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.6.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Minimum lot area 	10,000 square feet 
	Minimum lot width 	80 feet 
	Minimum lot depth 	100 feet 
(b) 	Yard requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	30 feet 
	Minimum side yard (interior) 	5 feet 
	Minimum side yard (street side) 	15 feet 
	Minimum rear yard 	25 feet 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum lot coverage 	50% main and accessory buildings 
	Maximum height 	35 feet 
	Minimum living area 	1,900 square feet 
	Minimum exterior building materials 	100% of the front wall surface area and 80% of each additional wall surface area shall be finished with a primary building material, concrete panel construction or stucco; for additional standards, see division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	Two enclosed parking spaces; for additional standards see division 5.12 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3 
(g) 	Supplemental requirements: 	See divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements: 	None, except for nonresidential uses allowed within residential districts; see division 2.6 
(i) 	Special requirements: None 	
 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 2, 7-21-01; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 1, 11, 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.7. - SF-8.5—SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT—8,500 
 
Sec. 23-3.7.1. - Purpose. 
The "SF-8.5", single-family residential district is intended to provide for development of medium density, urban detached single-family housing with moderate sized dwelling units, on lot areas not less than eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet. Its purpose is to provide quality housing that will serve as a move up from single or starter homes in areas protected from excessive noise, illumination, odors, visual clutter, and other influences that are generally objectionable or not conducive to family living.  
Sec. 23-3.7.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the SF-8.5—Single-family residential—8,500 district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.7.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Minimum lot area 	8,500 square feet 
	Minimum lot width 	70 feet 
	Minimum lot depth 	100 feet 
(b) 	Yard Requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	25 feet 
	Minimum side yard (interior) 	5 feet 
	Minimum side yard (street side) 	15 feet 
	Minimum rear yard 	20 feet 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum lot coverage 	50% main and accessory buildings 
	Maximum height 	35 feet 
	Minimum living area 	1,700 square feet 
	Minimum exterior building materials 	100% of the front wall surface area and 80% of each additional wall surface area shall be finished with a primary building material, concrete panel construction or stucco; for additional standards, see division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	Two enclosed parking spaces; for additional standards see division 5.1 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3 
(g) 	Supplemental requirements: 	See divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements: 	None, except for nonresidential uses allowed within residential districts: See division 2.6 
(i) 	Special requirements: 	None 
 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 2, 7-21-01; Ord. No. 2003-156, § 2, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 1, 11, 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.8. - SF-7—SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT—7,000 
 
Sec. 23-3.8.1. - Purpose. 
The "SF-7", single-family residential district is intended to provide for development of medium density detached single-family housing with lot sizes not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet Its purpose is to provide for development of quality medium density housing, for starter homes, move downs, empty nesters and singles in an area protected from excessive noise, illumination, odors, visual clutter and other influences that are generally objectionable or not conducive to family living. This district can also act as a transition between medium and high-density detached housing for small families and singles in the city.  
Sec. 23-3.8.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the SF-7—Single-family residential—7,000 district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.8.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Minimum lot area 	7,000 square feet 
	Minimum lot width 	60 feet 
	Minimum lot depth 	100 feet 
(b) 	Yard requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	20 feet 
	Minimum side yard (interior) 	5 feet 
	Minimum side yard (street side) 	15 feet 
	Minimum rear yard 	20 feet 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum lot coverage 	50% main and accessory buildings 
	Maximum height 	35 feet 
	Minimum living area 	1,500 square feet 
	Minimum exterior building materials 	100% of the front wall surface area and 80% of each additional wall surface area shall be finished with a primary building material, concrete panel construction or stucco; for additional standards, see division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	2 enclosed parking spaces; for additional standards see Section 5.1 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3 
(g) 	Supplemental requirements: 	See divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements: 	None, except for nonresidential uses allowed within residential districts; see division 2.6 
(i) 	Special requirements: 	None 
 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 2, 7-21-01; Ord. No. 2003-153, § 1, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 1, 11, 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.9. - TH—SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 23-3.9.1. - Purpose. 
The "TH", single-family attached residential or townhouse district is intended to promote stable, quality attached occupancy residential development on individually platted lots at slightly increased densities. Individual ownership of each lot should be encouraged and this district may be used to provide a "buffer" or a transition between lower density residential areas, multi-family or non-residential areas along major thoroughfares and in and around the old town area.  
Sec. 23-3.9.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the TH—Single-family attached residential district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.9.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Maximum density 	14 units/acre 
	Minimum lot area 	3,000 square feet 
	Minimum lot width 	25 feet 
	Minimum lot depth 	100 feet 
(b) 	Yard requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	25 feet 
	Minimum side yard (interior) 	None required (0') 
	Minimum side yard (street side) 	10 feet; the ends of two adjacent buildings shall be at least 10 feet apart 
	Minimum rear yard 	15 feet 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum building length 	A structure shall have minimum three attached units and shall not exceed 300 feet or width of twelve (12) attached dwelling units whichever is less 
	Maximum height 	35 feet 
	Minimum living area 	1,250 square feet 
	Minimum exterior building materials 	100% of each wall surface area; for additional standards, see division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	2 enclosed parking spaces; carports are prohibited; for additional standards see division 5.1 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3 
(g) 	Supplemental requirements: 	See divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements: 	See division 2.6 
(i) 	Special requirements: 	1. All developments shall provide open space at the same ratio as specified in section 23-3.10.4.3(i). 
		2. All utilities shall be provided separately to each lot in the TH district so that each unit is individually metered. 
		3. Single-family attached dwellings constructed in this district shall conform to the standards set forth in SF-7 district. 
		4. Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor home may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. 
 
(Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 2, 12, 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.10. - MF—MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 23-3.10.1. - Purpose. 
The "MF", multifamily residential district is intended to provide for development of high density attached residential structures. Its intent is to provide a transitional buffer between low/medium density housing and intensive nonresidential uses in the city. This purpose would be achieved by requiring these districts to be located adjacent to major thoroughfare or collector streets with direct access and/or frontage onto them and avoiding any principal access onto residential streets.  
Sec. 23-3.10.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the MF—Multiple-family residential district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.10.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Maximum density 	28 dwelling units per acre (calculated on platted lot acreage) 
	Minimum lot area 	1,600 square feet per dwelling unit 
	Minimum lot width 	80 feet 
	Minimum lot depth 	120 feet 
(b) 	Yard requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	Maximum 20 feet build-to-line from property line or utility easement (all areas adjacent to public streets shall be deemed as front yards) 
	Minimum side yard 	10 feet 
	Minimum rear yard 	10 feet, or 150 feet when building is in excess of one-story and adjacent to single-family zoning district 
	Minimum building separation 	20 feet apart at the closest point 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum lot coverage 	60% main and accessory buildings 
	Maximum height 	4 stories 
	Minimum living area 	650 square feet for one (1) bedroom, with an additional 150 square feet for each additional bedroom 
	Exterior building materials and architectural design 	See division 5.7 
	Maximum building length 	200 feet 
	Living unit mix 	Not more than 20% of the living units within a complex may be efficiency-type units, and not more than 30% of the living units within a complex may have 3 or more bedrooms 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	1.7 spaces per unit on site. Parking is permitted to incude tandem spaces and parallel spaces on private drives 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	Minimum wood fence along non street property lines at property owners option 
(g) 	Supplemental requirements: 	Single-family detached uses in this district shall conform to the standards set forth I the SF-7 district. For additional standards, see divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements 	Final approval by city council after P&Z recommendation and public hearing 
(i) 	Special requirements: 	
	1. Open Space 	Each lot or parcel of land, which is used for multiple-family residences, shall provide on the same lot or parcel of land, open space (as defined below) in accordance with the following requirements: (a) 20% of the gross lot area 
 
a.  Each lot or parcel of land, which is used for multiple-family residences, shall provide on the same lot or parcel of land, open space (as defined below) in accordance with the following requirements: 
Number of Bedrooms or 
Sleeping Rooms 	Amount of Open Space for Each Sleeping Room 
Efficiency and One-Bedroom Units: 	600 square feet 
Each Additional Bedroom Over One: 	300 additional square feet per room 
 
b.  An area of common open space shall have a slope not exceeding ten (10) percent, shall have no dimension of less than ten (10) feet, and may include landscaping, walks, recreational facilities, water features and decorative objects such as art work or fountains. Open space shall not include rooftops; accessory buildings; parking areas; driveways; turnaround areas; or the right-of-way or easement for streets or alleys. 
c.  At the time of site plan approval, the planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city council may approve credit for open use requirements under the following conditions: 
(1)  Up to three (3) square feet for each one (1) square foot of area provided for the following recreational facilities: 
(a)  Swimming pools, tennis courts, racquetball courts, or similar facilities. 
(b)  Decks, patios or lounge areas adjacent to or within ten (10) feet of swimming pools. 
(c)  Children's play areas developed with play equipment. 
(d)  Usable portions of recreational buildings. 
d.  Partial or full credit may be given for on-site open space that exceeds the minimum slope (as defined in (a) above), if it is determined that such areas are environmentally or aesthetically significant and their preservation would enhance the development and community. In determining environmental and aesthetic significance, the planning and zoning commission and city council will consider: 
(1)  Preservation of significant trees or other natural vegetation. 
(2)  Contribution to on-site retention of stormwater or natural control of drainage. 
(3)  Preservation of vistas and other qualities. 
(4)  Buffer or transition between the multi-family use and other uses 
e.  Available off-site open space may be credited for up to one third ( 1/3 ) of the open space requirement if: 
(1)  Fifteen (15) percent or more of the site's boundary is adjacent to park land. 
(2)  There are defined pedestrian connections between the multi-family development and park land. 
(3)  Permanent open space is within one hundred (100) feet of the development that is available for use by the general public. 
(4)  The design of the development provides a significant visual and pedestrian connection to public park land. 
f.  The combined credit for areas calculated at a three-to-one basis and off-site parks or open space shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total open space requirement for each multi-family development. 
(Ord. No. 2003-143, § 1, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2011-430, § 6(Exh. B), 3-8-11; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 3, 13, 9-25-18; Ord. No. 2018-657, § 1, 11-13-18)  
DIVISION 3.11. - NS-NEIGHBORHOOD SERVICE DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 23-3.11.1. - Purpose. 
The "NS", neighborhood service district is intended to provide limited or day-to-day retail, office and personal service needs to residents of nearby neighborhood areas. Establishments in this district could include small, free standing, single story retail structures and neighborhood oriented personal service establishments and should have architecture elements as well as hours of operation that are compatible with single-family residential uses. Sites zoned for the NS district should generally utilize small corner parcels within a logical neighborhood area, typically located at the entry of neighborhoods serving as a buffer between the neighborhood and arterial roadways. The district should require fully landscaped front yards and with low profile/ monument signs. This district should not allow any outside sales, storage or display, drive through, or any auto-related uses.  
Sec. 23-3.11.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the NS—Neighborhood service district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20. 
(b)  No outside sales, storage or display is permitted. 
(c)  No servicing of any vehicles (e.g., automobiles, trucks, trailers, etc.) is permitted.  
Sec. 23-3.11.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Minimum lot area 	7,000 square feet 
	Maximum lot area 	None 
	Minimum lot width 	60 feet 
	Minimum lot depth 	100 feet 
(b) 	Yard requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	20 feet 
	Minimum side yard 	10 feet, except when adjacent to land zoned residential then 20 feet is required 
	Minimum rear yard 	20 feet 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum height 	15 feet, one- or single-story with no restrictions on roof height; for buildings located at least 150 feet from a single-family residential zoning district, building height of up to 2 stories is permitted. 
	Maximum building size 	10,000 square feet (gross occupiable square footage.) Larger square footage totals may be approved through CUP procedure. 
	Exterior building materials and architectural design 	See division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	Parking shall be on the side or rear of structures; for additional standards see division 5.1 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3 
(g) 	Supplemental requirements: 	See divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements: 	See division 2.6 
(i) 	Special requirements: 	1. Architectural style should be compatible to the neighborhood. 
		2. Hours of operation shall be limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
 
(Ord. No. 2004-201, §§ 3—6, 4-14-04; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 3, 4, 14, 9-25-18; Ord. No. 2018-657, § 2, 11-13-18)  
DIVISION 3.12. - LR—LOCAL RETAIL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 23-3.12.1. - Purpose. 
The "LR" district is intended to provide areas for neighborhood, and/or local shopping facilities for retail sales of goods and services, including convenience stores, shopping centers and regional malls, serving the entire community, but does not include wholesaling or warehousing. This district should be located along or at the intersection of major collectors or thoroughfares to accommodate higher traffic volumes and should utilize landscaping and buffering requirements. Structures should be limited in height and mass to be compatible with area residential structures and masonry walls should be required adjacent to residentially zoned property.  
Sec. 23-3.12.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the LR-Local retail district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.12.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Minimum lot area 	None 
	Minimum lot width 	None 
	Minimum lot depth 	None 
(b) 	Yard requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	20 feet 
	Minimum side yard 	None, except when adjacent to a residential zoning district boundary line, then 20-feet is required 
	Minimum rear yard 	20 feet 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum lot coverage 	None 
	Maximum height 	Six (6) stories. When adjacent to Residential Districts; 3:1 foot ratio setback after the first two (2) stories. See section 23-5.4.4(b). 
	Exterior building materials and architectural design 	See division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	See division 5.1 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3 
(g) 	Site plan requirements: 	See division 2.6 
(h) 	Supplemental requirements: 	See divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(i) 	Special requirements: 	None 
 
(Ord. No. 2003-143, § 2, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 2004-201, § 6, 4-13-04; Ord. No. 2004-208, § 1, 6-22-04; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 5, 14, 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.13. - OT—OLD TOWN DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 23-3.13.1. - Purpose. 
The "OT", Old Town District is intended to create a zoning district that would be divided into three (3) subdistricts (see section 23-3.13.3). Each subdistrict would have a distinct purpose and have a special criteria to achieve the desired land use pattern which would facilitate enhancement and revitalization of the original old town area's turn-of-the century architecture and the Texas small town character. The purpose of this district will be to serve as the focal point of the community and the city, while providing for a blending of mixed land uses to create a defined area. This district may accommodate greater development intensity (than allowed elsewhere in the city) as a result of coordinated review requirements and special development standards. The district is also established to encourage and emphasize pedestrian-oriented activities and uses such as outdoor malls, festival marketplaces and similar activities, to create a truly vital environment, such that the district reflects the center of social, economic and political functions in the city.  
Sec. 23-3.13.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Uses listed in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) in conjunction with a site plan review. 
(b)  Such uses as may be permitted under conditional use permits, division 3.20. 
(c)  Municipally owned facilities and uses (no open storage or repair). 
(d)  Accessory buildings to the main use (section 23-4.1.3).  
Sec. 23-3.13.3. - Subdistricts created. 
Development proposed within the Old Town District is required to be consistent with subdistricts created for the purpose of facilitating the implementation of the Old Town Plan. The sub-districts correspond to the "Old Town Concept" discussed in the City of Cedar Hill's Comprehensive Plan. Boundaries for the sub-districts are identified in this section as a part of this chapter and recorded on the city's official zoning map. The following subdistricts are established: 
(1)  Old Town Square subdistrict. 
(2)  Old Town Corridor subdistrict. 
(3)  Old Town Residential subdistrict.  
Sec. 23-3.13.4. - Criteria for approval. 
(a)  Other than single-family located within the OT-Residential subdistrict, site plan review and recommendation by the downtown architectural review committee, as may be established by the city council, is required for all developments within the old town district. 
(b)  The downtown architectural review committee shall make a recommendation to approve the site plan, to approve it with conditions, or to deny the site plan. The committee's recommendation shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission and to city council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-576, § 2, 12-8-15)  
Sec. 23-3.13.5. - District development standards (all subdistricts). 
(a)  General site orientation and layout—(Nonresidential uses). 
(1)  Parking areas shall be located at the side or rear of buildings to improve the overall appearance from the street. 
(2)  Site layouts on individual lots shall be developed in such a manner that pedestrian connections between buildings both on that lot and between lots within the overall Old Town District Plan can be achieved. 
(3)  Trails designed for pedestrian or bicycle only travel should be provided in accordance with the parks master plan. 
(b)  Parking. 
(1)  Shared parking within a subdistrict will be considered on a case by case basis to reduce the overall amount of parking required. A reduction for shared parking shall be based on the following factors, and in no case shall exceed a reduction of over forty (40) percent of the otherwise required parking: 
a.  The uses clearly have mutually exclusive hours of operations; or 
b.  A secondary use drawing patrons from a primary use and not from the public at large (e.g., a shop selling sundries within a hotel); and 
c.  The reductions in parking and the hours of operation are made part of the certificate of occupancy record for that use. 
(2)  Also see division 5.1. 
(c)  Street furnishings and lighting. Private developments within the Old Town District shall coordinate the selection and installation of street furniture and lighting with the standards selected by the city for the public areas adjacent to streets in order to maintain design continuity. 
(d)  Paving design. 
(1)  In pedestrian areas, colored or textured concrete, modular paving units or other durable, visually interesting paving materials shall be used. 
(2)  Pedestrian paving design shall be consistent between separate developments within the Old Town area to ensure design continuity.  
Sec. 23-3.13.6. - Old Town Square subdistrict. 
(a)  Purpose. A primarily retail/office district with the opportunity for second story residential, that is primarily for the development of the core of the Old Town District "Retail Core Concept." Development within this subdistrict should have a site orientation, which creates a focal point within the Old Town district, and should take advantage of environmental amenities, encourage pedestrian traffic and connection between uses. The boundaries of this subdistrict shall be established on the zoning map consistent with the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Authorized uses. 
(1)  Uses listed in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) in conjunction with a site plan review. 
(2)  Residential uses may be permitted on the second floor of new or existing structures when approved as part of the site plan. No more than four residential dwelling units per building shall be permitted. 
(c)  Old Town Square sub-district development standards: 
General site orientation and layout: 
(1)  New development sites within Old Town Square subdistrict shall not be permitted unless integrated with other buildings within the area to maintain the functional and visual appearance of a focal point development for the Old Town. 
(2)  Buildings within Old Town Square subdistrict, shall be oriented toward streets and pedestrian traffic in order to create a cohesive, pedestrian oriented development plan. 
(3)  Parking areas shall be located at the side or rear of buildings to improve the overall appearance from the street. 
(4)  Building fronts and sidewalks shall be maintained for outdoor uses such as café's, restaurant seating, street side seating etc. 
Pedestrian circulation requirements: Each lot within the Old Town Square area shall provide on-site pedestrian facilities or public plazas or spaces that encourage pedestrian traffic on and to adjacent properties. Where the concept plan shows connections to other properties, adequate provisions should be made for creating a coordinated system of pedestrian ways throughout the district. 
Parking requirements: 
(1)  The design and layout of parking within the Old Town Square subdistrict shall conform to the following standards to the maximum extent possible. 
a.  Parking lots shall be located at the side or rear of the building. 
b.  Parking areas shall be screened or landscaped and shall be designed to maintain and facilitate continuity of the street façade. 
c.  Unloading/drop-off areas shall be provided. 
d.  Changes in pavement or grade should be used to indicate pedestrian crossings. 
e.  All primary parking shall be constructed of either reinforced concrete or concrete pavers. 
f.  Use of traffic islands or turnabouts is encouraged to add visual interest and directional guidance to parking lots. 
(2)  Developments in the Old Town Square subdistrict will be permitted to share parking with the Old Town Corridor subdistrict for the purpose of reducing parking areas within the Old Town Square area but shall be considered on a case-by-case basis. A reduction for Old Town Square parking shall be based on the following factors: 
a.  The uses clearly have mutually exclusive hours of operations (a restaurant and an office building; or 
b.  A secondary use which is clearly compatible with and draws a larger number of its patrons from a primary use (e.g., an art school and stationary shop); and 
c.  The reductions in parking and the hours of operation are made part of the certificate of occupancy record for that use. 
Area requirements: 	
Maximum density 	None 
Minimum lot area 	None 
Minimum lot width 	None 
Minimum lot depth 	None 
Yard requirements 	Setbacks shall match those of the existing adjacent structures on the same block. 
	Where no buildings exist, setbacks shall be established on the site plan. 
	When located adjacent to existing residential uses then the yard requirements for the Old Town residential subdistrict shall apply. 
Minimum exterior masonry 	100% brick exterior, unless certain variation is required for a building to be compatible with structures in the immediate area; in such cases, the exterior masonry requirement may be adjusted by the architectural review committee. 
Maximum building height 	Shall not vary more than 12 feet from structures on the same block. 
 
Architectural style requirements: 	
New construction 	Shall be compatible with turn of the century (late nineteenth or early twentieth century) architectural style that currently exists around the City Hall. 
Renovations 	Renovations to existing structures shall maintain the original facade and elevation elements of the structures/or other façade that is in keeping with the desired Old Town Square architectural theme. 
Exterior color 	Muted, earth colors. 
Building façade or elevation 	Shall reflect the rhythm of existing buildings in the area by maintaining similar building widths and exterior façade treatments to the extent possible. 
	Shall maintain a thickness such that it allows construction of recessed windows overlooking the street fronts. 
Openings 	Reflective glass shall not be allowed in this district. 
	All windows overlooking the street front shall be recessed and allow for store display areas. 
Awnings 	Approved through design review. 
Landscaping requirements 	Approved through design review. Also see division 5.2. 
Screening requirements 	Screening of building fronts and street sides shall be prohibited in this subdistrict. 
  
Sec. 23-3.13.7. - Old Town Corridor subdistrict. 
(a)  Purpose. A retail/office subdistrict that is primarily for retail and office uses that meets the convenience needs of the community. The boundaries of this sub-district shall be established through the zoning map. 
(b)  Authorized uses. 
1.  Uses listed in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) in conjunction with a site plan review. 
2.  In case of new or unlisted uses, a determination of appropriate classification of the form of land use shall be made by the planning and zoning commission by considering the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the subdistrict and the Old Town District in general. 
(c)  Old Town Corridor subdistrict development standards: 
General site orientation and layout: 
(1)  Buildings within Old Town Corridor subdistrict shall be oriented toward streets and pedestrian traffic in order to create a cohesive, pedestrian oriented development plan. 
(2)  Any existing residential use shall be allowed to continue in this subdistrict as a conforming use until it ceases to be used in that manner and then it shall not be allowed to reestablish. No additional totally residential development shall be newly erected or established within or relocated into the corridor subdistrict unless the use is an upper-story use established in compliance with this section. 
(3)  Upper story residential development may be established above any non-residential ground level use in this district through site plan approval. 
(4)  Parking areas shall be located at the side or rear of buildings to improve the overall appearance from the street. 
(5)  Wherever possible, parking for residential units shall be accessed from an alley or rear drive. 
(6)  Mixed residential and commercial uses may be established with both residential and business use in a live/work arrangement in this district only through the site plan approval process. 
(7)  Pad sites within Old Town Corridor subdistrict shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Pad sites shall occupy no more than two (2) corners of any street intersection and shall be two (2) acres or less. 
Area requirements: 	
Maximum density 	None 
Minimum lot area 	5,000 square feet 
Minimum lot width 	50 feet 
Minimum lot depth 	None 
Yard requirements: 	
Minimum front yard 	20 feet 
Minimum side yard 	5 feet when adjacent to nonresidential uses 
	15 feet when adjacent to residential structures; 
Minimum rear yard 	None, except when adjacent to residential structures, then 20 feet. 
Minimum exterior masonry (new structure) 	100% exterior masonry, unless certain variation is required for it to be compatible with structures in immediate area, in such cases exterior masonry requirement may be adjusted by the architectural review committee. 
Minimum exterior masonry (existing structure) 	If the existing structures are wood, then wood may be retained if approved on the site plan. 
Maximum building height 	2 stories or a height such that it maintains a variation of 7 feet from structures around it, whichever is greater. 
Architectural style requirements: 	
Exterior color 	Exposed masonry color or earth colors 
Building materials 	Approved through design review 
Building façade or elevation 	Shall reflect the early twentieth century architectural style or be compatible with such style. 
Openings 	Reflective glass shall not be allowed in this district. 
Awnings 	Approved through design review. 
Landscaping requirements: 	5-foot landscaped strip along the street in front yards; for additional standards see division 5.2. 
Screening requirements: 	Decorative masonry or living screening walls, maximum 4 feet in height shall be allowed on the front and side of the structures. 
	Parking lot screening walls shall be 3-feet maximum in height. 
	Masonry or living screening walls are required. Other materials may be approved only through a design review process on the site plan. 
Sign requirements 	Only signs attached to the building, post and panel and monument signs shall be permitted. 
	Festive and banner signs shall only be allowed as authorized by the Cedar Hill Sign Ordinance. 
 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 2, 7-21-01; Ord. No. 2002-110, § 9, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 2003-143, § 4, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 2006-276, § 4, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 2015-576, § 1, 12-8-15)  
Sec. 23-3.13.8. - Old Town residential subdistrict. 
(a)  Purpose: This subdistrict is intended primarily for residential uses that provide a buffer between the nonresidential uses of the Old Town district and lower density residential uses around it. Certain nonresidential uses that are compatible to the residential uses may be allowed in this subdistrict through an approved conditional use permit. The boundaries of this subdistrict shall be established through the zoning map. 
(b)  Authorized uses: 
(1)  Those uses listed for the OT-Old Town district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses; however, any non-residential use within the OT-R-Old Town residential subdistrict shall first obtain a conditional use permit as set forth in division 3.20. 
(2)  In case of new or unlisted uses, a determination of appropriate classification of the form of land use shall be made by the planning and zoning commission by considering the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the subdistrict and the Old Town district in general. 
(3)  Existing buildings shall be allowed to be established with both residential and business uses in a live/work arrangement in this district only through the conditional use permit approval process unless authorized as a home-bases business in accordance with section 23-4.1.5. 
(c)  Old Town residential subdistrict development standards: 
General site orientation and layout: 
(1)  Buildings in Old Town residential sub-district shall provide sidewalks or other pedestrian oriented environments. 
Area requirements: 	
Maximum density 	14 units per acre 
Minimum lot area 	3,000 square feet 
Minimum lot width 	25 feet 
Minimum lot depth 	100 feet 
Yard requirements 	
a) Townhouses 	None required (0') 
b) Townhouse building separation 	10 feet 
c) All other buildings 	5 feet 
Minimum front yard 	20 feet 
Minimum side yard (interior) 	None required (0') for townhouses; 
Minimum side yard (street side) 	
a) Townhouses 	10 feet 
b) All other buildings 	15 feet 
Minimum rear yard 	15 feet 
Minimum exterior masonry 	Approved through design review 
Maximum building height 	2 stories 
Architectural style requirements: 	
Exterior color 	Approved through design review 
Building materials 	Approved through design review 
Building façade or elevation 	Shall reflect the rhythm of existing historical structures in the area by maintaining similar building widths and exterior façade treatments to the extent possible. 
Openings 	Reflective glass shall not be allowed in this district. 
Awnings 	Approved through design review 
Landscaping requirements 	See requirements for residential developments in division 5.2. 
 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 6, 1-10-06)  
DIVISION 3.14. - UT—UPTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-655, § 17(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 25, 2018, amended Div. 3.14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3.14, §§ 23-3.14.1—23-3.14.9 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2001-71, 7-21-01; Ord. No. 2002-110, 6-11-02; Ord. No. 2003-143, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 2008-345, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2011-430, 3-8-11. 
 
Sec. 23-3.14.1. - Purpose. 
This is an overlay district intended to guide the development of the uptown area to create a thriving mixed-use area that builds on, and enhances, Cedar Hill's unique character as a friendly and family-oriented Texas town. The district regulations seek to extend the character of the historic downtown into the uptown area by providing an extension of pedestrian corridor(s) and vehicular circulation with the historic downtown core, and to establish harmony between mixed uses similar to the historic downtown. The regulations are intended to accommodate contemporary development needs for retail and commercial uses. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 17(Exh. A), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-3.14.2. - Authorized uses and applicability. 
(a)  This division shall apply to new construction and visible site improvements. 
(b)  Development standards that are not addressed in this division are subject to the regulations of the applicable base zoning district. Those uses allowed in the base zoning district are authorized. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 17(Exh. A), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-3.14.3. - General building and site orientation. 
(a)  All primary structures shall be oriented directly to a corner of intersecting public streets, or to the internal roadway(s) in the district. 
(b)  Primary parking areas shall be placed at the side or rear of buildings to improve the overall appearance of [buildings] from the streets in the district. 
(c)  Buildings should be located as close as possible to the front property line to improve the overall appearance from adjacent streets and provide a strong building wall on either side of street environs in the district. 
(d)  Site layouts on individual lots shall be developed in such a manner that pedestrian connections between buildings both on that lot and between lots within the overall uptown district can be achieved. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 17(Exh. A), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-3.14.4. - Yard requirements. 
(a)  Minimum front yard. 
(1)  Along streets with a right-of-way width of sixty-five (65) feet or less—Ten (10) feet. 
(2)  Porches, arcades or other architectural features with a minimum overhang height of ten (10) feet may extend to the adjacent right-of-way line. 
(b)  Minimum side yard. 
(1)  There shall be no requirement for buildings along public streets that have a floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less. 
(2)  Buildings adjacent to residential uses—Fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  Minimum rear yard. 
(1)  For buildings with a floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less when adjacent to residential uses, residential districts or streets—Twenty (20) feet. Otherwise, there shall be no requirement. 
(2)  For buildings with a floor area over ten thousand (10,000) square feet when adjacent to residential uses, residential districts or streets—Fifty (50) feet. Otherwise, the requirement shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 17(Exh. A), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-3.14.5. - Parking lot location and screening requirements. 
(a)  All parking or drive areas shall be located at least thirty (30) feet from right-of-way lines along public streets or park areas. 
(b)  The thirty (30) foot strip shall be screened and heavily landscaped and shall contain at least one (1) tree for every four hundred fifty (450) square feet within the strip. Such trees shall comply with the landscape standards for the city and may be used to meet the Cedar Hill landscape street yard requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 17(Exh. A), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-3.14.6. - Lighting standards. 
(a)  Screening of light fixtures. 
(1)  In order to preserve the night sky and to reduce glare on roadways, pedestrian areas and adjacent development, light sources (e.g., light bulbs) shall be oriented toward the center of the site or shielded so as to not be visible from the nearest property line. This applies to refractory lenses that extend beyond the lighting fixture and are designed to redirect the lighting source horizontally. This does not apply to neon or internally lit signs, or to decorative lighting with fifteen (15) watts or less per bulb. 
(2)  Historic or antique-style pedestrian light fixtures approved by the city are excluded from this standard. 
(b)  Decorative pedestrian level lighting. To accent entry areas and to enhance pedestrian safety, decorative pedestrian level pole or façade mounted lighting fixtures shall be used at entrances to the building and along major internal pedestrian routes. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 17(Exh. A), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-3.14.7. - Street and parking area fixtures. 
Street and pedestrian level lighting fixtures, signage and street furnishings that are compatible with the character of the old town historic district shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 17(Exh. A), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-3.14.8. - Signs. 
All provisions of chapter 4, article XII, signs, shall apply to development within the district. In general, to establish and enhance the unique character of the uptown overlay district, signs shall be limited to monument and building signs that blend with the design, color and material used on the primary building. Though monument signs are preferred along U.S. Highway 67 between Clark Road on the north [and] Beltline Road, pole signs may be permitted. 
Pole-mounted signs are not permitted within the district, except within fifty (50) feet from the nearest right-of-way line for U.S. Highway 67 between Clark Road on the north and Beltline Road on the south end of the district. However, to establish the unique character of the uptown overlay district, ground mounted signs are preferred adjacent to U.S. Highway 67. 
(1)  All other signs for new development or expansion of existing buildings within the district shall be ground mounted monument signs or wall mounted signs. 
(2)  Maximum area of any sign within the district shall be as permitted by the Cedar Hill Sign Ordinance. 
(3)  Ground mounted monument signs shall have a distinctive base, middle and top. 
(4)  Monument signs shall be no taller than eight (8) feet. Along U.S. Highway 67, monument signs may be twenty (20) feet in height, but with no increase in the permitted sign area. 
(5)  Monument signs must be spaced a minimum of eighty (80) feet apart. 
(6)  The structure of monument signs shall be constructed of materials and colors utilized on the building's primary façade. 
(7)  Landscaping around the base of monument signs is encouraged to blend the sign with other landscaped areas around the sign. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 17(Exh. A), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-3.14.9. - Floodplain. 
(a)  Any areas within the 100-year floodplain within the limits of the district shall be left in a natural state. 
(b)  Drainage areas flowing to the floodplain may be contoured to accommodate storm water detention, which shall be provided in a naturalistic manner. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 17(Exh. A), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-3.14.10. - Utilities. 
In order to keep visual clutter within the uptown overlay district to a minimum; especially at the district's entries and along Uptown Boulevard, all new utilities shall be placed below ground, except for major high voltage transmission lines. Use of existing overhead utilities is permitted; however, new service lines shall be placed underground. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 17(Exh. A), 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.15. - CC—CAMPUS COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 23-3.15.1. - Purpose. 
The "CC", corporate campus district is intended to provide a low intensity, campus or open setting for research and development laboratories, corporate offices and headquarters, science and high technology firms and related office and support uses. The sites for such uses should typically be large in size, with significant amounts of land used for open space, large setbacks and heavy landscaping. Buildings may be multi-story and should be set back away from the streets. No residential uses are allowed within the CC - corporate campus district other than incidental security quarters.  
Sec. 23-3.15.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the CC-Campus commercial district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.15.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Minimum lot area 	10,000 square feet 
	Minimum lot width 	None 
	Minimum lot depth 	150 feet 
(b) 	Yard requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	30 feet 
	Minimum side yard 	None except when adjacent to street or residential then 25 feet. 
	Minimum rear yard 	25 feet 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum lot coverage 	40% main and accessory buildings 
	Maximum height 	None (except when adjacent to residential, then an additional 2-foot setback is required for each additional 1 foot in height over 2 stories.) 
	Exterior building materials and architectural design 	See division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	See division 5.1 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3 
(g) 	Supplemental requirements: 	see divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements: 	See division 2.6 
(i) 	Special requirements: 	None 
 
(Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 6, 14, 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.16. - C—COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 23-3.16.1. - Purpose. 
The "C", commercial district is intended to accommodate development of all retail and wholesale activities, such as commercial sales and service uses, other contracting services, storage and warehouse services, automotive and transportation related services and activities dealing with services to other businesses and vehicular related activities. Developments of this type are generally incompatible with residential development due to heavy traffic generation, hours of operation, noise emissions, or other incompatible features and should be generally located along freeways, highways, and other designated high volume thoroughfares and should utilize established high level of landscaping and buffering.  
Sec. 23-3.16.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the C-Commercial district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.16.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Minimum lot area 	None 
	Minimum lot width 	None 
	Minimum lot depth 	None 
(b) 	Yard requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	20 feet 
	Minimum side yard 	20 feet 
	Minimum rear yard 	None, except 20 feet when adjacent to street or residential 
(c) 	Structural standards: 	
	Maximum height 	None, except when adjacent to residential zoning district in which case the maximum height shall be limited to 35 feet plus one foot of additional height for each one foot of setback the structure is from the applicable minimum yard requirements set forth in Section 3.17.3 above. 
	Exterior building materials and architectural design 	See division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	See division 5.1 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3 
(g) 	Supplemental requirements: 	See divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements: 	See division 2.6 
(i) 	Special requirements: 	None 
 
(Ord. No. 2004-208, § 2, 6-22-04; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2015-542, § 5, 7-22-14; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 7, 14, 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.17. - IP—INDUSTRIAL PARK DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 23-3.17.1. - Purpose. 
The "IP", industrial park district is intended to provide for development of low intensity industries and light manufacturing plants involved in assembling, fabrication, warehousing, wholesaling and some administrative operations, conducted wholly within enclosed buildings and conforming to an exceptionally high developmental, operational and environmental standards. The district shall be characterized by off street parking and loading facility requirement, generous setbacks, abundant open space and aesthetically landscaped site planning. This district will require accessibility to major thoroughfares, major highways, or other means of transportation.  
Sec. 23-3.17.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the IP, industrial park district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.17.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Minimum lot area 	None 
	Minimum lot width 	None 
	Minimum lot depth 	None 
(b) 	Yard requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	30 feet 
	Minimum side yard 	None when abutting "I" district 
	1) When abutting "C" district 	10 feet 
	2) When abutting "NS" or "LR" district 	20 feet 
	3) When abutting a residential district 	30 feet 
	4) When abutting more than one (1) district 	The more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
	Minimum rear yard 	None when abutting "I" district 
	1) When abutting "C" district 	10 feet 
	2) When abutting "NS" or "LR" district 	20 feet 
	3) When abutting a residential district 	30 feet 
	4) When abutting more than one (1) district 	The more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum lot coverage 	None 
	Maximum height 	35 feet; except when adjacent to single-family district: then an additional setback of 1 foot for each 2 feet in height above 35 feet is required 
	Exterior building materials and architectural design 	See division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	Loading docks are to be oriented away or screened from the collectors and arterial streets; for additional standards see division 5.1 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3 and also section 23-5.4.9. 
(g) 	Special requirements: 	See divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements: 	See division 2.6 
(i) 	Special requirements: 	None 
 
(Ord. No. 2004-207, § 1, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 8, 15, 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.18. - I—INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 23-3.18.1. - Purpose. 
The "I", industrial district is intended to provide for light industrial and light manufacturing uses that are somewhat limited in nature and function of permissive uses, such as assembling and fabrication, warehousing, wholesaling and service operations that do not depend upon frequent customer or client visits. The developments in this district should be in accordance to established performance standards and shall be characterized by large setbacks, minimal building coverage, off street parking and loading facilities, and landscaping and buffering requirements. This district should also require accessibility to major thoroughfares, major highways, or other means of transportation.  
Sec. 23-3.18.2. - Authorized uses. 
(a)  Those uses listed for the I, industrial district in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts) as "P" or "C" are authorized uses permitted by right or conditionally permitted uses, respectively. Conditional uses must be approved utilizing procedures set forth in division 3.20.  
Sec. 23-3.18.3. - District development standards. 
(a) 	Lot dimension requirements: 	
	Minimum lot area 	None 
	Minimum lot width 	None 
	Minimum lot depth 	None 
(b) 	Yard requirements: 	
	Minimum front yard 	25 feet 
	Minimum side yard (interior) 	None 
	Minimum side yard (corner) 	25 feet 
	Minimum rear yard 	None, except 40 feet when adjacent to single-family residential district 
(c) 	Structure standards: 	
	Maximum lot coverage 	None 
	Maximum height 	None 
	Exterior building materials and architectural design 	See division 5.7 
(d) 	Minimum off-street parking: 	See division 5.1 
(e) 	Landscaping requirements: 	See division 5.2 
(f) 	Screening requirements: 	See division 5.3, subsection 23-5.1.4(b) and section 23-5.4.9 
(g) 	Supplemental requirements: 	See divisions 5.4 through 5.7 
(h) 	Site plan requirements: 	See division 2.6 
(i) 	Special requirements: 	None 
 
(Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 9, 16, 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 3.19. - PD—PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 23-3.19.1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of a planned development zoning district ("PD district") is to provide for the development of land as an integral unit for single or mixed use in accordance with a PD concept plan that may include uses, regulations and other requirements that vary from the provisions of other zoning districts. PD districts are intended to implement generally the goals and objectives of the city's comprehensive plan. PD districts are also intended to encourage flexible and creative planning, to ensure the compatibility of land uses, and to allow for the adjustment of changing demands to meet the current needs of the community by meeting one (1) or more of the following purposes: 
(a)  To provide for a superior design of lots or buildings; 
(b)  To provide for increased recreation and/or open space opportunities for public use; 
(c)  To provide rural amenities or features that would be of special benefit to the property users or community; 
(d)  To protect or preserve natural amenities and environmental assets such as trees, creeks, ponds, floodplains, slopes or hills and viewscapes; 
(e)  To protect or preserve existing historical buildings, structures, features or places; or 
(f)  To provide an appropriate balance between the intensity of development and the ability to provide adequate supporting public facilities and services.  
Sec. 23-3.19.2. - Nature of district and minimum standards. 
Each PD district shall be a free-standing zoning district in which land uses and intensities of land use may be tailored to fit the physical features of the site and to achieve compatibility with existing and planned adjacent uses. Minimum standards for residential and nonresidential uses proposed for the PD district must be incorporated within an ordinance adopted by the council (the "adopting ordinance"). In the adopting ordinance, the city council may incorporate minimum standards by making reference to a standard zoning district 
(a)  Land use. 
(1)  Uses. Unless otherwise provided by the PD ordinance, only those uses authorized in section 23-4.1.2 of this chapter are permitted in a PD district. 
(2)  Location. The location of all authorized uses shall be consistent with the PD concept plan and PD site plan. 
(3)  Residential density. Unless otherwise provided by the PD ordinance on the basis of exceptional design and provision of enhanced open space, residential density shall not exceed four (4) units per gross acre for single-family residential use and eighteen (18) units per gross acre for multi-family use. 
(4)  Nonresidential uses. Unless otherwise provided by the PD ordinance, the following standards shall apply to all non-residential uses within a PD district: 
a.  Height. No structure shall exceed the lower of three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet above natural grade. 
b.  Drainage. Drainage features shall be integrated into the design of the development and shall be contained within ponds and streams with a natural appearance wherever possible. 
c.  F.A.R. Floor to area ratio shall not exceed one-to-one (1:1); however, the council may authorize higher intensities of use if supported by traffic impact analysis and site-specific open space analysis. 
(b)  Open space standards. 
(1)  Public and private open space. Unless otherwise provided by the PD ordinance, a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the gross land area within the entire PD district shall be devoted to open space, consistent with the open space requirements of the city's comprehensive plan. Open space for PD districts may be satisfied by either public or by a combination of public and private open space. Open space requirements specified in this subsection are in addition to requirements for site landscaping and buffering. Public open space shall be dedicated to the city. 
(2)  Preservation of natural features. Unless otherwise provided by the PD ordinance or PD concept plan: 
a.  Floodplain areas shall be preserved and maintained as open space; and 
b.  Significant stands of native trees and shrubs shall be preserved and protected from destruction or alteration. 
(3)  Open space amenities. An applicant for a PD district may propose open space amenities in order to intensify the uses of the land within the district. 
(4)  Open space allocation. Open space requirements shall be satisfied for each phase of a multi-phased residential development. If open space is not to be provided proportionally among phases of development, the applicant must execute a reservation of open space in a form that will assure the city that such open space will be provided. The city may require that all open space within the district must be provided prior to completion of development within the district. 
(c)  Dimensional and area standards. Unless otherwise provided by the PD ordinance, dimensional and area standards for uses shall be the most restrictive standards authorized by the city's zoning regulations for the same or similar uses.  
Sec. 23-3.19.3. - Plans required. 
There are three (3) types of plans that may be required as part of the development process within a PD district. The general purpose and use of each plan is described as follows: 
(a)  PD concept plan. The PD concept plan is mandatory, and is intended to be used as the first step in the PD development process. It establishes the most general guidelines for the PD district by identifying the land uses and intensities, thoroughfare locations, and open space boundaries (including public trail systems). It also illustrates the integration of these elements into a master plan for the whole PD district. The PD concept plan, as incorporated in the PD ordinance and together with the text of the ordinance, establishes the development standards for the PD district. The PD concept plan shall identify any areas that have different standards than established for the same or similar uses. 
(b)  PD development plan. A PD development plan is optional and is intended to be used, where necessary, as the second step of the PD development process. A PD development plan may be used where the developer requests or the council requires certain standards for the PD district to be specified after initial establishment of the PD district, and constitutes an amendment to the approved PD concept plan and PD ordinance. A PD development plan includes more detailed information as to the specific land uses and their boundaries. The purposes of a PD development plan are to allow flexibility in the development process by deferring specification of all development standards at the time of PD district creation and to enable developers to satisfy conditions imposed on creation of the district prior to submittal of a PD site plan. 
(c)  PD site plan. A PD site plan is mandatory and is the final step of the PD development process. The purposes of a PD site plan are to assure that the development of individual building lots, parcels, or tracts within the PD district are consistent with the approved concept plan and development plan, if any, and to assure that the standards applicable within the PD district are met for each such lot, parcel or tract. If a PD site plan terminates, development of the land covered by the terminated plan cannot occur until a new PD site plan has been approved for the land as provided by this section.  
Sec. 23-3.19.4. - Pre-application conference. 
An application for a PD development plan or PD site plan may request a pre-application conference with the planning director prior to formal application. The procedures in division 1.8 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250 § 4, 08-30-05)  
Sec. 23-3.19.5. - Compliance with approved plans. 
Except as otherwise provided by the city's subdivision regulations, no building permit shall be issued and no construction shall commence for any land within a PD district until a PD site plan that is consistent with the PD concept plan and any applicable PD development plan has been approved. Each PD district shall be developed, used, and maintained in compliance with the approved PD site plans for the district. Compliance with the PD Ordinance shall be construed as a condition precedent to granting of certificates of occupancy.  
Sec. 23-3.19.6. - Establishment of district and concept plan. 
(a)  Zoning amendment. An application for the establishment of a PD district shall be made to the commission. The application shall include: (1) a PD concept plan; (2) a list of proposed PD district development standards; (3) identification of a zoning district, if any, which shall apply to the extent not otherwise provided by the PD concept plan or by the proposed PD district development standards; (4) an informational statement, and (5) traffic impact analysis, unless waived by the council. Except to the extent provided by the PD concept plan and the PD ordinance, development within the PD district shall be governed by all of the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city in effect at the time of such development (including the standards of the zoning district identified in the application). In the event of any conflict between the PD concept plan and the PD ordinance and the then-current ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city, the terms, provisions, and intent of the PD concept plan and PD ordinance shall control. 
(b)  PD concept plan. A PD concept plan (or, at the applicant's option, a PD development plan) shall be processed simultaneously with the zoning amendment application, and if the zoning amendment application is approved, the PD concept plan (or PD development plan) shall be incorporated as part of the PD ordinance. The graphic depictions contained on a PD concept plan shall be considered as regulatory standards. Each PD concept plan shall be prepared on one (1) or more standard sheets of sizes of 30? × 42? or 24? × 36? and at an engineering scale of 1?=100' (or other scale necessary to clearly convey the appropriate information). If multiple sheets are required, an overall plan shall be submitted as well (which may be to any scale). Unless waived by the planning director, each PD concept plan shall graphically depict the following: 
(1)  A diagram or drawing of the boundaries of the proposed PD district; 
(2)  Proposed and existing land uses by category (including, if applicable, proposed and existing land uses by category for any sub-areas to be developed within the PD district); 
(3)  Proposed density by type of residential uses, including the maximum numbers of dwelling units for residential uses other than single-family detached and lot sizes for single-family detached; 
(4)  Proposed estimated total floor area and floor area ratios by category of nonresidential uses, together with residential view analysis, if any; 
(5)  Proposed configuration of public and private open space serving the development, showing the relationship to the city's comprehensive plan, including trail system and access points to the trail system, estimated dimensions and approximate area, and areas to be dedicated to the public or to a private maintenance organization, if known; 
(6)  Proposed and existing thoroughfares, boulevards and large streets; 
(7)  To the extent known for adjoining land, existing land uses (by zoning district), existing thoroughfares; and existing open space for such adjoining land; 
(8)  Any amenities proposed for purposes of achieving density or intensity bonuses; and 
(9)  A general plan for circulation of traffic and pedestrians within and external to the development, including designated points of access. 
(c)  Proposed PD development standards. Proposed PD district development standards shall be processed simultaneously with the zoning amendment application, and if the zoning amendment application is approved, such standards shall be incorporated as part of the PD ordinance. Such proposed development standards may include (but shall not be limited to) uses; density; lot size; lot dimensions; setbacks; coverage; height; landscaping; lighting, fencing, parking and loading; signage; open space; drainage; and utility and street standards. Any graphic depictions used to illustrate such standards, unless otherwise provided in the PD ordinance, shall be considered as regulatory standards. 
(d)  Concept plan informational statement. A PD concept plan shall be accompanied by an narrative statement containing the information set forth below. If the zoning amendment application is approved, the informational statement shall not be binding on the applicant or the land owner and shall not be considered part of the PD concept plan or the PD ordinance. Informational statements shall be updated concurrently with any amendment to the PD concept plan and with each PD development plan, if any. Each statement shall include the following: 
(1)  A general statement setting forth how the proposed PD district will relate to the city's comprehensive plan; 
(2)  The total acreage within the proposed PD district; 
(3)  If the development is to occur in phases, a conceptual phasing plan that identifies the currently anticipated general sequence of development, including the currently anticipated general sequence for installation of major capital improvements to serve the development; and 
(4)  An aerial photograph with the boundaries of the PD concept plan clearly delineated. 
(e)  Traffic impact analysis. The applicant shall submit to the city engineer a traffic impact analysis for the proposed PD district unless waived by the city council, after it receives the advise of the city engineer. The analysis must be approved or waived by the council prior to, or concurrently with, the council's approval of the PD district. The traffic impact analysis shall not be considered part of the PD concept plan or the PD ordinance, but may be used to condition the density of uses or the timing of development with the district based upon the existence of a supporting roadway network adjacent to accommodate the expected traffic generation. The traffic impact analysis shall be updated with each PD site plan. 
(f)  Complete application. No application for the establishment of a PD district shall be deemed to be filed with the city until the planning director has determined that the PD concept plan is complete, that the proposed PD district development standards have been identified, that a traffic impact analysis has been submitted (unless waived), and that the informational statement is complete. A sufficient number of copies of the application, as determined by the planning director, shall be submitted to allow review by city staff and appropriate boards. 
(g)  Commission recommendation. The commission, after notice and public hearing in accordance with the city's zoning procedures, shall formulate its recommendation with respect to establishment of a PD district. The recommendation of the commission shall be forwarded to the council for decision. 
(h)  Council decision. Following receipt of the commission's recommendation, the council, after notice and public hearing in accordance with the city's zoning procedures, shall conduct a public hearing and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application for establishment of the PD district. 
(i)  Approval criteria. Based upon the PD concept plan, the commission, in making its recommendations to the council, and the council, in determining whether the PD district should be established, shall consider whether the following criteria have been met: 
(1)  The plan of development is generally consistent with the city's comprehensive plan (as such plan may be amended prior to or concurrently with approval of the PD district); 
(2)  Proposed uses and the configuration of uses are compatible with existing and planned adjoining uses; 
(3)  The general arrangement of streets conforms to the city's thoroughfare plan (as such plan may be amended prior to or concurrently with approval of the PD district); 
(4)  Proposed uses, development densities and intensities, and development regulations are generally consistent with this section; 
(5)  The configuration of the proposed open space serving the development is consistent with the city's comprehensive plan (as such plan may be amended prior to or concurrently with approval of the PD district); 
(6)  The amenities proposed justify proposed densities or intensities; 
(7)  The proposed plan of development furthers the public health, safety and general welfare of the community; and 
(8)  The traffic impact analysis demonstrates that the capacity of the proposed roadways shown on the proposed PD concept plan, together with any roadways within related PD districts and the supporting roadway network, are adequate to accommodate the traffic expected to be generated by the uses, densities and intensities of use shown on the PD concept plan in and authorized in the PD ordinance in a timely and efficient manner. 
(j)  Conditions. The commission may recommend, and the council may require, such conditions to the establishment of a PD district and to the approval of a PD concept plan as are reasonably necessary to assure that the purposes of the district and the approval criteria for the PD concept plan are met. Such conditions may include the requirement of a PD development plan. 
(k)  Adopting ordinance. The PD ordinance shall include and incorporate the PD concept plan an integral part of the regulations and shall include the following: 
(1)  A statement of the purpose and intent of the PD district; 
(2)  A metes and bounds description of the land within the PD district; 
(3)  A list of the specific land uses permitted within the PD district, together with a description of the sub-areas, if any, in which such uses are allowed; 
(4)  The maximum density or intensity of each permitted land use; 
(5)  A list of all the PD district development standards, together with necessary graphic illustrations; 
(6)  Identification of the city's then-current zoning district standards that shall apply to the extent not otherwise provided by the PD concept plan or PD ordinance; 
(7)  Identification of the development standards, if any (whether in the PD ordinance or in the then-existing ordinances, rules, or regulations of the city), that may be deferred for specification until approval of a PD development plan or that may be varied by the council as part of the approval process for a PD site plan. 
(8)  Unless otherwise identified on the PD concept plan, the general location and size of open space serving the development; including any proposed dedication of open space to the public or to a maintenance organization. 
(9)  Provisions governing amenities, if any, to justify densities or intensities. 
(10)  Such additional conditions as are established by the council to assure that the PD district and PD concept plan are consistent with the purposes of the district and the approval criteria for the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, §§ 8, 9, 7-21-01)  
Sec. 23-3.19.7. - Development plans. 
If the council requires as a condition of establishing the PD district and approving a PD concept plan that PD development plans be submitted prior to submittal of a PD site plan, a PD development plan may be prepared and submitted for the entire development at one (1) time or for individual phases of development. The applicant also may elect to submit a development plan in accordance with this section. Each plan shall be submitted to the city planning director. Each PD development plan shall be accompanied by (i) a development plan informational statement and (ii) a preliminary drainage study for the area covered by the proposed plan. If deemed necessary by the city engineer or planning director, the applicant for a PD development plan shall also submit an updated traffic impact analysis prior to commission action. 
(a)  Submittal requirements for PD development plans. 
(1)  Approximations of the following: site boundaries and dimensions, lot lines, site acreage and square footage, and distances to the nearest cross streets; 
(2)  Location map, north arrow, title block and site data summary table; 
(3)  Existing land uses and zoning classifications on adjacent properties; 
(4)  Any features omitted from the PD concept plan upon council authorization; and 
(5)  Such additional features as are necessary to assure compliance with conditions established by the council to be satisfied by the development plan. 
(b)  PD Development Standards. Development standards that were not specified in the PD ordinance, as authorized by the council, shall be submitted and approved as an amendment to the PD ordinance and incorporated therein, in conjunction with approval of the PD development plan. 
(c)  Development plan informational statement. Each PD development plan shall be accompanied by an informational statement containing the information hereinafter set forth. The informational statement shall not be binding on the applicant or the land owner and shall not be considered part of the PD development plan or PD ordinance. Informational statements shall be updated concurrently with any amendment to a PD development plan and with each PD site plan. Each informational statement shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of landowner and date of preparation of the PD development plan; 
(2)  Name and address of architect, landscape architect, planner, engineer, surveyor, or other persons involved in the preparation of the PD development plan; 
(3)  A table listing the specific permitted uses proposed for the property, and, if appropriate, the boundaries of the different land uses and the boundary dimensions; 
(4)  Development standards for each proposed land use, as follows: 
a.  Minimum lot area; 
b.  Minimum lot width and depth; 
c.  Minimum front, side, and rear yard areas; 
d.  Maximum height of building; and 
e.  Maximum building coverage. 
(5)  A list of the development standards, if any (whether in the PD ordinance or in the then-existing ordinances, rules, or regulations of the city that apply to development within the PD district), for which the applicant is seeking amendment by the council as part of the PD development plan approval process. 
(6)  If council approval of any height increase is being requested, a view analysis of the impact of such requested waiver on adjacent residential areas of the city. 
(7)  Preliminary and approximate building locations and building footprints; 
(8)  Preliminary elevations and perspectives to show the relationship of building heights to surrounding topography; 
(9)  Location of parking areas and structures for multi-family and nonresidential uses, including areas for off-street parking; 
(10)  A detailed description of how open space serving the development will be satisfied for the phase of development represented by the PD development plan, including any proposed dedications of open space to the public or to a private maintenance organization; 
(11)  If the PD development plan is a phase of the project (as described in the applicant's original informational statement submitted with the PD concept plan), depiction of the area subject to the development in relation to the then-current phasing plan, together with any updates of the then-current phasing plan that was submitted as part of the applicant's original informational statement; 
(12)  Preliminary tree survey; 
(13)  A list detailing each condition imposed by the PD ordinance that is to be satisfied through approval of the PD development plan; and 
(14)  A list identifying each proposed addition or amendment to the PD ordinance. 
(d)  Preliminary drainage study. Each PD development plan shall be accompanied by a preliminary drainage study for the area covered by the study. The study shall be prepared by a professional engineer who is licensed in the State of Texas and who is experienced in the study of drainage issues. The preliminary drainage study shall (i) contain a topographical map of the area proposed for development to a scale not smaller than 1 inch = 200 feet; (ii) generally describe how the proposed development will comply with the drainage design policies set forth below; (iii) include all information deemed necessary by the preparing engineer to support his or her determination that the proposed development will comply with the drainage design policies; and (iv) include all information reasonably requested by the city engineer to support his or her review of the preliminary drainage study. The purposes of the drainage design policies are to prevent flooding of adjacent properties, owned by third parties and to regulate water surface elevations and peak discharges. Development within the PD District shall not produce any increase in the water surface elevation (either upstream or downstream) due to a 5-year, 10-year, 50-year, or 100-year storm. If the discharge from the area proposed for development would increase the water surface elevation above predevelopment conditions on any property owned by third parties due to any of such storms, then such peak discharge must be regulated to the extent necessary to eliminate the increased water surface elevation. The regulation of discharges to eliminate such increases may be achieved using either on-site or off-site stormwater management facilities (such as detention areas, retention areas, and infiltration and sedimentation ponds). 
(E)  Updated traffic impact analysis. If deemed necessary by the city's transportation engineer or if required by the PD ordinance, the applicant for a proposed PD development plan shall submit an updated traffic impact analysis prior to action by the commission. The purpose of the updated analysis is to determine whether the traffic estimated to be generated by the development shown on the proposed PD development plan will necessitate specific on-site or adjacent traffic improvements (e.g., turn lanes, stacking lanes, signalization, etc.) and to determine whether conditions attached to the concept plan based on the original traffic impact analysis have been met. 
(f)  Commission recommendation. The commission, after notice and public hearing in accordance with the city's zoning procedures, shall recommend to the council whether to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove each PD development plan, together with each proposed amendments to the PD ordinance. 
(g)  Council decision. Upon receipt of the commission's recommendation, the council, after notice and public hearing in accordance with the city's zoning procedures, shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove each PD development plan and each proposed addition or amendment to the PD ordinance. 
(h)  Approval criteria. The commission, in making its recommendation to the council, and the council, in acting upon each PD development plan and proposed addition or amendment to the PD ordinance, shall determine whether the proposed PD development plan and ordinance addition or amendment meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The plan generally is consistent with the approved PD concept plan (including open space, trails, and thoroughfares); 
(2)  The plan generally is consistent with the development standards set forth in the PD ordinance; 
(3)  The plan satisfies any conditions established by the council in the PD ordinance relating to development plan approval; 
(4)  The plan is generally consistent with the standards and conditions of the zoning regulations and of other ordinances, rules and regulations of the city (to the extent that such standards and conditions are applicable to development within the PD district); 
(5)  The traffic estimated to be generated by the plan is generally consistent with the original, council approved traffic impact analysis and any conditions to be satisfied at the time of the development plan approval have been met; 
(6)  The plan includes the necessary on-site or adjacent traffic improvements to accommodate traffic generated by the plan (e.g., turn lanes, stacking lanes, signalization, etc.); and 
(7)  The preliminary drainage study for the plan indicates that the proposed development can be achieved without increasing the upstream or downstream water surface elevation on property owned by third parties and that detention and drainage areas can be improved in a natural manner. 
(i)  Conditions. The commission may recommend, and the council may require, such conditions to the approval of a PD development plan as are reasonably necessary to assure that the approval criteria are met. 
(j)  Approving ordinance. The development plan shall be incorporated within an ordinance amending the PD ordinance and the concept plan. The amending ordinance shall set forth all standards necessary for development of the land subject to the development plan that were not included in the PD ordinance. The amending ordinance also shall repeal or amend any conditions that were attached to the PD ordinance that have been satisfied as a result of approving the development plan and associated amendments. All PD's shall be shown on the city's zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 10, 7-21-01)  
Sec. 23-3.19.8. - PD site plans. 
(a)  Delegation to commission. The planning and zoning commission hereby is delegated the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny PD site plans and all amendments thereto, subject to appeal to the council. Any PD site plan that is subject to a request for waivers or other modifications and that are reserved for the council by these PD regulations shall be decided by the council, upon recommendation of the commission. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. The following requirements apply to each application for PD site plan approval: 
(1)  Size. PD site plans shall be prepared on one (1) or more standard sheets of sizes of 30? × 42? or 24? × 36? and at an engineering scale of 1?=100' or larger. If multiple sheets are required, an overall plan shall be submitted as well (which may be to any scale). PD site plans shall be prepared by a registered engineer, architect, or landscape architect. 
(2)  General information: 
a.  North Arrow; 
b.  Total site acreage; 
c.  Submission date; 
d.  Scale (written and graphic); 
e.  Vicinity map; 
f.  Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of designer, engineer, developer, and owner; 
g.  A boundary survey of the site with the location of proposed land uses; 
h.  Adjacent subdivision names and property lines; and 
i.  Adjacent land uses and structures. 
(3)  Structures: 
a.  Location, dimensions, and use of all existing facilities and proposed building sites; 
b.  Setback and separation distances between building sites; 
c.  Proposed construction type and facade materials for all multi-family and non-residential buildings (the commission may require elevations and perspective drawings); 
d.  Proposed density of each use; and 
e.  Proposed location of screening along public roadways shown on the PD concept. 
(4)  Streets and sidewalks: 
a.  Location and width of all rights-of-way and easements; 
b.  Location and dimensions of all pavement and curbing; 
c.  Location and width of all sidewalks; 
d.  Location and width of all ingress/egress points; 
e.  Location and width of all medians and median breaks; and 
f.  Location of any special traffic regulation facilities. 
(5)  Off-street parking and loading areas: 
a.  Number, location, and dimension of spaces; 
b.  Type of surface material of parking facility; 
c.  Dimension of aisles, driveways, maneuvering areas, and curb return radii; 
d.  Distance between spaces and adjacent rights-of-way; 
e.  Location of all existing and proposed fire lanes and hydrants; and 
f.  Proposed lighting diagram. 
(6)  Landscaping: 
a.  Location and size of major tree groupings and existing hardwood trees of 6? caliper or greater, noting whether they are to be removed or retained; 
b.  Location and size of proposed plant materials, including paving, together with type and species of plants; 
c.  Number and type of each landscape element; 
d.  Height and type of all fencing or buffering; 
e.  Height of all planters, sculptures, and decorative screens; 
f.  Location and type of trash receptacle screening; 
g.  Location and type of lighting for streets, signage, and parking areas; and 
h.  Location of visibility triangles where required. 
(7)  Drainage: 
a.  Direction of water flow; 
b.  Quantity of on and off-site water generation; 
c.  Topographic contours at a minimum of five-foot intervals; 
d.  Points of concentrated water discharge; 
e.  Areas where special design and construction may be necessary due to slope or soil conditions; and 
f.  Location and design of all water detention and drainage areas; 
g.  Drainage ways, creeks, and limits of the 100-year floodplain and floodway as shown on current FEMA mapping or the city's master drainage plan, including location and acreage, together with a general plan for accommodating flood waters and drainage. 
(8)  Preliminary utility service plan: 
a.  A preliminary drainage plan of the area showing the size and location of each existing and proposed drainage way and retention or detention area; 
b.  If no development plan has been required and approved by the council, the drainage plan shall incorporate the requirements of the preliminary drainage study as specified in section 23-3.19.7(d); 
c.  If no development plan has been required and approved by the council, an updated traffic impact analysis as required by section 23-3.19.7(e); 
d.  The proposed method of providing water and sewer service; 
(9)  A list of the development standards, if any (whether in the PD ordinance or in the then-existing ordinances, rules, or regulations of the city that apply to development within the PD district), for which the applicant is seeking a waiver by the council as part of the PD site plan approval process; and 
(10)  If council approval of any height increase is being requested, the applicant shall prepare (at the request of the planning director) a view analysis of the impact of such requested waiver on adjacent residential areas of the city. 
(c)  Commission decision. The commission, after notice and public hearing in accordance with the city's zoning procedures, shall approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny each PD site plan. 
(d)  Approval criteria. The commission, in approving, conditionally approving, or denying a PD site plan, shall consider the following criteria: 
(1)  The plan complies with the applicable PD concept plan or development plan, if any, and with the PD ordinance, including expressly conditions attached to the concept plan, development plan or PD ordinance. 
(2)  The plan complies with the standards and conditions of the zoning regulations and of other ordinances, rules and regulations of the city (to the extent that such standards and conditions are applicable to development within the PD district); 
(3)  If no development plan was required and approved by the council, the traffic estimated to be generated by the plan is generally consistent with the original, council approved traffic impact analysis; 
(4)  If no development plan was required and approved by the council, the plan includes the necessary on-site or adjacent traffic improvements to accommodate traffic generated by the plan (e.g., turn lanes, stacking lanes, signalization, etc.); and 
(5)  If no development plan was required and approved by the council, the preliminary drainage study for the plan indicates that the proposed development can be achieved without increasing the upstream or downstream water surface elevation on property owned by third parties and that detention and drainage areas can be improved in a manner approved by the council. 
(e)  Conditions. The commission, or the council on appeal, may establish such conditions to the approval of a PD site plan as are reasonably necessary to assure that the approval criteria are met. 
(f)  Appeal from commission action. If the commission approves a PD site plan with conditions or if it disapproves a PD site plan, the applicant may appeal the decision to the council by filing a written request with the city secretary within ten (10) days after the commission's decision. 
(g)  Waivers. If the applicant requests a waiver from PD ordinance standards or other ordinance requirements, the waiver request will be forwarded to the council with the commission's recommendation for decision. 
(Ord. No. 2001-71, § 7, 7-21-01)  
Sec. 23-3.19.9. - Amendment of plans. 
(a)  PD concept plans. PD concept plans (excluding informational statements) are considered part of the PD ordinance. Any amendment to a PD concept plan shall be considered a zoning change, and the provisions of Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code relating to notices, public hearings, and written protests for changes in zoning districts or regulations shall apply. If a PD district is established subject to approval of PD development plans, the provisions of this subsection shall apply to such PD development plan. 
(b)  PD site plans. PD site plans are not considered part of a PD ordinance. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, any amendment to an approved PD site plan must be approved by the commission. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, "minor modifications" to any PD site plan may be approved by the planning director. If the planning director believes that a request for minor modification entails a significant change in the site plan, he may refer the request to the commission for determination. A "minor modification" to a PD site plan is defined as any modification that does not: 
(1)  Alter the basic relationship of proposed development to adjacent property; 
(2)  Change the uses permitted; 
(3)  Increase the maximum density, floor area, or height; 
(4)  Decrease the amount of off-street parking, unless parking remains sufficient in number and conforms to ordinance requirements; or 
(5)  Reduce the minimum yards or setbacks.  
Sec. 23-3.19.10. - Lapse of approval in PD districts. 
(a)  Lapse of plans. In a PD district, progress toward development of an approved project shall occur within the following time periods: 
(1)  Failure to submit development plan. A development plan, where required, shall be submitted for approval within two (2) years of the date of establishment of the PD district, unless otherwise provided in the adopting ordinance. If a development plan for all or a portion of the project is not submitted within such period, or if the application for the development plan subsequently is denied, the authority to submit such development plan and all subsequent plans shall expire. 
(2)  Failure to submit subsequent development plan. If the project is to be developed in phases, a subsequent development plan shall be submitted within two (2) years from the date of approval of a development plan for the preceding phase, continuing at such intervals until a development plan has been approved for all phases of the PD. If a subsequent development plan is not submitted the applicable period or if the application for the subsequent development plan is denied, authorization to submit such development plan for that portion of the property or other subsequent development plans for the property shall expire. 
(3)  Failure to submit site plan. A site plan shall be submitted for approval within one (1) year from approval of the applicable development plan, or, if no development plan is required, within two (2) years of the date of establishment of the PD district. If a site plan is not submitted within such period, and following any extensions that may be granted, or if the site plan application subsequently is denied or expires, authorization to submit a site plan shall expire. If no development plan is required and the project is to be developed in phases, then subsequent site plans shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions for submittal of development plans and subject to suspension of authorization to submit further site plans, in accordance with subsection (2). 
(4)  Lapse of site plan and extension. If a building permit for an authorized use has not been obtained within one (1) year from the date of approval of a site plan, the site plan shall lapse and no application for a site plan or building permit shall be accepted for filing thereafter. The property owner, however, may submit a request for extension of the site plan at least sixty (60) days prior to expiration of such plan, setting forth the reasons why an extension should be granted. The planning and zoning commission thereafter shall schedule a public hearing to consider such request and shall determine whether to extend the site plan, subject to a right of appeal to the city council. In no case shall the site plan be extended for a period in excess of two (2) years. 
(5)  Stay of procedures. Upon expiration of any of the time limits for any step in the planned development process set forth in this section, an application for the development plan or site plan, as the case may be, shall not be accepted for filing or further processed, pending the outcome of the procedures set forth in subsections (b) through (d). 
(b)  Planning & zoning commission recommendation. Following expiration of the right to submit a development plan or site plan, the planning and zoning commission shall consider whether the undeveloped land within PD district should be changed to another classification. Notice and conduct of the hearing shall be in accordance with procedures for a zoning amendment pursuant to division 2.3. The commission thereafter shall recommend to the city council whether the right to submit a development plan or site plan should be reinstated, or whether the property should be zoned to another classification. 
(c)  Council consideration. The commission's recommendation shall be referred to the city council for consideration in accordance with procedures applicable to zoning amendments in division 2.3. The council shall determine whether the right to submit the development plan or site plan should be reinstated, or whether the property should be rezoned to another classification. In making such determination, the council shall consider, at a minimum, the following factors: 
(1)  Whether the PD district remains consistent with the comprehensive plan; 
(2)  Whether the uses authorized in the PD district are compatible with existing and planned land uses adjacent to the site; 
(3)  Whether there are extenuating circumstances justifying the failure to submit a development plan or site plan during the applicable time period; and 
(4)  Whether rezoning the property to another classification constitutes confiscation of a vested property right or deprives the owner of the economically viable use of the land. 
(d)  Council action. The city council may take the following actions: 
(1)  Reinstate the right to submit the applicable development plan or site plan within a time certain, subject to any conditions that may be appropriate to ensure that significant progress will be made toward development of the project; 
(2)  Modify the PD district regulations applicable to the property; or 
(3)  Repeal the PD district for the affected portions of the property and zone such property to another zoning district classification. 
(Ord. No. 2005-250, § 5, 8-30-05)  
Sec. 23-3.19.11. - Effect on prior PD districts. 
This chapter amends any PD district established under Article XI-C, Ordinance No. 85-777, or any predecessor ordinance, as follows: 
(a)  PD district provisions to remain in effect. The provisions of the PD districts established by the ordinances appearing in Appendix A, which is incorporated herein by reference, together with Sections 3 and 4 of Article XI-C, Ordinance No. 85-777 as amended, shall remain in effect, except as may be expressly superseded by regulations in subsection (b), for the following purposes: 
(1)  To govern solely enforcement of development standards or conditions pertaining to any lot or tract within the PD district for which a use has been established and which standards or conditions are made applicable to such use by the ordinance establishing the PD district or valid amendment thereto; 
(2)  To govern solely the re-establishment of such use following destruction; 
(3)  To govern standards for approval of any plats accepted for filing after June 22, 1999, and the establishment of uses subject to and consistent with such approved plats, provided that the project associated with such plats has not terminated by operation of law. 
(4)  For purposes of this section a use authorized under a prior approved PD district shall be deemed established if an application for a building permit has been accepted for filing prior to the effective date of these zoning district regulations, the application is subsequently approved and construction is completed consistent with the approved building permit. 
(b)  Rules applicable to all existing PD districts. Notwithstanding section 23-3.19.11(a) above, development authorized within a PD district existing on the effective date of these zoning regulations shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Landscaping and screening requirements as set forth in division 5.2 and 5.3; 
(2)  Supplemental regulations as set forth in division 5.4; 
(3)  Performance standards and standards governing lighting and glare, as set forth in divisions 5.5 and 5.6; and 
(4)  Exterior construction requirements as set forth in division 5.7.  
Sec. 23-3.19.12. - Planned development combining district. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the planned development combining (PDC) district is to assure the consistency of the official zoning map with the future land use map of the adopted comprehensive plan, while providing for the development of land formerly classified as a planned development district under Ordinance No. 85-777, as amended, or a predecessor ordinance, in accordance with some or all of the standards and conditions contained within the ordinance establishing such prior district, in the event that development under base district regulations is determined by the city council to be confiscatory or inequitable. 
(b)  Repealed PD ordinances. For any PD district or portion thereof that has been reclassified as a planned development combining district on the zoning district map for these zoning regulations, the ordinance establishing the PD district with respect to such land hereby is repealed, and shall have no further force and effect, except to the extent that such provisions are incorporated within the planned development combining district pursuant to this section 23-3.19.12. All development within such former PD district or portion thereof as may occur thereafter shall be governed by the regulations for such planned development combining district, until such classification shall be changed in accordance with procedures for zoning map amendments. A list of ordinances creating PD districts which are repealed in whole or in part appears as Appendix B to these zoning regulations and is incorporated herein by reference. 
(c)  Nature of district and uses authorized. 
(1)  The planned development combining (PDC) district is an overlay district that combines with one (1) or more base districts established by these zoning regulations. The PDC district incorporates the uses, standards and conditions established under a planned development district created pursuant to Ord. No. 85-777, as amended, or a predecessor ordinance. The boundaries of each PDC district shall be mapped on the city's official zoning map, which shall show the base district(s) and the number of the ordinance creating the PD district. 
(2)  A list of the ordinances establishing former PD districts which have been reclassified in whole or in part as a planned development combining district appears as Appendix B to this chapter and is incorporated herein by reference. When more than one (1) PDC district has been mapped for a single PD district, such districts are designated in Appendix B by a suffix following the PD district number. 
(3)  The authorization to develop land within a PDC district in accordance with prior use regulations and development standards in contravention of base district regulations arises only upon approval of a vested rights petition by the city council in accordance with the procedures and standards in section 23-3.19.12(d) In all other circumstances, the uses authorized and the standards for development shall be those of the base district. 
(4)  In the event that a PDC district is deemed void by order of any court, it is the intent of this section that the land shall remain classified as the base district(s) on the city's zoning map and that the uses authorized and the standards for development for the land subject to the overlay district shall be those solely of the base district with which it was combined. 
(d)  Procedures. 
(1)  Vested rights petition required. Except for uses authorized and consistent with the development standards in the base district, no application for site plans or plat approval shall be accepted for filing for development within a planned development combining district until a petition for a determination of vested rights has been filed in accordance with this section. 
(2)  Application for vested rights determination. An owner of land within a planned development combining district may petition the city council for a vested rights determination and other relief under this subsection (d). The petition must be filed either in conjunction with the submission of a complete application for approval of a preliminary plat, final plat, or any other permit for development of all or a portion of the land within the district, or in conjunction with the filing of a development plan prepared in accordance with section 3.19.7, depicting development of the remaining undeveloped land within the district. The plat or development plan shall be consistent with the approved land uses, standards and conditions set forth in the ordinance and associated land use plan establishing the prior PD district listed in Appendix B. 
(3)  Time for petition. In either event, the petition for the vested rights determination and accompanying plats or plans must be filed with the planning director in writing within six (6) months of the effective date of these 2000 zoning regulations. The petition for a vested rights determination shall be accompanied by an unconditional waiver of any claim that the plat application or other application has not been processed in accordance with any time limits established by law. Applications that are inconsistent with the approved land use plan for the prior PD district shall be returned to the applicant as incomplete. 
(4)  Consideration by council. 
a.  The petition for a vested rights determination shall be considered by the city council within a reasonable time after the petition is received. The city council shall not authorize development in accordance with the prior PD district regulations unless the applicant first presents credible evidence from which the city council can reasonably conclude that the application of all or a part of the standards in the base district will deprive the applicant of a vested right or of the economically viable use of his land. 
b.  The city council also may consider any proposal by the petitioner to rezone the land subject to the planned development combining district, provided that such application is processed as an amendment to the zoning map in accordance with the procedures in division 2.3. 
(5)  Criteria. In deciding whether to grant relief to the applicant, the city council shall take into consideration any evidence presented on the following factors: 
a.  The nature and extent of prior applications filed or approved within the prior PD district; 
b.  Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the application or the property within the prior PD district; 
c.  Whether any prior approvals of applications granted by the city within the prior PD district have been terminated in accordance with law; 
d.  Whether specific standards to be applied under base district regulations affect lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size. 
e.  The nature and intensity of the uses allowed under the base district; 
f.  Whether such provisions allow an economically viable use of the land; 
g.  The degree to which the property owner may be damaged by the application of the standards contained in the base district; 
h.  The total expenditures made in connection with the proposed development in reasonable reliance on prior PD regulations; 
i.  Any fees reasonably paid in connection with the proposed development; 
j.  Any representations made by the city concerning the project and reasonably relied upon to the detriment of the applicant; 
k.  The extent to which the owner of the property had actual or constructive notice of proposed changes to the zoning regulations. 
6.  Action by city council. The city council may take the following actions: 
a.  Deny the request for relief, and direct that development of the land within the district included in the petition thereafter be in accordance with the uses and the standards authorized in the base district; 
b.  Grant the relief requested, and direct that the application be processed and evaluated in accordance with the regulations contained in the prior PD district as incorporated by the PDC district; 
c.  Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that some of the land within the district included in the petition thereafter be developed in accordance with the uses and standards authorized in the base district, and that the remainder of such land be developed in accordance with the regulations contained in the prior PD district as incorporated by the PDC district. 
(7)  Waiver. 
a.  A vested rights determination granted under this section shall expire, and all claims pertaining to vested rights or loss of economically viable use shall be deemed waived, forfeited and void, if any of the following conditions should occur: 
(1)  A complete application for approval of a plat or other permit, consistent with the city council's determination, is not filed within thirty (30) days of the date of such determination; or 
(2)  The application subsequently is denied for failure to comply with regulations governing the plat or permit; or 
(3)  Approval of the application has expired. 
b.  Following waiver of a vested rights determination, the only uses authorized and the only standards governing development within the combining district thereafter shall be those of the base district and any other standards imposed generally by these zoning regulations. 
(e)  Effect of action on petition. If the city council grants the relief requested in the petition for a vested rights determination in whole or in part, development within the planned development combining district shall thereafter be consistent with the uses authorized and the standards and conditions made applicable to the proposed project for the land subject to the petition. Relief granted pursuant to this section shall not be deemed approval of the plat, development plan or other application submitted, but as authorization to submit such plan for approval in accordance with procedures applicable to the type of application submitted. If relief is denied, uses authorized and standards governing development within the district for such land shall be solely those of the base district and any other standards imposed generally by these zoning regulations. 
(f)  Effect of failure to petition. If a property owner within a planned development combining district fails to petition for a vested rights determination within the time prescribed by subsection (d), the right to submit such petition expires and the only uses authorized and the only standards governing development within the combining district thereafter shall be those of the base district and any other standards imposed generally by these zoning regulations. 
(g)  Removal of overlay district. The city council or the planning and zoning commission on its own initiative may seek to remove the planned development combining district from the zoning map in accordance with the procedures for zoning amendments in division 2.3 on occurrence of any of the following events: 
(1)  The property owner within the planned development combining district fails to petition for a vested rights determination within the time prescribed by subsection (d); or 
(2)  The relief sought upon petition of the property owner pursuant to this section is denied by the city council; or 
(3)  A vested rights determination is waived by the property owner in the manner provided in subsection (d).  
DIVISION 3.20. - CUP—CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT 
 
Sec. 23-3.20.1. - Purpose. 
(a)  Nature of conditional use. A conditional use is a land use which, because of its unique nature, is compatible with the permitted land uses in a given zoning district only upon a determination that the external effects of the use in relation to the existing and planned uses of adjoining property and the neighborhood can be mitigated through imposition of standards and conditions. This Section sets forth the standards used to evaluate proposed conditional uses and the procedures for approving conditional use permit (CUP) applications. 
(b)  Permit required. No conditional use shall be established and no building permit shall be issued for any use designated as a conditional use within a zoning district until a conditional use permit is issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. An application for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared in the manner described in division 2.6. The site plan shall illustrate the proposed use to be established, its relationship to adjoining properties, and how it meets the approval standards set forth in section 23-3.20.5.  
Sec. 23-3.20.2. - Status of conditionally permitted uses. 
The following general rules apply to all conditional uses: 
(a)  The designation of a use in a zoning district (see section 23-4.1.2) as a conditional use does not constitute an authorization or assurance that such use will be approved. 
(b)  Approval of a conditional use permit shall authorize only the particular use for which the CUP is issued. 
(c)  No use authorized by a conditional use permit shall be enlarged, extended or relocated, nor may the number of dwelling units be increased, unless an application is made for approval of a new conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. 
(d)  Development of the use shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all the permits and approvals required by these zoning regulations, the City's Code of Ordinances, or any permits required by regional, state and federal agencies.  
Sec. 23-3.20.3. - Application for conditional use permit. 
(a)  Application requirements. An application for a conditional use permit may be submitted by the property owner or by the property owner's designated representative to the city. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of division 2.6. If a zoning amendment is required to authorize the use or as application is pending, the application for a conditional use permit shall not be considered complete unless accompanied by a copy of the approved zoning ordinance or amendment. 
(b)  Subdivision approval. If the proposed use requires a division of land, an application for subdivision approval shall be submitted in conjunction with the application for a conditional use permit. Approval of the conditional use permit shall not become effective until final approval of the subdivision application; provided that if the land is to be divided in phases, the approval of the conditional use permit shall take effect upon final approval of the phase of the subdivision containing the property on which the conditional use is to be located.  
Sec. 23-3.20.4. - Procedures for conditional use permits. 
(a)  Planning and zoning commission recommendation. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the planning director, the planning and zoning commission shall conduct a public hearing in order to formulate its recommendations to the city council on the conditional use permit application. Following the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall recommend approval, approval subject to modification, or denial of the proposal to the city council in accordance with division 2.3. If the appropriateness of the use cannot be assured at the location, the planning and zoning commission shall recommend denial of the application as being incompatible with existing uses or with other uses permitted by right in the district. 
(b)  City council action. The city council shall be the final decision-maker on applications for conditional use permits. Following a public hearing and in consideration of the planning and zoning commission's recommendations, the city council shall approve, modify or deny the proposal for a conditional use permit in accordance with division 2.3. If the appropriateness of the use cannot be assured at the location, the application for conditional use permit shall be denied as being incompatible with existing uses or with other uses permitted by right in the district.  
Sec. 23-3.20.5. - Standards. 
(a)  Factors for consideration. When considering applications for a conditional use permit, the planning and zoning commission in making its recommendation and the city council in rendering its decision on the application shall, on the basis of the site plan and other information submitted, evaluate the impact of the conditional use on, and the compatibility of the use with, surrounding properties and neighborhoods to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location. The planning and zoning commission and the city council shall specifically consider the extent to which: 
(1)  The proposed use at the specified location is consistent with the policies embodied in the adopted comprehensive plan; 
(2)  The proposed use is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district regulations; 
(3)  The proposed use meets all supplemental standards specifically applicable to the use as established in the development standards, divisions 5.1 through 5.7; 
(4)  The proposed use is compatible with and preserves the character and integrity of adjacent development and neighborhoods and, as required by the particular circumstances, includes improvements or modifications either on-site or within the public rights-of-way to mitigate development-related adverse impacts, including but not limited to: 
a.  Adequate ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to vehicular and pedestrian safety and convenience, and access in case of fire; 
b.  Off-street parking areas, loading areas, and pavement type; 
c.  Refuse and service areas; 
d.  Utilities with reference to location, availability, and compatibility; 
e.  Screening and buffering, features to minimize visual impacts, and/or set-backs from adjacent uses; 
f.  Control of signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district; 
g.  Required yards and open space; 
h.  Height and bulk of structures; 
i.  Hours of operation; 
j.  Exterior construction material, building design, and building facade treatment; 
k.  Roadway adjustments, traffic control devices or mechanisms, and access restrictions to control traffic flow or divert traffic as may be needed to reduce or eliminate development-generated traffic on neighborhood streets; 
l.  Provision for pedestrian access/amenities/areas; 
m.  Impervious coverage percentage; and 
n.  Concentration of, or distance from, similar uses. 
(5)  The proposed use is not materially detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience and welfare, or results in material damage or prejudice to other property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Conditions. In approving the application, the commission may recommend and the city council shall impose such conditions as are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with these standards and the purpose and intent of this section, in accordance with the procedures in division 2.3. Any conditions imposed shall be set forth in the action approving the conditional use and shall be incorporated into or noted on the site plan for final approval. The director shall verify that the plan incorporates all conditions, and shall sign the plan to indicate final approval. The city shall maintain a record of such approved conditional uses and the site plans and conditions attached thereto. 
(1)  Prohibition on waivers and variances. 
a.  The foregoing standards of development shall not be subject to variances that otherwise could be granted by the zoning board of adjustments (ZBA), nor may conditions imposed by the city council subsequently be waived or varied by the ZBA. In conformity with the authority of the city council to authorize conditional uses, the city council may waive or modify specific standards otherwise made applicable to the use by this chapter, to secure the general objectives of this section; provided, however, that the city council shall not waive or modify any approval factor set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
b.  The conditional use permit application shall conform to the base district in which the use is located, including any variance that may have been granted by the zoning board of adjustments pursuant to division 2.2 
(Ord. No. 2008-345, § 6, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2020-699 , § 8, 6-9-20)  
Sec. 23-3.20.6. - Expiration and termination of conditional use permits. 
(a)  If a certificate of occupancy has not been issued within one (1) year of the approval of a conditional use permit, then the conditional use permit shall expire. The planning director may extend the expiration time up to an additional one (1) year if a building permit has been issued for new construction on the premises. Thereafter, a new conditional use permit must be approved prior to development of the use under standards then in effect. 
(b)  If a use approved by conditional use permit is abandoned for a period of one (1) year, then the conditional use permit and all associated site plans shall be deemed to have expired. Thereafter, a new conditional use permit must be approved prior to development of the use under standards then in effect. 
(c)  If a use approved by conditional use permit exceeds the standards and conditions established under the permit, the city may enforce the terms of the permit in accordance with article 6, or the city council may by majority vote revoke the permit following notice to the owner and public hearing in accordance with procedures for appeals to the board of adjustment as set forth in section 23-2.2.6. 
(Ord. No. 2019-669, § 1, 3-26-19)  
Sec. 23-3.20.7. - Amendment. 
No proposed or existing building, premise or land use authorized as a conditional use may be established, enlarged, modified, structurally altered, or otherwise changed from that approved in the conditional use permit, unless such amendment is authorized in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in this Ordinance, and the conditional use permit and approved site plan are amended accordingly.  
Sec. 23-3.20.8. - Other regulations. 
The zoning board of adjustments shall not have jurisdiction to hear, review, reverse, or modify any decision, determination, or ruling with respect to the specific land use designated by any conditional use permit.  
Sec. 23-3.20.9. - Use regulations. 
Uses allowed by CUP are specified in section 23-4.1.2 (Use Charts).  
Sec. 23-3.20.10. - Effect on special uses. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this Section that zoning districts authorizing special uses under Ordinance No. 85-777, as amended, be repealed, and that established special uses be authorized either as permitted, nonconforming or conditional uses under these zoning regulations. It is the further intent of this section that any standards or conditions attached to such approved special uses remain in effect for purposes of enforcement. 
(b)  Repeal of zoning districts authorizing special uses. 
(1)  Any ordinance establishing a zoning district that authorizes a special use pursuant to Ord. No. 85-877, article XIII, as amended, hereby is repealed, and shall have no further force and effect, except that the standards and conditions governing such authorized special use shall remain in effect for such purpose and hereby are incorporated by reference for purposes of enforcement. A list of ordinances creating districts authorizing special uses which are repealed appears as Appendix C to these zoning regulations, and is incorporated herein by reference. 
(2)  All new development within such former special use zoning district as may occur following repeal shall be governed by these zoning regulations pursuant to the standards for the zoning district in which such proposed development is to be located; provided, however, that established uses for which construction has not been completed shall be governed by the standards and conditions adopted in the ordinance creating the special use district. 
(c)  Authorization as permitted, conditional or nonconforming use. 
(1)  Authorized permitted use. Whenever an established special use authorized under Ordinance No. 85-777, as amended, is identified either as a permitted use or a conditional use under division 4.1 of these zoning regulations for the zoning district in which the use is located, the use shall be classified hereafter as a use permitted of right within the district, and shall conform to the regulations of the district, except to the extent that the standards and conditions governing the former special use are in conflict with the district regulations. In such event, such standards and conditions shall take precedence over those for the district with respect to the former special use. To the extent that such standards and conditions render a structure or lot non-conforming, such nonconformity shall be deemed lawful, and the provisions of division 2.5 of these zoning district regulations shall apply. 
(2)  Lawful nonconforming use. Whenever an established special use authorized under Ordinance No. 85-777, as amended, is identified neither as a permitted nor a conditional use under division 4.1 of these zoning district regulations for the zoning district in which the use is located, the use shall be deemed hereafter to be a lawful nonconforming use within the district, and shall be subject to the provisions of division 2.5 of these zoning district regulations. The standards and conditions governing the former special use shall continue to apply to such use, and shall be deemed lawful non-conformities. 
(3)  Established use. For purposes of this Section a special use authorized under a prior approved special use permit (SUP) district shall be deemed established if, on the effective date of these zoning regulations, the special use permit has not expired, as provided in Article XIII, Ord. No. 88-877, as amended. In order to maintain status as an established special use, a building permit subsequently shall be approved and construction shall be completed consistent with such approved building permit. If the special use permit expires pursuant to Article XIII, Ord. No. 88-877, as amended, a building is not obtained, or construction is not completed consistent with the permit, the special use shall be considered abandoned. 
(4)  Termination or modification of use. If the former special use authorized under this section as a permitted, conditional or lawful nonconforming use is abandoned, lawfully terminated or destroyed, or is otherwise modified in a manner inconsistent with the standards and conditions governing the use under Ordinance No. 85-777, as amended, the provisions of division 2.5 governing abandonment of nonconforming uses and restoration of nonconforming structures shall apply.  
Sec. 23-3.20.11. - Change in status of permitted use. 
Whenever a use classified as a permitted use under zoning district regulations in effect immediately prior to the effective date of these zoning regulations is classified as a conditional use under the zoning district regulations in which the property is located on the approved zoning map, the use shall be treated as a non-conforming use subject to the provisions of division 2.5, unless the applicant obtains approval of a conditional use permit under this division 3.20.  
DIVISION 3.21. - HP—HIGH POINTE OVERLAY DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 23-3.21.1. - Purpose. 
There hereby is established a High Pointe (HP) overlay district. The High Pointe overlay district is intended to combine with one (1) or more planned development districts or planned development combining districts established by this comprehensive zoning ordinance. The districts with which the High Pointe overlay district combines are identified in Appendix D, which is incorporated by reference herein. The purpose of the district is to provide standards for landscaping, screening and buffering of new land uses to be developed within the district.  
Sec. 23-3.21.2. - Uses and development standards. 
The land uses authorized within the High Pointe overlay district and the standards applicable to development within the district shall be those of the underlying planned development district or planned development combining district, except as provided in section 3.21.3 below.  
Sec. 23-3.21.3. - Additional landscaping, screening and buffering standards incorporated. 
The additional landscaping, screening and buffering standards which appear in Appendix D of this comprehensive zoning ordinance shall apply to new development of land within the High Pointe overlay district, as stated and limited by the provisions contained in Appendix D.  
ARTICLE 4. - USE REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 4.1. - USE REGULATIONS (CHARTS) 
 
Sec. 23-4.1.1. - Use regulations (Charts). 
(a)  The use of land or buildings shall be in accordance with those listed in the following use charts. No land or building shall hereafter be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, or converted other than for those uses specified in the zoning district in which it is located. No use permitted in the use charts shall permit a sexually oriented land use except for those permitted uses specifically defined as sexually oriented uses under section 23-4.1.7 sexually oriented businesses of the zoning ordinance. The legend for interpreting the permitted uses in the use charts is: 
 
Designates use permitted in the zoning district indicated. 
 
Designates use prohibited (i.e., not allowed) in the zoning district indicated. 
 
Designates use may be permitted in the zoning district indicated by Conditional Use Permit (also see Section 3.20). 
 
Designates nonconforming uses which may be replaced if destroyed. 
 
Means "not applicable", and that there is no parking requirement. 
 
See definitions in division 5.8 of the zoning ordinance for further description of uses. 
(b)  If a use is not listed (or blank) in the use charts, it is not allowed in any zoning district (see subsection (d) below). 
(c)  Use chart organization. The following use categories are listed in the use charts: 
(1)  Agricultural uses. 
(2)  Residential uses. 
(3)  Office uses. 
(4)  Personal and business service uses. 
(5)  Retail uses. 
(6)  Transportation and auto service uses. 
(7)  Amusement and recreational service uses. 
(8)  Institutional/governmental uses. 
(9)  Commercial and wholesale trade uses. 
(10)  Manufacturing, industrial and construction uses. 
(d)  Classification of new/unlisted uses. It is recognized that new types of land use will develop, and forms of land use not presently anticipated may seek to locate in the City of Cedar Hill. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use in the use charts (section 23-4.1.2) shall be made as follows: 
(1)  Initiation: 
a.  A person, city department, the planning and zoning commission, or the city council may propose zoning amendments to regulate new and previously unlisted uses. 
b.  A person requesting the addition of a new or unlisted use (in writing) shall submit to the planning director or his/her designee, all information necessary for the classification of the use, including but not limited to: 
(1)  The nature of the use and whether the use involves dwelling activity, sales, services, or processing; 
(2)  The type of product sold or produced under the use; 
(3)  Whether the use has enclosed or open storage and the amount and nature of the storage; 
(4)  Anticipated employment typically anticipated with the use; 
(5)  Transportation requirements; 
(6)  The nature and time of occupancy and operation of the premises; 
(7)  The off-street parking and loading requirements; 
(8)  The amount of noise, odor, fumes, dust, toxic materials and vibration likely to be generated 
(9)  The requirements for public utilities such as sanitary sewer and water and any special public services that may be required; and 
(10)  Impervious coverage percentage. 
(2)  The planning director, or his/her designee, shall refer the question concerning any new or unlisted use to the planning and zoning commission requesting a recommendation as to the zoning classification into which such use should be placed. The referral of the use interpretation question shall be accompanied by the statement of facts in subsection (d)(1)b. above. An amendment to this chapter shall be required as prescribed by division 2.3. 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and determine the zoning district or districts within which such use is most similar and should be permitted. 
(4)  The planning and zoning commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the city council as to the classification proposed for any new or unlisted use. The city council shall approve or disapprove the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission or make such determination concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate based upon its findings. If approved, the new or unlisted use shall be amended in the use charts of the zoning ordinance according to division 2.3 (i.e., following notification and public hearing, etc.). 
(5)  Standards for new and unlisted uses may be interpreted by the planning director, or his/her designee, as those of a similar use. When a determination of the appropriate zoning district cannot be readily ascertained, the same criteria outlined above (subsection (d)(1)b.) shall be followed for determination of the appropriate district. The decision of the planning director, or his/her designee, may be appealed according to the process outlined in subsections (d)(2) through (d)(4) above. 
(e)  Temporary uses. The following uses shall be authorized in any district as temporary uses, upon issuance of a temporary use permit by the building official, subject to the standards contained in this section. The duration of the permit shall not exceed thirty (30) days. In the event the applicant seeks to establish a temporary use for a longer period, he shall make application to the city council, which, upon recommendation of the building official and in accordance with the standards of this section, may authorize the use for a period of not to exceed six (6) months. In granting the permit, the council may impose such reasonable conditions, including conditions related to the factors enumerated in section 23-3.20.5(a)(4) (conditional use permit standards) as necessary to assure compatibility of the temporary use with adjacent uses and the character of the neighborhood. 
(1)  The following uses are authorized as temporary uses: 
a.  Carnivals, 
b.  Circus, 
c.  Fairgrounds, 
d.  Religious assemblies, 
e.  Sports events, 
f.  Political rallies, 
g.  Concrete mixing or batching plant used temporarily by contractors during construction of public improvements or buildings, and in such cases, the period of time provided in the contract for completion of such improvement for building, 
h.  Armed forces displays, 
i.  Educational display, and 
j.  Temporary sales of merchandise by non-profit organizations and existing businesses. 
(2)  The following standards and regulations apply to temporary uses: 
a.  A temporary use shall not be permitted nearer than one hundred (100) feet to a developed lot zoned for residential use. 
b.  A permit for the temporary use of any property for the above listed uses shall be secured from the code enforcement department prior to such use. 
c.  Use of a parcel of property for any of the above listed uses at any time on any day shall constitute a day's use. Use of a parcel of property for any of the above listed uses for more than thirty (30) days except of concrete mixing or batching plants, during any one (1) year shall constitute a permanent use and such parcel of property shall automatically again be subject to the district regulations of the zoning district in which such parcel of property is located. 
d.  Upon application being made therefore, the council may, by conditional use permit, approve the use of any property for the foregoing temporary uses or any other use not to exceed six (6) months, under such conditions and restrictions as the city council shall determine. 
e.  Temporary Buildings, when they are to be used only by a church or school, shall be permitted by the building official for a time period of not more than one (1) year. After the initial one (1) year lapses, application of extension shall be submitted to the city council. Temporary buildings for churches or schools are exempt from any zoning district masonry requirement. 
(f)  Parking group. The parking group number on the use charts (section 23-4.1.2) are reference numbers which correspond to section 23-5.1.6 (schedule of parking space requirements). Refer to the applicable parking group number in section 23-5.1.6 to determine the required number of parking spaces for a particular land use. Two (2) parking group reference numbers mean that both are required. 
(g)  Supplemental regulations. The supplemental regulations column on the use chart (section 23-4.1.2) gives reference to additional portions of the zoning ordinance which are applicable to that particular use. The sectional citations in this column are intended for reference and convenience purposes only, and are not intended to be exhaustive in listing every zoning ordinance section which applies to the use category. It is the applicant's responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply with, all portions of the zoning ordinance which apply to his intended land use or development regardless of whether or not such applicable regulations are cited in the use chart. 
(Ord. No. 2010-418, § 2, 9-14-10)  
Sec. 23-4.1.2. - Use charts. 
P - Designates use is permitted within district 	E - Designates nonconforming uses which may be replaced if destroyed. 
  - Designates use prohibited in district indicated 	N/A - Means "not applicable", no parking requirement. 
C - Designates use may be approved as conditional use permit. 
* - See section for definition. 
Authorized Uses 	Residential Districts 	Nonresidential Districts 	Parking Group 	Supplemental Regulations 
	RR 	SF-E 	SF-22 	SF-15 	SF-10 	SF-8.5 	SF-7 	TH 	MF 	NS 	LR 	OT 	CC 	C 	IP 	I 	Section 5.1.6 	Section 
AGRICULTURE 																		
Bulk grain and/or feed storage 	P 													P 		P 	15 	
Farms, general (crops)* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Farms, general (livestock/ranch)* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Forestry and tree harvesting* 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
Greenhouse (non-retail/hobby) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Hay, grain, and/or feed sales 	C 													P 		P 	10 	
Livestock sales 	P 															P 	10 	
Orchard/crop propagation 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Plant nursery 											C 			P 	P 	P 	15 	
Stables (as a business) 	C 													P 		P 	15 	
Stables (private, accessory use)* 	P 	P 															NA 	
Stables (private, principal use)* 	P 																NA 	
RESIDENTIAL 																		
Accessory building/structure (residential)* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 								NA 	23-4.1.3 
Accessory building/structure (nonresidential) 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Caretaker's/guard's residence* 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 				C 	C 	C 	C 	2 	
College dormitory (on-campus) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	1 	
Community home* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 								1 	
Family home adult care 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 								27 	
Fraternity/sorority house 								C 	P 	C 							1 	
Four family (quadraplex) 									P 								3 	
Garage accessory dwelling* 							C 	C 									2 	
Home based business/home occupation* 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 					26 	23-4.1.5 
Multi-family (apartments) 									P 			C 					3 	
Rooming/boarding house* 								C 	P 			C 					25 	
Single-family detached* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 					4 	
Single-family HUD Code-manufactured home* 																C 	3 	
Single-family industrialized home* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 								3 	
Single-family townhouse (attached)* 								P 	P 			C 					5 	
Single-family zero-lot line (patio home)* 												C 					5 	
Solar panel system (accessory use) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		4.1.10 
Solar panel system (primary use) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		4.1.10 
Swimming pool (private)* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 					NA 	
Three family (triplex) 									P 			C 					3 	
Travel trailer/RV park/MH subdivision* 																C 	1 	
Two-family (duplex)* 							E 	E 									5 	
Retail/residential* 												C 					26 	
Armed services recruiting center 										P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	10 	
Check cashing service 											P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	
Credit agency 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	P 	C 	C 	C 	C 	10 	4.1.11 
OFFICE 																		
Insurance agency offices 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	
Offices (brokerage services) 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	
Offices (counseling services) 										P 	P 	P 		P 			8 	
Offices (health services) 										P 	P 	P 	P 				8 	
Offices (legal services) 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	
Offices (medical office) 										P 	P 	P 	P 				8 	
Offices (professional) 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	
Offices (parole-probation)* 																		
Real estate offices 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			10 	
Telemarketing or E-Commerce agency 											C 		P 	P 	P 	P 	7 	
PERSONAL AND BUSINESS SERVICES 																		
Appliance repair 										C 	P 	C 		P 	P 	P 	10 	
Artist studio 										P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	10 	
Ambulance service* 											P 			P 	P 	P 	10 & 35 	
Animal boarding and kennels (indoor only)* 										C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	23-5.4.13(a) 
Animal and kennels (indoor/outdoor kennels/pens)* 														P 	C 	C 	io 	23-5.4.13(b) 
Auction (indoors) 											P 	P 		P 		P 	28 	
Audio recording studio 										C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	7 	
Audio recording studio retreat* 	C 	C 															4 & 7 	23-4.1.8 
Automobile driving school 											P 			P 	P 	P 	10 & 35 	
Automatic teller machines (ATM's) kiosk* 										P 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	23-5.1.3(k) 
Bank* 										C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	8 	23-5.1.3(k) 
Barber shop (non-college) 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	8 	
Beauty shop (non-college) 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	8 	
Bed & breakfast hotel* 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	25 	
Communication equipment (installation and/or repair - no outdoor sales or storage) 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	
Computer sales 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	8 	
Credit access business 											C 		C 	C 	C 	C 	10 	4.1.11 
Crematoriums* 																C 	15 	
Dance/drama/music schools (performing arts) 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	7 	
Extended stay hotels/motels* (residence hotels) 												C 	C 	P 	C 	C 	25 	
Exterminator service (no outdoor sales or storage) 											P 			P 	P 	P 	8 	
Exterminator service (storage) 											C 			P 	P 	P 	8 	
Funeral home or mortuary* 											C 	C 		P 	C 	C 	8 & 29 	
Hotel/motel* 											C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	25 	
Karate school/studio (martial arts) 											P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	28 & 8 	
Kiosk (providing a service)* 											P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	8 	
Laundry/dry cleaning (drop off/pick up)* 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	33 	23-5.1.3(k) 
Laundry/dry cleaning (greater than 3,000 s.f.) 														P 	P 	P 	10 	23-5.1.3(k) 
Laundry/dry cleaning (less than 3,000 s.f.)* 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	12 	23-5.1.3(k) 
Laundry/dry cleaning (self-service) 										P 	P 			P 	P 	P 	8 	
Lawn - Landscaping maintenance service - No outdoor storage* 											C 			P 	P 	P 	12 	23-5.1.4(f) 
Locksmith 										P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	8 	
Massage therapy (state licensed) 										P 	P 	P 	P 				8 	
Mini-warehouse/self storage* 											C 			C 	C 	C 	38 & 39 	
Photo studio 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	8 	
Photocopying/duplicating 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	8 	
Security quarters as associated with a business (live-in)* 											C 		C 	C 	C 	C 	1 	
Sexually oriented business* 																P 	10 	23-5.4.7 
Shoe repair 										P 	P 	P 		P 			10 	
Studio for radio or television (without tower)* 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	23 	
Tailor shop 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			10 	
Tool rental (indoor storage)* 											C 			P 	P 	P 	10 	
Tool rental (outdoor storage)* 														P 		P 	10 	
Travel agency 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	8 	
Truck/heavy equipment driving school 														P 	P 	P 	36 	23-5.1.4(f) 
RETAIL 																		
Animal humane society (private) 														P 			8 	
All-terrain vehicle (go-carts) dealer/sales only 											C 				P 	C 	8 	
Aquarium (retail only) 											P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	9 	
Art dealer 										P 	P 	P 		P 			8 	
Auto, truck, trailer dealer (primarily new/used) 											C 			C 		C 	12 & 16 	
Auto, truck, trailer dealer (primarily used) 														C 		C 	12 & 16 	
Auto supply store for new & rebuilt parts* 											P 			P 	P 	P 	12 & 18 	
Bait and tackle shop 											C 	C 		P 			8 	
Bike sales and/or repair 											P 	P 		P 			12 & 16 	
Boat dealer/sales only 														C 		C 	12 & 16 	
Cabinet shop (manufacturing) 														P 	P 	P 	8 	
Consignment shop 										P 	P 	P 					8 	
Convenience Store 										C 	C 	C 		P 	P 	P 	8 	
Drapery shop 											P 	C 		P 			8 	
Drug Store 										C 	P 	P 		P 			8 	
Farmers market 												P 		P 	P 	P 		
Florist shop* 										P 	P 	P 		P 			8 	
Furniture sales (indoor)* 											P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	10 	
Garden shop (inside storage)* 										P 	P 	P 		P 			8 	
Gasoline and fuel sales 										C 	C 			P 	P 	P 		23-5.4.2(e) 
General merchandise store 										P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	9 	
General Merchandise Store Other Than Listed 										C 	C 	C 		C 			8 	
Gravestone/Tombstone sales 														P 	P 	P 	8 	
Grocery Store 										C 	P 	P 		P 			8 	
Handicraft shop 										P 	P 	P 		P 			8 	
Hardware store 										P 	P 	C 		P 			10 	
Heating/air conditioning sales/service/repair 											C 			P 	P 	P 		
Heavy machinery sales/display (inside) 																C 	8 	
Heavy machinery sales/display (outside)* 																C 	13 	
Home improvement center 											P 	C 		P 	P 	P 	11 & 15 	
Landscape Materials Sales 											P 			P 			17 	
Lawnmower sales and/or repair (inside only) 											C 			P 	P 	P 	10 	
Lawnmower sales and/or repair (inside/outside) 														P 	P 	P 	10 	
Liquor store 											C 			C 	C 	C 	9 	4.1.13 
Mailing service (private) 										P 	P 	P 		P 			8 	
Major appliance sales (indoor) 											P 			P 			10 	
Manufactured home dealer/sales only* 																C 	18 	
Motorcycle dealer* 											C 			P 		C 	12 & 16 	
Needlework shop 										P 	P 	P 		P 			8 	
Pawn shop* 											P 			P 		P 	8 	
Pet shop 											P 	P 		P 	P 		8 	
Plant nursery (retail sales/outdoors) 										C 	C 	C 		P 	P 	P 	13 	
Portable building leasing/storage 																C 	11 & 16 	
Portable chemical toilet leasing/storage/sales 														C 		C 	11 & 16 	
Propane and fuel sales (retail - replacement tanks)* (accessory use) 										P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 		
Propane and fuel sales (retail - above ground filling tanks)* 											C 			C 	C 	C 		
Propane and fuel sales (retail - below ground filling tanks)* (accessory use) 											P 			P 	P 	P 		
Recreational vehicle dealer/sales only 											C 			P 		P 	11 & 16 	
Recycling kiosk 										C 	C 			P 	P 	P 	NA 	23-5.1.3(k) 
Restaurant 										C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	7 	
Restaurant (carry-out or delivery) 										C 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	7 	
Restaurant (drive-in service) 										C 	P 			P 	P 	P 		
Retail business, specialty or novelty items 																		23-4.1.6 
Security systems installation company 											P 	C 		P 			8 	
Sexually oriented media store 															P 	P 	8 	23-4.1.7 
Sexually oriented retail store 															P 	P 	8 	23-4.1.7 
Specialty Food Store 										C 	P 	P 		P 			8 	
Studio tattoo or body piercing 														C 			8 	
Super Store 											P 			P 			8 	
Temporary outdoor retail sales/commercial promotion 											C 	C 		C 		C 	13 	23-4.1.1(e) 
Travel bureau or travel consultant 										P 	P 	C 	P 	P 			8 	
Upholstery shop (non-auto) 											C 			P 			8 	
Used merchandise; furniture, antique shop, rummage, second hand store (includes outside sales) 														C 		C 	10 & 13 	
Used merchandise; flea market, furniture, antique shop, rummage, second hand store (indoor only) 											C 	P 		p 		p 	10 	
Vacuum cleaner sales and repair 											P 	P 		P 			10 	
Variety Store 										C 	C 	C 		C 			8 	4.1.14 
Veterinarian (small domesticated household animals)* 	P 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	23-5.4.13(a) 
Woodworking shop (ornamental) 												P 		P 	P 	P 	8 	
TRANSPORTATION AND AUTO SERVICES 																		
Auto auction* 																P 	12 & 16 	
Auto body repair 											C 			P 		P 	12 	
Auto financing & leasing (indoor) 											P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 & 35 	
Auto glass repair/tinting 											C 			P 		P 	12 	
Auto impound yard (private) 														C 		C 	12 & 16 	
Auto interior shop 											C 			P 		P 	10 	
Auto muffler shop 											C 			P 		P 	10 	
Auto paint shop 											C 			P 		P 	12 	
Auto rental* 											C 			P 	P 	P 	11 & 35 	
Auto repair (general) major* 											C 	E 		P 		P 	12 	
Auto repair as an associated use to retail sales (minor)* 											P 			P 		P 	12 & 16 	
Auto salvage/wrecking yard* 																C 	12 & 16 	
Auto tire repair /sales (outdoor sales storage/display) 											C 			P 		P 	10 	
Auto wrecker service 																C 	12 	23-5.1.4(f) 
Boat repair and/or storage 																P 	12 	
Car wash (self service) 											C 			P 	P 	P 	24 	23-5.1.3(k) 
Full service car wash (detail shop) 											C 			P 	P 	P 	8 	23-5.1.3(k) 
Commercial parking lot (trucks/heavy equip.) 																C 	12 	
Inoperable vehicle holding yard (private) 																C 	12 	
Limousine service 											C 			P 		P 	12 & 35 	
Motorcycle repair (general) & sales 											C 			P 		P 	12 & 16 	
Public garage 											C 			C 	C 	C 		
Quick lube/oil change/minor inspection 											C 			P 		P 	8 	23-5.1.3(k) 
Taxi stand 											P 			P 	P 	P 	10 & 35 	
Tire sales (indoors) (no outdoor sales/storage or display) 											P 			P 	P 	P 	8 	
Transfer/storage terminal/moving* 															P 	P 	15 	
Truck/heavy equipment/recreational vehicle repair* - indoors 														P 	P 	P 	12 	
Truck/heavy equipment/recreational vehicle repair* - outdoors 																P 	12 	
Truck stop (including gas and diesel sales) 																C 	8 & 17 	
Truck/trailer rental 														C 		C 	12 	23-5.1.4(f) 
Trucking company/motor freight co. * 																P 	8 & 12 	
Wrecker or tow service* 																C 	12 	23-5.1.4(f) 
AMUSEMENT & RECREATION SERVICE 																		
Art gallery 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	8 	
Banquet facilities 										C 	C 	C 	C 		C 	C 	8 	
Boat basing/floating boat storage 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 	C 	12 	
Boat launching ramp 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 			C 	C 	C 	NA 	
Broadcast station (with tower) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	23 	23-5.4.5 
Camping and RV camp ground with office* 	C 					C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	1 & 8 	
Carnival, circus or tent service (temporary)* 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	23-4.1.1(e) 
Commercial amusement, other than listed (indoor) 											C 	C 		C 	C 	C 	7 	4.1.4 
Commercial amusement, other than listed (outdoor) 											C 	C 		C 	C 	C 	8 	
Country club (private)* 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 		C 	C 	C 	C 	7 & 10 	
Covered or totally enclosed boat and/or RV dry storage facilities on land 											C 			C 	P 	P 	12 	
Dance hall 											C 	C 		C 	C 	C 	7 	
Day camp 	C 									C 	C 	C 	C 	C 			16 	
Driving range 											C 		C 	P 	P 	P 	31 	
Earth satellite dish (private, less than 3' in diameter) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	23-5.4.5 
Earth satellite dish (3' > 10' in diameter) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	23-5.4.5 
Earth satellite dish (greater than 10&prime in diameter) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	NA 	23-5.4.5 
Exhibition hall 											P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	7 	
Fair ground 											C 			P 	P 	P 	10 	
Golf course 	P 	P 	P 								P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	31 	
Health club (physical fitness) 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	8 	
Marina 											P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	
Membership sports 											P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	7 	
Motion picture studio, commercial film 														P 	P 	P 	14 	
Museum/wax museum 											P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	8 	
Nature center (private) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		
Noncommercial radio tower less than 35 feet high 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	23-5.4.5 
Noncommercial radio tower between 35—65 feet high 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	23-5.4.5 
Noncommercial radio tower greater than 65 feet high 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	NA 	23-5.4.5 
Open boat and/or R.V. dry storage facilities on land; including boat rental, repair and/or service 												C 		C 		P 	12 	
Park and/or playground 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	
Parking areas for vehicles/trailers/R.V.'s 											C 			C 		P 	35 	
Race track operation* 																C 	10 	
Recreational club (members only) 	C 										P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	8 	
Rodeo grounds 	C 															P 	10 	
Sexually oriented motion picture theatre 															P 	P 	7 	23-4.1.7 
Sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub 															P 	P 	7 	23-4.1.7 
Skating rink 											C 			P 	P 	P 	28 & 8 	
Snack bars and vending machines on land and/or water 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Stadium/sports arena 											C 		C 	P 	P 	P 	28 	
Swimming pool (private)* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	7 	
Tennis court (private/lighted) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	C 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	32 	
Tennis court (private/not lighted) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	32 	
Theater (indoors) 											P 	P 		P 	P 	P 		4.1.4 
Theater (non-motion picture)* 											P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	28 	
Theater (outdoors) 											C 	C 		P 	P 	P 	7 & 16 	
Video rental/sales 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	8 	
Zoo* 	C 										C 		C 	C 	C 	P 	10 	
INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL 																		
Adult day care* 										P 	P 	C 		P 	P 		26 	
Animal pound (public) municipal 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Airport or landing field* 	C 													C 	C 	C 	10 & 17 	
Alcoholic care home 													C 	P 	C 	P 	27 	
Alcoholic rehabilitation facility* 														P 	C 	P 	27 	
Assisted living facility* 								P 	P 	C 	C 	C 		P 	C 	P 	27 & 10 	
Broadcast towers/antennas 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	NA 	23-5.4.5 
Cellular communications tower/antennas* 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	NA 	23-5.4.5 
Cemetery and/or mausoleum* 														C 	C 	P 	17 	
Child care-child day care (business) 12 or more* 											P 	P 	P 	C 	P 		21 	23-5.4.11 
Child care-family home care* (5 or less) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 								27 	
Child care-registered family home* (6—12 children) 	P 	P 	P 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 								27 	
Church/place of worship* (no day/child care in residential areas) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	29 	23-5.4.11 
23-5.1.7(b) 
23-5.4.4 
Civic club 							P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	8 	
Clinic* 										C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	27 & 10 	
College and/or university 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	19 	
Electrical generating plant 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	17 	
Electrical substation 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	17 	23-5.3.2(g) 
Electrical or utility transmission line* 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	NA 	
Emergency care clinic 										P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	23 & 27 	
Food or grocery store 										C 	P 	P 		P 			9 	
Franchised private utility* (not listed) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Fraternal organization* 								P 	P 	C 	P 	P 		P 			8 	
Gas transmission line (regulating station) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	NA 	23-5.3.2(g) 
Group day care home* 								P 	P 	P 				P 	P 	P 	21 	
Half-way house* 																		
Heliport* 	C 												C 	C 	C 	C 	10 	
Helistop* 	C 												C 	C 	C 	C 	10 	
Homeless shelter 														P 			27 	
Hospice* 									P 		C 		P 	P 	P 	P 	26 	
Hospital* (Acute care) 											C 		P 	P 	P 	P 	23 & 27 	
Hospital* (chronic care) 											C 		P 	P 	P 	P 	23 & 27 	
Maternity homes 									C 		C 			C 	C 	C 	23 & 27 	
Municipal - Community center 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Municipal - Fire station 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Municipal - Governmental building 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Municipal - Inoperable vehicle/impound lot 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	NA 	
Municipal - Library 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Municipal - Public parking lot* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		
Municipal - Police station 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Municipal - Recreation center 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	
Municipal - Sanitary land fill 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	NA 	
Municipal - Sewage pumping station 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Municipal - Swimming pool 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	7 	
Municipal - Tennis court 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	32 	
Municipal - Wastewater treatment plant 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Municipal - Water supply facility (elevated water storage) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Municipal - Water treatment plant 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
Monastery/convent 									C 	P 		C 		P 	P 	P 	28 	
Non-profit activities by church 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	
Orphanage 									C 	C 		C 		P 	P 	P 	23 	
Philanthropic organization 										P 	P 	P 		P 	P 	P 	23 	
Post office (governmental) 										P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 & 35 	
Prison 																C 	17 	
Psychiatric care home 														P 	P 	P 	23 & 27 	
Psychiatric hospital 														P 	P 	P 	23 & 27 	
Rectory/parsonage 									C 	P 	P 	C 		P 	P 		28 	
Rehabilitation care facility* 																		
Rehabilitation care institution* 																		
Retirement home/home for the aged* 							C 	P 	P 	C 	C 	P 		P 	P 	P 	2 	
School, driving/defensive driving 											P 			P 	P 	P 	10 & 35 	
School, K through 9 (private)* 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	21 	23-5.1.4(d) 
School, K through 9 (public)* 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	21 	23-5.1.4(d) 
School, secondary, 10—12 (private or public)* 		P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	19 	23-5.1.4(e) 
School, vocational* (business/commercial trade) 											C 		P 	P 	P 	P 	36 	
Skilled nursing facility* 									P 		C 			P 	P 	P 	27 & 10 	
Telephone exchange/switching station 											C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	7 & 15 	
Utility distribution line* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	23-5.3.2(g) 
Utility shop and storage 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 					P 	C 	P 	18 	
Water supply facility (private) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	
COMMERCIAL AND WHOLESALE TRADE 																		
Apparel, piece goods, and notions-wholesale 														P 	P 	P 	10 	
Aquarium (wholesale) 														P 	P 	P 	16 	
Automobile sales - Wholesale 														P 		P 	12 & 16 	
Bakery - Wholesale* 														P 	P 	P 	16 	
Book binding 														P 	P 	P 	16 	
Bottling works 															P 	P 	16 & 23 	
Cabinet shop 												C 		P 	P 	P 	16 & 23 	
Collection container (less than 60 cubic feet in size) 									P 	P 	P 		P 				NA 	5.3 
Collection container (more than 60 cubic feet in size) 													P 	P 	P 	P 	NA 	5.3 
Confectionery manufacturing 														P 	P 	P 	16 	
Dyeing or laundry plant 														P 	P 	P 	23 	
Equipment rental (heavy) 														P 	P 	P 	12 	
Equipment sales (new or used) 														P 	P 	P 	12 	
Farm (food) products - wholesale 														P 	P 	P 	16 	
Feed & grain store 														P 		P 	16 	
Flea market (indoor) 														P 	P 	P 	16 	
Food processing plant 															P 	P 	23 	
Furniture manufacture 														P 	P 	P 	23 	
Furniture upholstery shop 														P 	P 	P 	10 	
Hazardous gases/chemicals bulk storage 																P 	15 	
Heating & air-conditioning sales 														P 	P 	P 	12 	
Heavy machinery sales (wholesale) 															P 	P 	12 	
Livestock - Wholesale 																P 	16 	
Lumber sales - Wholesale 																P 	16 	
Office showroom* 											C 			P 	P 	P 	10 & 15 	
Paper and/or paper products (wholesale) 														P 	P 	P 	16 	
Petroleum and/or petroleum products - Bulk storage 																P 	16 	
Petroleum sales - Wholesale 																P 	16 	
Portable building sales (outdoor display) 														P 		P 	13 	
Office warehouse 														P 	P 	P 	10 & 15 	
Reverse vending machine 																P 		
Scrap/waste recycling collection and/or storage* 																		
Taxidermist 																P 		
Transfer station (refuse/pick-up) 																		
Truck sales - Wholesale 														P 	P 	P 	12 	
Veterinarian (small & large domesticated household animals)* 														P 		P 	10 	23-5.4.13(b) 
Warehouse/storage (inside) 														P 	P 	P 	15 	
Warehouse/storage (outside) 														C 	C 	P 	13 	
Welding shop 														P 		P 	23 	
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIAL AND CONSTRUCTION 																		
Alcoholic beverage manufacturing 															P 	P 	23 	
Apparel manufacturing 															P 	P 	23 	
Asphaltic material manufacture 																C 	23 	
Batching plant (permanent) 																C 	17 	
Batching plant (temporary) 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	17 	23-4.1.1(e) 
Burial vault manufacturing 															P 	P 	23 	
Chemical and allied product manufacture (non-hazardous) 																P 	23 	
Cement manufacturing* 																		
Cement Product Forming/Molding/Casting (indoors only)* 															P 	P 	14 	
Contractor's office/sales, no outside storage including vehicles 											P 		P 	P 	P 	P 	12 	
Contractor's shop, with outside storage 														C 	P 	P 	17 	
Contractor's temporary on-site construction office 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	10 	23-4.1.1(e) 
Electronic manufacturing 															P 	P 	23 	
Engine repair/motor manufacturing re-manufacturing and/or repair* 														P 	P 	P 	23 	
Food canning operation 															P 	P 	23 	
Hazardous chemical manufacture 																		
Heavy assembly* 														C 	P 	P 	23 	
Industrial/chemical/medical incineration 																		
Iron and/or steel foundry 																	15 	
Laboratory equipment manufacturing 															P 	P 	23 	
Leather tanning and/or finishing 																	15 	
Light assembly* 														P 	P 	P 	23 	
Light manufacturing 														P 	P 	P 	23 	
Machine shop* 														P 	P 	P 	23 	
Maintenance & repair service for buildings 														P 	P 	P 	10 	
Meat packing/slaughterhouse 																	15 	
Meat products, manufacturing 															C 	P 	23 	
Metal forging and/or heavy stamping 																	15 	
Metal smelting 																	15 	
Microbrewery 											C 	C 		C 	C 	C 	23 	4.1.4 
Milk depot, dairy, ice-cream plant 															P 	P 	23 	
Mineral extraction & mining operations 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	23 	
Mobile home manufacturing 															C 	P 	23 	
Oil and/or gas extraction 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	23 	
Outside storage 															C 	P 	13 & 18 	
Petroleum refining 																	15 	
Plastic product manufacturing* 														P 	C 	P 	23 	
Plating establishment 																	15 	
Plumbing shop 											C 			P 		P 	8 	
Poultry slaughtering/processing 																	15 	
Printer (newspaper, etc.) 														P 	P 	P 	23 	
Refuse disposal system 																C 	23 	
Research lab (hazardous) 																C 	10 	
Research lab (non-hazardous) 												C 	P 		P 	P 	10 	
Rubber product manufacturing* 														P 	C 	P 	23 	
Salvage and/or reclamation (indoors)* 																C 	15 	
Salvage and/or reclamation (outdoors)* 																	23 	
Sand/gravel sales (storage) and/or extraction 														C 	C 	C 	15 & 23 	
Sanitary landfill (not operate by city) 																C 	23 	
Sign manufacturing 														P 	P 	P 	23 	
Stone/clay/glass manufacturing 															P 	P 	23 	
Wind-powered generators totaling 25 kW or less (personal use)* 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 		23-4.1.8 
Wind-powered generators totaling more than 25 kW (personal use)* 									C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 	C 		23-4.1.8 
Winery 											C 	C 		C 	C 	C 	23 	4.1.4 
 
(Ord. No. 2003-143, § 11—15, 18, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 2004-201, § 8, 11, 4-13-04; Ord. No. 2006-276, § 7—14, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 2008-345, § 8, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 2, 3, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2010-418, § 3, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2011-435, § 1—5, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 2011-442, § 2, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 2011-461, § 3, 10-11-11; Ord. No. 2012-494, § 1, 10-23-12; Ord. No. 2013-525, § 1, 10-8-13; Ord. No. 2014-542, §§ 1, 3, 7-22-14; Ord. No. 2014-543, § 1, 8-12-14; Ord. No. 2015-557-A, § 2, 5-12-15; Ord. No. 2015-569, § 1, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 2016-580, § 2, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2016-605, § 2, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2019-669, §§ 2—4, 3-26-19; Ord. No. 2020-699 , §§ 1—3, 6-9-20)  
Sec. 23-4.1.3. - Accessory building and use regulations. 
(a)  In a single-family residential district or a portion of a planned development district designated for single-family residential uses, an accessory building is a subordinate or incidental building, attached to or detached from the main building, not used for commercial purposes and not rented. Accessory buildings shall be located toward the rear portion of the property. The cumulative floor area of all accessory buildings on a single lot shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the floor area of the main building. 
(b)  In nonresidential and multiple-family districts, an accessory building is a subordinate building, the use of which is secondary to and supportive of the main building. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted without a main building or primary use being in existence. Accessory buildings shall not be located in front of the main building and should, wherever possible, be located toward the rear portion of the property. The cumulative floor area of all accessory buildings on a single lot shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the floor area of the main building(s). 
(c)  Accessory dwelling units in the single-family residential zoning districts (including the single-family attached, TH district) shall be allowed as an incidental residential use of a building on the same lot as the main dwelling unit and used by the same person or persons of the immediate family, and meet the following standards: 
(1)  The accessory dwelling unit must be constructed to the rear of the main dwelling, separate from the main dwelling. 
(2)  The accessory dwelling unit may be constructed only with the issuance of a building permit and shall be constructed out of the same material as the main structure. 
(3)  The accessory dwelling unit may not be sold separately from sale of the entire property, including the main dwelling unit, and shall not be sublet. 
(4)  Setback requirements shall be the same as for the main structure. 
(5)  Accessory dwellings are not permitted without the main or primary structure. 
(d)  Accessory dwellings (including garage/accessory dwellings and detached units) may be permitted in residential zoning districts (see regulations for the specific district, and the use charts, section 4.1.2), and shall conform to the height limitations of the main structure. No such accessory dwelling or quarters shall be used or occupied as a place of abode or residence by anyone other than a bona fide caretaker, servant or farm worker actually and regularly employed by the land owner or occupant of the main building, or is a guest or family member of the owner/occupant. Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit (i.e., garage/accessory dwelling, servants/caretakers quarters, etc.) shall be allowed on any lot within a residential zoning district. Accessory dwelling units shall not be limited to the same maximum floor area as accessory buildings. However, they shall be clearly incidental to the primary use. These accessory living structures shall not, in any case, be leased or sold. 
(e)  Area regulations for accessory buildings in residential and multiple-family districts. 
(1)  Front yard. Detached accessory buildings shall be prohibited in front of the main building. 
(2)  Side yard. There shall be a side yard not less than three (3) feet from any side lot line, or alley line for any accessory building provided that such building is separated from the main building by a minimum distance of ten (10) feet. In the case of an accessory building being closer than ten (10) feet to the main building, the minimum side yard requirements for the main building shall be observed. Accessory buildings adjacent to a side street shall have a side yard not less than fifteen (15) feet. Garages or carports located and arranged so as to be entered from the side yard shall have a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet from the side lot line, alley line, or alley easement line. Carports or garages arranged to be entered from the side yard, facing a public street, shall have a minimum distance equal to the required front yard for the main building. 
(3)  Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard not less than three (3) feet from any lot line or alley line, or alley easement line when accessory buildings are constructed ten (10) feet or more from the main building, except that where apartments are permitted, the main building and all accessory buildings shall not cover more than sixty (60) percent of that portion of the lot lying to the rear of a line erected joining the midpoint of one (1) side lot line with the midpoint of the opposite side lot line; and carports, garages, or other accessory buildings, located within the rear portion of a lot as heretofore described, constructed closer than ten (10) feet to the main building, shall have a rear yard equivalent to the rear yard requirement for the main building. If an alley exists, accessory buildings may be located within three (3) feet of a rear lot line if the maximum (e.g., ridge) height of the building is no greater than eight (8) feet and if a solid fence or wall of the same height is built on the rear lot line to screen the building from property located to the rear. Garages or carports that are arranged so as to be entered by a motor vehicle from an alley or rear alley easement shall be set back from the rear property line or alley easement line a minimum distance of twenty (20) feet. 
(f)  Carports shall be measured from the posts supporting the roof nearest to the street or alley. (See Illustration 4.) 
(g)  Accessory buildings are not permitted without a main structure. 
(h)  Accessory buildings shall not exceed one (1) story in height. Garage/accessory dwelling units are allowed up to twenty (20) feet in height in residential districts. Garage/accessory dwelling units up to two (2) stories may be permitted in certain other districts by CUP if there is no adverse impact upon adjacent properties. 
(i)  Accessory outdoor storage. 
(1)  Accessory outdoor storage shall not encroach into the street yard, setbacks, right-of-way, fire lane, vehicular drive aisle, or required off-street parking space. 
(2)  Accessory outdoor storage shall not exceed eight (8) feet or the height of required screening. 
(3)  Accessory outdoor storage shall not exceed the following percentages of the gross floor area of the building or business establishment. 
Size of Building/Business 
(gross sq. ft. of floor area) 	Maximum Allowed Area for 
Outdoor Sales/Storage/Display 
0 (zero) to 9,999 sq. ft. 	Five percent (5%) 
10,000 to 49,999 sq. ft. 	Ten percent (10%) 
50,000 to 99,999 sq. ft. 	Fifteen percent (15%) 
100,000 or greater sq. ft. 	Twenty percent (20%) 
 
(4)  Additional outdoor storage exceeding the maximum allowed area or maximum allowed height may be authorized with approval of a conditional use permit. 
(j)  Accessory outdoor display. 
(1)  Accessory outdoor display on non-residentially zoned property may be located in the front of buildings with a minimum floor area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet up to a maximum distance of twelve (12) feet forward of the front building face. Such display of merchandise shall not encroach into the fire lane, vehicular drive aisle, on-street parking space or required off-street parking space. The merchandise shall not remain outdoors overnight except for seasonal items such as Christmas trees or pumpkins. 
(2)  The minimum floor area requirement shall not apply to buildings on property located within the uptown overlay and the old town districts. Additionally, outdoor display on property within the uptown overlay and the old town districts may occupy up to thirty (30) percent of a covered sidewalk that is located within twenty (20) feet of the building. Such display shall not impede pedestrian use of the sidewalk and at least a five-foot passable distance shall be maintained. 
(3)  Additional outdoor display may be authorized with approval of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 18(Exh. B), 9-25-18; Ord. No. 2019-683, §§ 2—4, 8-27-19)  
Sec. 23-4.1.4. - Alcoholic beverage requirements. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the storage, possession, sale, serving or consumption of any alcoholic beverages, when permitted by the laws of the State of Texas shall be regulated and governed by the following use regulations and requirements. For additional regulations pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premise consumption, refer to chapter 14, article I of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
(1)  Person shall include association, trustee, receiver, organization corporations, firms, partnerships, and natural persons. 
(2)  Hotel means the premises of an establishment: 
(1)  Where in consideration of payment, travelers are furnished food and lodging; 
(2)  In which are located at least ten (10) adequately furnished, completely separate rooms with adequate facilities so comfortably disposed that persons usually apply for and receive overnight accommodations in the establishment, either in the course of usual and regular travel or as a residence; and 
(3)  Which operates a regular dining room constantly frequented by customers each day. 
(c)  The storage, possession, sale, serving or consumption of any alcoholic beverages to be sold or served by the holder of a mixed beverage permit or the holder of a private club permit issued by the State of Texas in bottles or any other container direct to the customer or person for consumption on the premises of the holder of a mixed beverage permit or in a private club shall be permitted only with a conditional use permit as an accessory use to a primary use described in this subsection subject to the regulations for the primary use provided in this chapter. 
(1)  Hotel. Limited to delivery to individual rooms of the hotel pursuant to of V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 28.01(b) and shall hold a license from the TABC to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption only. 
(2)  Restaurant. The operator shall hold a license from the TABC to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption only. 
(3)  Commercial amusement, other than listed (indoor). The minimum floor area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, be located within the uptown overlay, and hold a license from the TABC to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption only. 
(4)  Microbrewery. On-premise consumption shall be limited to the beer that is produced on the premises and located within the uptown overlay. 
(5)  Theater (indoor). The minimum floor area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, be located within the uptown overlay, and hold a license from the TABC to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption only. 
(6)  Winery. On-premise consumption shall be limited to the wine that is produced on the premises and located within the uptown overlay. 
(d)  The gross annual sales in Cedar Hill from products and services excluding the revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption shall represent sixty (60) percent or more of its total sales from all products and services including the revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption. 
(e)  Hours of operation shall be limited from 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. 
(f)  In addition to the regulations enumerated in this chapter for a conditional use permit, the application for a conditional use permit for on-premise consumption of alcoholic beverages shall include the following: 
(1)  A signed application affirming that the person(s) will comply with the regulations contained in this section and all other applicable ordinances and regulations. 
(2)  A site plan that satisfies the requirements applicable to all site plans in this chapter. 
(3)  Interior design plan including location of all waiting areas, restaurant seating areas reflecting the approximate number of seats; kitchen, storage and serving areas for all alcoholic beverages; and dance floor, gaming devices, and electronic amusement machines. 
(4)  The site plan and interior design plan shall delineate the area of the primary use and where alcoholic beverages will be sold and consumed on the premises. Alcoholic beverages shall only be sold and consumed on the premises of the area delineated on the site plan and interior design plan. 
(5)  An artist's rendering or building elevations for all exterior features. 
(6)  Survey showing that the place of business where alcoholic beverages will be sold for on-premise consumption meets the minimum distance requirements of this section and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. 
(7)  Narrative description of the planned activities, which includes projected breakdown of revenues and any use of the premises for dancing, gaming devices and/or electronic amusement games. 
(8)  Copies of all applications and information filed or to be filed with the State of Texas for a mixed beverage or private club permit. 
(9)  Provide a copy of the written notice of the request to the officials of any public or private school whose nearest property line is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the door by which the public may enter the place of business, measured across street lines and directly across intersections, This section does not apply to a permit or license covering a premise where minors are prohibited from entering the premises under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53. 
(10)  A nonrefundable filing fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall accompany each application for a conditional use permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption. 
(g)  The person(s) holding a conditional use permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption shall on a quarterly basis, no later than on the 21 st day of the month following each quarter, file with the city secretary an affidavit on an officially approved form provided by the city that reflects gross sales for the preceding three (3) months and gross sales for the preceding twelve (12) month period, or since the business began its operation, whichever is shorter, distinguishing the revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption from the other products and services. The person holding a conditional use permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption shall on a quarterly basis file with the city secretary a copy of the filings supplied to the State of Texas for sales tax and mixed beverage (alcoholic beverages) tax purposes. The city reserves the right to require an annual audit of the gross sales. All filings including all sales and alcoholic beverage tax filings shall remain confidential. The person(s) shall permit the city to view the books, records and receipts any time after four (4) hours' notice. Said records may be introduced in court for the purpose of showing the person(s) holding a conditional use permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption is in violation of this [section]. 
(h)  Distance requirements. 
(1)  Church or public hospital. No conditional use permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption shall be granted by the city council within three hundred (300) feet of any church or public hospital except as authorized within this section. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-premise consumption and a church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. 
(2)  Public school. No conditional use permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption shall be granted by the city council within three hundred (300) feet of any public school except as authorized within this section. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-premise consumption, and the public school shall be: (1) in a direct line from the property line of the public school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or (2) if the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public school to the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. For any permit or license covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering the premises under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53, the measurement of the distance between the premises and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. 
(3)  Private school, day-care center and child-care facility. No conditional use permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption shall be granted by the city council within three hundred (300) feet of any private school, day-care center, or child-care facility except as authorized within this section. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold, and the private school, day-care center, or child-care facility shall be: (1) in a direct line from the property line of the private school, day-care center, or child-care facility to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or (2) if the permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the private school, day-care center, or child-care facility to the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located. This distance requirement does not apply to the holder of a license or permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code who also holds a food and beverage certificate issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission covering the premises that is located within three hundred (300) feet of a private school, day-care center, or child-care facility. 
(4)  Residential. No conditional use permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption shall be granted by the city council within three hundred (300) feet of any property zoned or classified for any residential zoning district (including all RR, SF, single-family attached-TH, multi-family-MF, and portions of planned development districts for residential uses). The measurements of the distance shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door and in a direct line across intersections. 
(i)  The City of Cedar Hill expressly reserves the right to permit variances to the aforementioned distance requirements if the city council determines that enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason after consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, determines the best interest of the community. 
(j)  Upon a change in ownership of the business for which a conditional use permit has been issued, the new owner or person(s) operating such a restaurant shall within ten (10) days of the change in ownership apply for a new conditional use permit. 
(k)  The city council, after due notice and hearing, may revoke a conditional use permit for failure to comply with any of the terms of this section and all other applicable ordinances, after receipt of written notice of noncompliance and failure to rectify any such deficiencies within thirty (30) days of receipt of such written notice. In addition to canceling the conditional use permit, the city attorney may inform the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission that the location no longer is in compliance with the City of Cedar Hill ordinances as previously certified to by the city secretary and request that the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission take whatever action is available under the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. The remedies provided in this subsection are in addition to, and do not exclude, all other civil remedies and criminal penalties the city is entitled to pursue at law, in equity, or under any ordinance of the City of Cedar Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2004-201, § 9, 4-13-04; Ord. No. 2014-535, § 1, 3-25-14; Ord. No. 2015-556, §§ 1, 2, 3-10-15; Ord. No. 2019-669, § 6, 3-26-19)  
Sec. 23-4.1.5. - Home based business regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. Standards for controlling home business are set forth to minimize annoyance and inconvenience to neighboring property owners within residential areas. These standards are intended to allow reasonable and comfortable enjoyment of adjacent and nearby property by their owners and by occupants of neighboring residential dwellings, while providing opportunities for the pursuit of home-based businesses. 
(b)  Special provisions for home based businesses. 
(1)  Home based businesses shall be permitted as accessory use in single-family residential zoning districts (including all RR, SF, single-family attached-TH, and residential-PD districts) provided that they comply with all restrictions herein; 
(2)  The business shall produce no alteration or change in the character or exterior appearance of the principal building from that of a residential dwelling, and performance of the business activity shall not be visible from the street; 
(3)  Such use shall be incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for residential purposes, and shall not utilize floor area exceeding twenty (20) percent of the combined gross floor area of dwelling unit and any accessory building(s) that are used for the home business (in no case shall the combined floor area utilized for a home business exceed five hundred (500) square feet); 
(4)  The business shall not employ anyone other than the persons who are members of the household in which the home business occurs; 
(5)  Not more than one (1) patron or business-related vehicles shall be present at one (1) time, and the proprietor shall provide adequate off-street parking on the property where the use is located; 
(6)  The operation of such business shall be between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for outdoor activities, and between 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. for indoor activities; 
(7)  One commercial vehicle, capacity of one (1) ton or less (according to the manufacturer's classification), may be used or parked on the property in connection with the home business, but said vehicle may not be parked in the street; 
(8)  The business activity shall not increase vehicular traffic flow beyond what normally occurs within a residential district, and shall not require regular and frequent deliveries by large delivery trucks or vehicles with a rated capacity in excess of one and one-half tons, according to the manufacturer's classification; 
(9)  There shall be no outside storage, including trailers, or outside display related to the home business use; 
(10)  No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be employed on the premises other than that which is customarily found in a home environment, and that which is customarily associated with an avocation which is conducted solely for pleasure and not for profit or financial gain; 
(11)  The home business shall not generate noise, vibration, glare, fumes/odors, heat or electrical interference beyond what normally occurs within a residential district; 
(12)  The business shall not require the use of chemicals on the property that are obnoxious or hazardous to the welfare of the neighborhood; 
(13)  The home business shall not involve the use of advertising signs or window displays, or any other device that calls attention to the business use of the premises through audio and/or visual means; 
(14)  The business shall not offer a ready inventory of any commodity for sale on the premises unless the commodity is made/assembled on-site (e.g., arts and crafts items, handmade clothing, etc.); and 
(15)  The business shall not be harmful or detrimental to the health, welfare and safety of the neighborhood, nor shall it interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property and recreation by residents of the area. 
(c)  Applicability of other regulations: Home based businesses shall also be subject to any and all other provisions of local, state and federal regulations and laws that govern such uses. 
(d)  Uses allowed as home based businesses: Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) above, home businesses may include the following uses: 
(1)  Office facility of an accountant, architect, landscape architect, attorney, engineer, consultant, insurance agent, Realtor, broker, or similar profession; 
(2)  Author, artist or sculptor; 
(3)  Dressmaker, seamstress or tailor; 
(4)  Music/dance teacher, or similar types of instruction, provided that instruction shall be limited to no more than one (1) pupil at a time; 
(5)  Individual tutoring and home schooling; 
(6)  Millinery; 
(7)  Office facility of a minister, rabbi, priest or other clergyman; 
(8)  Home crafts, such as rug weaving, model making, etc.; 
(9)  Office facility of a salesman, sales or manufacturer's representative, etc., provided that no retail or wholesale transactions or provision of services are personally and physically made on the premises; 
(10)  Repair shop for small electrical appliances, cameras, watches/clocks, and other small items, provided that the items can be carried by one (1) person without using special equipment, and provided that the items are not equipped with an internal combustion engine; 
(11)  Food preparation establishments such as cake making/decorating or catering, provided that there is no on-premises consumption by customers, and provided that all aspects of the business comply with all state and local health regulations; 
(12)  Family homes (see definition in division 5.8), in compliance with applicable state laws, which are incorporated herein by reference, with no more than six (6) children; 
(13)  Barber shop/beauty salon or manicure studio provided that no more than one (1) customer is served at a time; and 
(14)  Swimming lessons and water safety instruction, provided that such instruction involves no more than six (6) pupils at any one time. 
(e)  Uses prohibited as home based businesses: Home based businesses shall not, in any event, be deemed to include the following uses: 
(1)  Animal hospitals or clinics, commercial stables, or kennels; 
(2)  Schooling or instruction, except swimming/water safety classes and home schooling, with more than one (1) pupil at a time; 
(3)  Restaurants or on-premises food or beverage (including private clubs) consumption of any kind; 
(4)  Automobile, boat or trailer paint or repair shop; small engine or motorcycle repair shop; welding shop; large household appliance repair shop; or other similar type of business; 
(5)  Office facility for a doctor, dentist, veterinarian or other medical-related profession; 
(6)  On-premises retail or wholesale sales of any kind, except for items that are produced entirely on the premises in conformance with this Zoning Ordinance, and except for occasional garage sales; 
(7)  Commercial clothing laundering or cleaning; 
(8)  Mortuaries or funeral homes; 
(9)  Trailer, vehicle, tool or equipment rentals; 
(10)  Repair shops or services, except as specifically provided in section 23-3.9.4 above; 
(11)  Drapery or furniture upholstery shops; 
(12)  Antique, gift or specialty shops; 
(13)  Repair shops for any items having internal combustion engines; 
(14)  Any use that would be defined by the building code as an assembly, factory/industrial, hazardous, institutional or mercantile occupancy; and 
(15)  Open storage except materials for resident's personal use or consumption (i.e., firewood, gardening materials, etc.). 
(f)  Home business uses not classified: any use that is not either expressly allowed nor expressly prohibited by subsections (d) and (e), respectively, is considered prohibited, unless and until such use is classified by amendment to this chapter by the Cedar Hill City Council, subsequent to an affirmative recommendation by the planning and zoning commission. 
(g)  Effect of existing home businesses: 
(1)  Any home business that was legally in existence as of the effective date of this chapter and that is not in full conformity with the provisions herein shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use, and is subject to the provisions of division 2.5 provided that the owner/proprietor of such home business register his business with the city within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter, and provided that the home business use was not in violation of any other local, state or federal law or regulation on that date. 
(2)  Any home business that was legally in existence as of the effective date of this chapter and that conforms with (i.e., is not in violation of) the provisions herein shall be hereby authorized to continue. 
(Ord. No. 2003-143, § 6, 02-25-03)  
Sec. 23-4.1.6. - Retail businesses, specialty or novelty items. 
(a)  The regulations in this Section apply to businesses dealing in certain novelty items, commonly referred to as "head shops". Specifically, these businesses include any establishment that sells, distributes or manufactures any specialty or novelty item that is not otherwise permitted by law including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled substance, or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances; 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant that is a controlled substance, or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
(5)  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
(6)  Dilatants and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose or lactose, that are used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or reefing marijuana; 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances; 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging controlled substances; 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storage or concealing controlled substances; 
(11)  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body any controlled substance (including, but not limited to, marijuana, cocaine, hashish and hashish oil), such objects including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that had become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
e.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
f.  Chamber pipes; 
g.  Carburetor pipes; 
h.  Electric pipes; 
i.  Air-driven pipes; 
j.  Chillums; 
k.  Bongs; and/or 
l.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(12)  The term "controlled substance", as used herein, shall mean and refer to those substances now or hereafter included as controlled substances under Texas State Law (i.e., the Texas Controlled Substances Act, Article 447615, V.A.C.S.), as amended.  
Sec. 23-4.1.7. - Sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  Notwithstanding any other provision of the zoning ordinance to the contrary, the procedures and standards contained in this section 23-4.1.7 shall apply to regulation of sexually oriented businesses and those businesses selling or renting sexually oriented media or merchandise, or providing sexually oriented entertainment, and in the event of a conflict the provisions of this section shall prevail. 
(2)  This chapter shall be construed together with the provisions of chapter 10, article V sexually oriented business licenses of the City Code of Ordinances regarding the licensing of sexually oriented businesses. 
(b)  Findings. The facts and other matters set forth in the "Whereas" clauses that form the preamble to this section are hereby adopted as findings of fact in support of this amendment to the zoning ordinance. Upon adoption of this section, the recitals contained in the whereas clauses shall be incorporated into the zoning ordinance by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows: 
(1)  Applicant. Any person, including any spouse of an individual owner, or any other entity required to submit any documentation and/or receive any approvals for operating sexually oriented business or working within a sexually oriented business within the City of Cedar Hill. 
(2)  Bath house, sexually oriented. An enterprise where a portion of its business is offering baths and/or showers with other persons present who are nude or displaying specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Body painting studio, sexually oriented. An establishment where a portion of its business is the application of paint or other substance to or on the human body by any means of application, technique or process when the subject's body displays for the patron's view specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Business, sexually oriented. Any of the following businesses: sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub; sexually oriented entertainment; sexually oriented motion picture theater; sexually oriented video viewing kiosk, booth or arcade; sexually oriented encounter center; sexually oriented media store; sexually oriented bathhouse; sexually oriented massage business; sexually oriented retail establishment; sexually oriented body painting studio; sexually oriented lingerie or swimwear modeling studio; sexually oriented modeling/photography studio; sexually oriented escort business; or any other such business establishment whose purpose is offering sexually oriented entertainment, media or merchandise. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult," "XXX" or similar terms, shall be considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as a sexually oriented business. Each such business is considered a separate land use for purposes of these regulations. For the purpose of this Ordinance, a business is not a sexually oriented business if its inventory, square footage, and product value devoted to sexually oriented merchandise (including media) is ten (10) percent or less and it offers no onsite sexually oriented entertainment. 
(5)  Business license, sexually oriented. Any license applied for under the sexually oriented business licensing ordinance establishing licensing requirements for sexually oriented businesses. 
(6)  Cabaret or nightclub, sexually oriented. A building or portion of a building which provides or allows the provision of live sexually oriented entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the public as an establishment where sexually oriented entertainment is available, but such definition shall not include any sexually oriented use prohibited by this Section. Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to "adult entertainment," "strippers," "showgirls," "exotic dancers," "gentleman's club," "XXX" or similar terms, shall be considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
(7)  Child care facility, licensed. A facility licensed by the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services providing supervision for children thirteen (13) years of age or younger or for any individual who is deemed mentally challenged. 
(8)  Civic center building. A building or complex of buildings that house municipal offices and services, and which may include cultural, recreational, athletic, convention or entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a municipality. 
(9)  Customer. A person who: 
a.  Enters a business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; or 
b.  Enters a business and purchases, rents, or otherwise partakes of any material, merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services offered therein; or 
c.  Enters a business other than as an employee, vendor, service person, or delivery person. 
(10)  Display publicly. The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private, an item or activity in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal unaided vision from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others or from any portion of the premises where items and materials other than sexually oriented media or merchandise are offered for sale or rent to the public. 
(11)  Educational facility. A public or private kindergarten, primary, secondary and postsecondary educational facilities offering instruction in the branches of learning and study required to be taught by the Texas Education Agency; and such federally-funded educational programs for preschool children as the Head Start Program. 
(12)  Encounter center, sexually oriented. A business or enterprise that offers physical contact between two (2) or more persons when one (1) or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, for the purpose of engaging in specified sexually activity or touching specified anatomical areas, but not including a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub. 
(13)  Entertainer, sexually oriented. Any person paid by some form of remuneration to provide entertainment to customers at a sexually oriented business; entertainment may consist of dancing, singing, modeling, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers whereby the entertainer is paid any form of remuneration directly or indirectly for such conversations. 
(14)  Entertainment, sexually oriented. Any of the following activities, when performed by a sexually oriented entertainer at a sexually oriented business: dancing, singing, talking, touching, modeling (including lingerie or photographic), gymnastics, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with customers. 
(15)  Escort, sexually oriented. A person who offers to provide, for some form of remuneration, acts of sexually oriented entertainment or conduct to a client. 
(16)  Escort business, sexually oriented. A business or person that advertises or solicits in any way to prospective clients for the provision of sexually oriented escorts that will provide sexually oriented entertainment, companionship or conduct or employs or contracts with a sexually oriented escort, or refers or provides to a client a sexually oriented escort. 
(17)  Floor area, gross. The total area of the building accessible or visible to a person, including showrooms, theaters including stage area, service areas (but not including restrooms), behind-counter areas, areas used for storage of sexually oriented media or merchandise, and aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas. 
(18)  Frequently. Two (2) or more times per month. 
(19)  Library, public. A publicly-owned facility in which literary and artistic materials, such as books, periodicals, newspapers, pamphlets, prints, records, and tapes, are kept for reading, reference, or lending. 
(20)  Lingerie or swimwear modeling studio, sexually oriented. An establishment or business that provides the services of live models modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or similar wear to individuals, couples, or small groups. 
(21)  Massage. The act of touching, stroking, kneading, stretching, friction, percussion, and vibration, and includes holding, positioning, causing movement of the soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body. 
(22)  Massage business, sexually oriented. Any business in which massages are offered as one of the business's services by a person who is not licensed as a massage therapist under the Texas State Statutes, Title 3, Chapter 455: Massage Therapy; or any business which provides massage for the purpose of sexual stimulation. 
(23)  Massage therapist. A person licensed as a massage therapist in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Department of State Health Services in accordance with the Texas State Statutes, Title 3, Chapter 455: Massage Therapy. 
(24)  Media. Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, film, videotape or videotape production, or pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication. Media includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound recordings, CD-ROMS, DVDs, other magnetic media, and undeveloped pictures. 
(25)  Media, sexually oriented. Media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(26)  Media store, sexually oriented. A store with sexually oriented media for sale and/or rent, and to which any of the following applies: 
a.  The sale and/or rental of sexually oriented media, whether alone or in conjunction with the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented merchandise, constitutes a principal business of the establishment, taking into consideration any of the following: 
(1)  The value realized from the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented media and/or merchandise; 
(2)  The floor area devoted to sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise; 
(3)  The amount of inventory constituting sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise; or 
b.  The business advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a "XXX," "adult" or "sexually oriented" media and/or merchandise business. 
(27)  Merchandise, sexually oriented. This term includes any of the following categories of merchandise: lingerie presented in combination with other merchandise contained within this definition; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use for sadomasochistic practices; condoms or sexual lubricants presented in combination with other merchandise contained within this definition; sexually oriented novelties; and sexually oriented media which is separately defined in this section. 
(28)  Modeling/photography studio, sexually oriented. Any place where a person who appears nude or semi-nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity and is to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A sexually oriented modeling/photography studio does not include educational classes in conjunction with a private or public college, junior college, or university or that of an individual artist studio established solely for conduct of the artist. 
(29)  Motel, sexually oriented. A hotel, motel, or similar commercial lodging establishment that: 
a.  Provides as its business accommodations to the public for any form of consideration for the purpose of viewing sexually oriented media or sexually oriented entertainment. This definition does not include lodging facilities that offer sexually oriented media via cable or satellite services on room televisions as ancillary television programming; or 
b.  Is marketed as or offered as "adult," "XXX," "couples," or "sexually oriented" lodging facility; or 
c.  Offers a sleeping room for a period of less than ten (10) hours or allows a tenant or occupant to rent the room for a period of time of less than ten (10) hours or allows the tenant to have a weekly or monthly rental of the room for the purposes of providing sexually oriented entertainment. 
(30)  Motion picture theater, sexually oriented. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, sexually oriented media are frequently shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or that is marketed as or offered as "adult," "XXX," or sexually oriented. Frequently shown media as characterized herein do not include sexually oriented speech and expressions that take place inside the context of some larger form of expression. This definition does not include any type of facility that would meet the definition of a sexually oriented video viewing kiosk, booth or arcade. 
(31)  Novelties, sexually oriented. Instruments, devices, toys, or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts or designed or marketed primarily for use in sexually oriented stimulation of specified anatomical areas. 
(32)  Nudity or state of nudity. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. See, also, "seminude." For purposes of this definition, body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex, whether wet or dried, and other similar substances shall not be considered a fully opaque covering. 
(33)  Owner. The individual owner of an establishment, or if the legal owner is a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company, the term shall include all general partners, any limited partner with a financial interest of ten (10) percent or more, all corporate officers and directors, and any shareholder or member with a financial interest of ten (10) percent or more. "Owner" includes the spouse(s) of any of the above persons. 
(34)  Planning director. The Planning Director of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas, or a designated agent. 
(35)  Premises. The physical location at which a business is located; as used in this Section, the term shall include all parts of that physical location, both interior and exterior, which are under the control of the subject business, through ownership, lease or other arrangement. 
(36)  Protected highway buffer. A distance of five hundred (500) feet from the right-of-way line of U.S. Hwy 67. 
(37)  Protected land use. A licensed child care facility, civic center building, educational facility, public library, recreational facility, or religious facility. 
(38)  Protected zoning district. Residential districts as shown in section 23-4.1.2 use chart, old town-residential district, planned development district developed for residential uses, and mixed use district where residential is a primary use. 
(39)  Public area. A portion of a sexually oriented business that is accessible to the customer, excluding restrooms, while the business is open for business. 
(40)  Recreational facility. A permanent facility devoted to recreational purposes such as parks, play fields, or community recreation buildings. 
(41)  Religious facility. A permanent facility exclusively used on a regular basis for religious assembly such as customarily occurs in a synagogue, temple, mosque, or church or convent or monastery. 
(42)  Retail store, sexually oriented. A store with sexually oriented merchandise for sale and/or rent, and to which any of the following applies: 
a.  The sale and/or rental of sexually oriented merchandise, whether alone or in conjunction with the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented media, constitutes a principal business of the establishment, taking into consideration any of the following: 
(1)  The value realized from the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented merchandise and/or media; 
(2)  The floor area devoted to sexually oriented merchandise and/or sexually oriented media; 
(3)  The amount of inventory constituting sexually oriented merchandise and/or sexually oriented media; or 
b.  The business advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a "XXX," adult" or "sexually oriented" merchandise business and/or media business. 
(43)  Sadomasochistic practices. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked. 
(44)  Semi-nude or in a state of semi-nudity. The showing of the female areola or nipple with less than fully opaque covering. Showing of any other part of the anatomy defined under nude or state of nudity shall constitute being nude or in a state of nudity. For purposes of this definition, body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex, whether wet or dried, and other similar substances shall not be considered a fully opaque covering. 
(45)  Specified anatomical areas. Areas that include: 
a.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft or the human female areola or nipple; or 
b.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(46)  Specified criminal act. Any offense as defined in Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code; or any sexual offense, rape, statutory rape or other sexually related offense as defined by criminal statutes in Texas or any other state or by federal laws addressing similar or related offenses; or any offense involving controlled substances, or illegal drugs or narcotics as defined in federal or state laws in Texas or any other state. 
(47)  Specified sexual activities. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy. These activities include, but are not limited to the following: bestiality, erotic or sexual stimulation with objects or mechanical devices, acts of human analingus, cunnilingus, fellatio, flagellation, masturbation, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or any excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth above with any person on the premises. This definition shall include apparent sexual stimulation of another person's genitals whether clothed or unclothed. 
(48)  Video, sexually oriented. This definition is used to refer to any motion pictures, movies, films, videotapes, CD-ROMS, DVDs, computer images, slides, sound recordings, other magnetic media or electrical or electronic reproductions of anything that is or may be used as a means of communication that is distinguished or characterized by it emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(49)  Video viewing arcade, sexually oriented. A building or any portion of a building wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any other form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
(50)  Video viewing kiosk or booth, sexually oriented. Any kiosk, booth, cubicle, stall, or compartment that is designed, constructed, or used to hold or seat customers and is used for presenting videos or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic, magnetic, digital, or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, CD-ROMs, books, DVDs, magazines or periodicals) to show images of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" for observation by customers therein. The term "booth," "arcade booth," "preview booth," and "video arcade booth" shall be synonymous with the term "sexually oriented video viewing kiosk or booth." 
(d)  Use regulations. 
(1)  Permitted uses. Only the sexually oriented business specified in section 23-4.1.2, use charts, of the zoning ordinance shall be permitted. 
(2)  Prohibited uses. The following are sexually oriented business uses that are prohibited uses within any zoning district due to the experiences in other communities that demonstrate these uses create the opportunity for high-risk sexual activity, prostitution, drug use, and other criminal behavior while posing logistical difficulties and physical endangerment risks for code enforcement and police officers in policing these businesses, and uses involving sexually oriented media viewing kiosks, booths or arcades are associated with deleterious effects and access to such media is available in other venues which are less harmful to the health, safety and welfare of the community: 
a.  Sexually oriented bath house; 
b.  Sexually oriented body painting studio; 
c.  Sexually oriented encounter center; 
d.  Sexually oriented escort business; 
e.  Sexually oriented lingerie or swimwear modeling studio; 
f.  Sexually oriented massage business; 
g.  Sexually oriented modeling/photography studio; 
h.  Sexually oriented motel; 
i.  Sexually oriented video viewing kiosk, booth or arcade; 
j.  Any permitted sexually oriented business that includes as part of its business any business designated in subsections a. through i.; and 
k.  More than one (1) sexually oriented use on any lot, parcel or tract. 
(3)  Nonconforming uses. Uses that are lawfully operating on the effective date of this chapter but do not conform to the use and separation provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed nonconforming uses, subject to the provisions of division 2.5, nonconforming uses and structures, of the zoning ordinance. 
(e)  Location requirements and measurement of distances. 
(1)  Separation standards. The following spatial requirements shall apply to the location of permitted sexually oriented business: 
a.  No "sexually oriented media store" shall be located closer than one thousand (1,000) feet to any protected land use or protected zoning district; 
b.  No "sexually oriented retail store" shall be located closer than one thousand (1,000) feet to any protected land use or protected zoning district; 
c.  No "sexually oriented motion picture theatre" shall be located closer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet to any protected land use or protected zoning district; 
d.  No "sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub" shall be located closer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet to any protected land use or protected zoning district; 
e.  No sexually oriented business shall be located closer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet to any other sexually oriented business; and 
f.  No sexually oriented business shall be located within a protected highway buffer. 
(2)  Measurement. Where one (1) use is required to be separated from another use, measurements shall be made in accordance with the following: 
a.  The required separation distance shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the structure containing the sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the protected land use, protected zoning district, protected highway buffer or other sexually oriented business. 
b.  If the sexually oriented business is located in a multi-tenant building, then the distance shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the portion of the building occupied by the sexually oriented business to the nearest property line occupied by the protected land use, protected zoning district, protected highway buffer or other sexually oriented business. 
c.  The required distance separation from a protected land use, protected zoning district, protected highway buffer or other sexually oriented business shall apply regardless of whether such protected land use, zoning district, protected highway buffer or other sexually oriented business is located inside or outside the City of Cedar Hill. 
d.  The separation measurements shall be provided and certified by a licensed professional surveyor hired by the sexually oriented business. 
(3)  Nonconformity. No legally permitted sexually oriented business shall become nonconforming through subsequent establishment of a protected land use or protected zoning district located in closer proximity to the permitted sexually oriented business than what is required by the separation standards in this section. 
(f)  Specific requirements for particular uses. 
(1)  Exterior lighting. The exterior property of a sexually oriented business shall be lighted in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Exterior lighting of the entries and parking areas shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) foot-candles as measured three (3) feet from the ground or paving; 
b.  For a business on a single lot or parcel, no lighting shall illuminate any property not in control of the business by more than five (5) foot-candles as measured at the nearest adjacent property; 
c.  Light sources shall be oriented toward the center of the site or shielded so as to not be visible from the property line; this applies to refractory lenses which extend beyond the lighting fixture and are designed to redirect the lighting source horizontally; and 
d.  All proposed exterior lighting shall be submitted with the application for site plan approval. 
(2)  Exterior signage. All proposed signage for a sexually oriented business shall be in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  All proposed exterior signage shall be submitted with the application for site plan approval; and 
b.  Notwithstanding any provision of the Cedar Hill Sign Ordinance to the contrary which is more restrictive, signage permitted for sexually oriented businesses must: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing lights; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area; and 
(4)  Not exceed ten (10) feet in height or ten (10) feet in length. 
(3)  Exterior fencing. No sexually oriented business shall have any fencing or other structure exceeding five (5) feet in height that obstructs the view of the parking lot or entrance ways of the business. 
(4)  No public display permitted. No sexually oriented media, merchandise or activity shall be publicly displayed by a sexually oriented business. 
(5)  Age limit. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted within the sexually oriented business; and 
(6)  Business license. All sexually oriented businesses shall be in compliance with chapter 10, article V, sexually oriented business licenses, of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(g)  Pre-submission application. 
(1)  No application for site plan approval, a building permit or certificate of occupancy for a sexually oriented business shall be submitted to the city until the owner submits a complete "pre-submission application" to the planning director containing the following information: 
a.  A legal description and sketch of the parcel for the proposed use; 
b.  Confirmation of the applicant's ownership or controlling interest in the property; 
c.  Detailed description and type of proposed sexually oriented business; 
d.  A professional land surveyor's delineation of the proposed building, lot lines and the location of its primary entrance and confirming via specific measurements that the proposed sexually oriented business meets the separation distances required from protected land uses, buffer and zoning districts or any other sexually oriented business; and 
e.  Payment of an application fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(2)  Action on pre-submission application. Within five (5) business days of receipt of a complete pre-submission application, the planning director shall: 
a.  Determine whether the proposed use is a permitted use in the zoning district in which it is to be located; 
b.  Determine whether the proposed use meets the required separation distances; and 
c.  If the above criteria are satisfied, approve the pre-submission application and authorize the applicant to submit an application for site plan approval pursuant to division 2.6 of the zoning ordinance. 
(h)  Site plan review. 
(1)  No application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be submitted to the city until the owner has first submitted a complete application for site plan review pursuant to the submission requirements of the zoning ordinance in division 2.6 site plan review. 
(2)  The site plan application shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied in accordance with division 2.6 within ninety (90) calendar days from the date an application for site plan review has been received and deemed complete. 
(3)  If the site plan application is denied, the denial shall be in writing and shall specify the reasons why the site plan was denied, citing specific section provisions or other provisions of other ordinances that provide the basis for such denial. 
(4)  Waiver of rights. The applicant may, at its option, pursue other or additional administrative remedies available under the zoning ordinance; by doing so, the applicant shall be deemed to have waived any right to a decision within a particular time period and shall be subject to all of the terms, conditions and timelines applicable to such administrative remedies under the zoning ordinance. 
(i)  Exemptions to separation restrictions. 
(1)  Process. If the planning director denies the pre-submission application due to the separation restrictions of section 23-4.1.7(e)(1), the applicant may apply for an exemption from the separation restrictions by filing a written petition with the city secretary requesting a hearing within ten (10) calendar days of the date the applicant receives notification of the planning director's decision. The city council shall serve as the appeals board. The appeal shall be scheduled within twenty (20) calendar days of the date the petition is received in the office of the city secretary. The city secretary shall give written notice to the applicant of the time and place for the hearing on the applicant's appeal at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled date of hearing. 
(2)  Hearing. The city council shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to demonstrate that the requested exemption to the separation restrictions meets the criteria for granting of such exemption. 
(3)  Criteria for exemptions. The city council may grant an exemption from the separation restrictions of section 23-4.1.7(e)(1) if the city council makes the following findings: 
a.  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
b.  That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance; 
c.  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
d.  That the location of a sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
e.  That all other applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance shall be observed. 
(4)  Decision. The city council shall issue a decision with findings within ten (10) calendar days. If the separation exemption is granted, the city council shall direct the planning director to approve the pre-submission application. If the separation exemption is denied, the applicant shall be immediately notified by registered or certified mail to the address provided on the application, and the letter of notification shall state the basis for such denial. The applicant may not reapply for an exemption until at least twelve (12) months have elapsed since the date of the city council's action. Any applicant aggrieved by the denial of an exemption may seek judicial review in the appropriate court. 
(5)  Time period. If the city council grants the separation exemption, the exemption is valid for one (1) year from the date of the city council's action. If a certificate of occupancy has not been issued within one (1) year from the date of the city council action granting the separation exemption, the exemption shall expire. 
(Ord. No. 2010-418, § 6, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2014-530, § 1, 1-28-14)  
Sec. 23-4.1.8. - Wind-powered generators (personal). 
Wind-powered generators for personal use, as defined by this zoning ordinance, are permitted only as an accessory use to a main structure as authorized by the use table herein. All personal wind-powered generators shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  Minimum setback. No portion of a wind-powered generator shall be located closer to a property line than the distance equal to the overall height of system; additionally, in no event shall any portion of a wind-powered generator extend into the minimum required yard for the main structure as specified for the zoning district the system is located. 
(b)  Maximum height. No portion of a wind-powered generator, including blades, shall extend above the ground, at the system base, more than the maximum height specified for the zoning district in which it is located. However, the overall height of a wind-powered generator may be increased above the maximum height specified for the zoning district in which the facility is located provided that the wind-powered generator is set back from all property lines a minimum distance that is equal to three times the height of the system; however, in no instance shall any portion of the wind-powered generator extend more than one hundred ten (110) feet above the ground. 
(c)  Clear zone. A minimum of 15 feet clearance shall be maintained around any wind-powered generator. 
(d)  Number allowed per site. Multiple wind-powered generator systems may be located on a single parcel of land provided their sum total rated output are 25kW or less. 
(e)  Mono-pole construction required. All free standing wind-powered generator systems shall be of monopole construction. 
(f)  System access. Ladders or other climbing apparatuses are prohibited within twelve (12) feet of the ground. 
(g)  Wiring requirements. All electrical wiring shall be contained within the support structure or buried underground. 
(h)  Braking systems requirement. All wind-powered generator systems shall be equipped within an automatic braking system and a manual braking system. 
(i)  Noise and vibration. Wind-powered generators shall adhere to the performance standards specified in section 23-5.5.3 of the Cedar Hill Zoning Code. 
(j)  Manufacturer's specification. All wind-powered generators shall be installed in accordance with all City Codes and regulations and shall be installed and maintained in accordance with manufacture specification; 
(k)  Nonfunctioning or hazardous systems. All wind-powered generators shall be maintained in good working order. Nonfunctioning or systems that pose a safety hazard shall be removed at owner's expense. Systems that do not provided at least fifty (50) percent of the manufacturer's specified power rated for any given wind condition shall be deemed nonfunctioning. The owner shall, at the request of the city, provided access to the site for inspection and shall provide documentation showing the systems operational characteristics and that the system is safe and functioning. 
(l)  Permit required. No wind-powered generator shall be erected, constructed, or installed without a permit first being issued by the City of Cedar Hill. 
(m)  Compliance with current city adopted building code. Building permit applications for wind-powered generators shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the location of the system in relation to property lines, easements, structures, trees and other obstructions, as well as standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and footings. Construction plans for the foundation and supporting structure shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a professional engineer licensed by the State of Texas. 
(n)  Compliance with current city adopted electric code. Building permit applications for wind-powered generators shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of installation conforms to the current National Electrical Code as adopted. 
(o)  Owner's responsibility. the owner shall be responsible for securing the site and maintaining the facility in a safe manner. 
(Ord. No. 2011-442, § 3, 6-28-11)  
Sec. 23-4.1.9. - Audio recording studio retreat. 
Audio recording studio retreat, shall be subject to the following: 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of these standards to preserve the quiet, peaceful nature and character of the residential district and to allow, as a subordinate use, a place for recording artists to gather, write, collaborate, perform, instruct, and prepare audio recordings. 
(b)  Accessory use. The standards contained in this section regarding audio recording studio retreat shall be in addition to the zoning district standards in which the facility is located. The primary use of the property shall be for residential purposes with the audio recording studio retreat being an accessory use. 
(c)  Minimum lot area. No audio recording studio retreat shall be located on a lot that is less than five (5) acres in area. 
(d)  Parking. In addition to the parking required by this zoning ordinance for residential structures, additional parking shall be provided for the audio recording studio retreat as specified by the use table contained in division 4.1 and pursuant to division 5.1 of this zoning code. 
(e)  Noise and vibration. Audio recording studio retreat shall adhere to the performance standards specified in section 23-5.5.3 of this zoning code. 
(f)  No outside activities. All activities associated with the audio recording studio shall be conducted whole and completely within an enclosed building. 
(g)  Outdoor amplified sound prohibited. There shall be no concerts on site or outdoors amplified sound. 
(Ord. No. 2011-461, § 2, 10-11-11)  
Sec. 23-4.1.10. - Solar panel systems. 
General purpose and description. The purpose of these regulations is to accommodate solar panel systems in appropriate locations while protecting the public's health, safety and welfare, and to provide a permitting process for solar panel systems to ensure compliance with the provisions of the requirements and standards established herein. 
(a)  Solar panel system (accessory use). Solar panel systems that are allowed as an accessory use as set forth in section 4.1.2. (Use Chart) may be roof mounted, or ground mounted solar panel systems provided the ground mounted system conforms to the setbacks and height standards for accessory buildings set forth within this Zoning Ordinance (Ord. 2001-64) as amended. 
(b)  Solar panel system (primary use). Solar panel systems that are allowed as the primary use, as set forth in section 4.1.2. (Use Chart), shall conform to the zoning district standards for which the system is located. 
(c)  No solar panel system shall be erected, constructed, modified, or installed without first receiving a building permit from the building official. Modification shall include any changes to the solar panel system that materially alters the size, type or location of the system. Like-kind replacements shall not be construed to be a modification. 
(Ord. No. 2015-557-A, § 3, 5-12-15)  
Sec. 23-4.1.11. - Credit access business. 
(a)  A credit access business is prohibited as an accessory use. 
(b)  A credit access business shall be located at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any other credit access business as measured in a straight line between the nearest points of the credit access businesses. 
(c)  A credit access business shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from any single-family residential district or any planned development district for single-family residential uses as measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the credit access business. 
(Ord. No. 2016-605, § 3, 12-13-16)  
Sec. 23-4.1.12. - Drive-through facility. 
(a)  A drive-through facility is permitted with a bank or a restaurant in the local retail, commercial, industrial park and industrial districts with the exception of when those districts are located within the uptown overlay. Otherwise, a drive-through facility shall require a conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions for consideration enumerated in this chapter. 
(b)  A drive-through facility is prohibited with a liquor store. 
(Ord. No. 2019-669, § 5, 3-26-19)  
Sec. 23-4.1.13. - Liquor store. 
A liquor store shall not have walk-up window access, and shall not have a drive-through facility. 
(Ord. No. 2019-669, § 5, 3-26-19)  
Sec. 23-4.1.14. - Variety stores. 
(a)  All variety stores shall have a minimum of ten (10) percent of its selling floor area dedicated to the sale of fresh produce, fresh meat and dairy products. 
(b)  A variety store shall not be located within a radius of one (1) mile, measured from property line to property line, of another variety store. 
(c)  A scaled floor plan delineating the floor area for the sale of fresh produce, fresh meat and dairy products shall be provided in conjunction with an application for a Conditional Use Permit for a variety store pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  For the purposes of this subsection, the following terms shall have the meanings described below: 
(1)  Selling floor area shall mean the floor area of the building where customers are allowed to find and purchase items. 
(2)  Fresh produce shall mean fruits and vegetables that have not been processed in any manner. This term does not include such items as nuts, popcorn, vegetable plants/seedlings, dried beans/peas, seeds/grains, and flowers. 
(3)  Fresh meat shall mean skeletal muscle and its associated tissues derived from mammalian, avian, reptilian, amphibian, and aquatic species that have not been preserved by curing, salting, smoking, drying, or canning. 
(4)  Dairy products shall mean food produced from mammals such as milk, yogurt and cheese. 
(Ord. No. 2020-699 , § 4, 6-9-20)  
ARTICLE 5. - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
DIVISION 5.1. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 23-5.1.1. - Purpose. 
To secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to lessen congestion on public streets; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation; to conserve the value of buildings; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land. Minimum off-street parking and loading shall be provided as set forth in the following schedules and provisions.  
Sec. 23-5.1.2. - Residential districts—Special off-street parking provisions. 
(a)  Required off-street parking shall be provided on the same site as the use it is to serve. 
(b)  All vehicle parking and maneuvering areas shall be on reinforced concrete paved surfaces. Residential driveways in excess of two hundred (200) feet in length may be constructed of any all-weather surface; however, that portion of the driveway that is within fifty (50) feet of the street shall be paved in reinforced concrete. In addition to the required enclosed parking, two exterior parking spaces shall be paved with reinforced concrete outside the garage portion of the residential structure. 
(c)  No required parking space, garage, carport, or other automobile storage space shall be used for the storage of any heavy load vehicle (see definitions for "heavy load vehicle"). 
(d)  Required garages shall not be enclosed for residential living purposes unless and until they are replaced with separate garages, either attached or detached, that complies with the requirements of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance and Building Code of the City of Cedar Hill. Residential properties platted prior to March 26, 1985, and planned development districts that have no garage requirement are exempt from this paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2001-71 §§ 11, 13, 07-21-01; Ord. No. 2008-345 § 11, 01-08-08)  
Sec. 23-5.1.3. - Nonresidential and MF districts—Special off-street parking provisions. 
(a)  To prevent nuisance situations, all parking area lighting shall be designed and operated so as not to reflect or shine on adjacent properties and in accordance with the standards established in division 5.6. 
(b)  For safety and fire-fighting purposes, free access through to adjacent nonresidential parking areas shall be provided in accordance with division 5.4. 
(c)  All required off-street parking, maneuvering, loading and storage areas shall be paved with reinforced concrete and in accordance with the parking lot paving requirements in the City's Code of Ordinances (i.e., no parking shall be permitted on grass, within landscaped areas, or on other unimproved surfaces). 
(d)  Parking spaces shall be permanently and clearly identified by stripes, buttons, tiles, curbs, barriers, or other approved methods. Nonpermanent type marking, such as paint, shall be regularly maintained to ensure continuous clear identification of the space. 
(e)  Each standard off-street surface parking space size shall be in accordance with the design standards as shown on Illustration 10 for space size and design. Specific parking space sizes, exclusive of aisles, driveways and maneuvering areas shall be nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet standard spaces and eight (8) feet by twenty-two (22) feet for parallel spaces. 
(f)  All parking and loading spaces, and vehicle sales or display areas on private property shall be paved and shall have a vehicle stopping device installed so as to prevent parking of motor vehicles in any required landscaped areas, to prevent vehicles from hitting buildings, to protect public and/or private utility structures/facilities, and to prevent parked vehicles from overhanging a public right-of-way line, public sidewalk, or adjacent private property. An extra-wide sidewalk on private property may be permitted so as to allow encroachment of vehicle overhang while maintaining an unobstructed three-foot minimum sidewalk width. The requirement shall apply only where spaces are adjacent to the walks, right-of-way, and required landscaping. Parking shall not be permitted to encroach upon the public right-of-way in any case. For new construction only, all vehicle maneuvering shall take place on-site. No public right-of-way shall be used for backing or maneuvering into or from a parking space, or for circulation within the parking lot. 
(g)  In all nonresidential and multi-family zoning districts, the perimeter of all parking lots and driveways shall be provided with concrete curbs or other means to control traffic. 
(h)  Refuse storage facilities placed in a parking lot shall not be located in a designated parking or loading space. Each refuse facility shall be located so as to facilitate pickup by refuse collection agencies. 
(i)  Handicap parking space(s) shall be provided according to building codes, state laws, and requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
(j)  In all nonresidential and multi-family zoning categories, designated parking and loading areas shall not be used for the repair, storage, dismantling or servicing (except for normal maintenance of a private vehicle) of vehicles or equipment; or for the storage of materials or supplies, or for any other use in conflict with the designated parking and loading areas (i.e., advertising or open storage of raw materials). 
(k)  To ensure that all requirements set forth in this section are carried forward, it will be the responsibility of the owner of the parking area to adequately maintain the facility. All off-street parking areas shall be kept free of trash, debris, vehicle repair operation or display and advertising uses. At no time after initial approval of the parking area layout can changes be made in the location and number of provided spaces without approval of the planning and zoning administrator, or his designee. 
(l)  When parking is prohibited within the street yard by this chapter, it shall be behind the front façade of the building and in the side or rear except if the lot or development to be built is: 
(1)  Encumbered with an easement, septic system, or water feature that restricts the amount of land available for such required parking for the approved uses for that district or; 
(2)  A platted lot of such size and/or existing building placement that all required parking located on the side or rear yards restrict the allowed uses for that district. 
(m)  Off-street stacking requirements for drive-through facilities: 
(1)  A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring eight (8) feet by twenty (20) feet with direct forward access to a service window or station of a drive-through facility which does not constitute space for any other circulation driveway, parking space, or maneuvering area. An escape lane, of at least eight (8) feet in width and with negotiable geometric design, must be provided to allow vehicles to get out of stacking lane in the event of a stalled vehicle, emergency, accidental entry, etc. 
(2)  For financial institutions with drive-through facilities, each teller window or station, human or mechanical, shall be provided with a minimum of five (5) stacking spaces. One (1) escape lane shall be provided. 
(3)  For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of six (6) spaces shall be provided for the first vehicle stop (usually the menu/order board), and two (2) spaces shall be provided for each additional vehicle stop (order/pick-up windows, etc.). One (1) escape lane shall be provided from the beginning of the stacking lane to the first stop (e.g., menu/order board). 
(4)  For retail operations (other than restaurants, banks, etc.) and kiosks that provide drive-through facilities (e.g., pharmacy, dry cleaners, etc.), a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces for each service window shall be provided. 
(5)  For a full-service car wash, each vacuum or gas pump lane shall be provided with a minimum of four (4) stacking spaces. For the finish/drying area, adequate vehicle stacking and storage space must be provided to keep finished vehicles out of circulation aisles, access easements, fire lanes, streets, etc. 
(6)  For each automated self-service (drive-through/rollover) car wash bay, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces, in addition to the wash bay itself, shall be provided. One (1) stacking space shall be provided at the exit end of each wash bay for window-drying and other detailing. 
(7)  For each wand-type self-service (open) car wash bay, a minimum of two (2) stacking spaces, in addition to the wash bay itself, shall be provided. One (1) stacking space shall be provided at the exit end of each wash bay for window-drying and other detailing, unless a separate area/shade structure is provided (outside of circulation aisles) for these activities. 
(8)  For automobile quick-lube type facilities, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces shall be provided for each service bay in addition to the service bay(s) itself. 
(Ord. No. 2004-201, § 7, 4-13-04; Ord. No. 2006-276, §§ 15, 16, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 2008-345, § 12, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2019-669, § 7, 3-26-19)  
Sec. 23-5.1.4. - Off-street loading space—All districts. 
(a)  All retail, commercial, industrial and service structures shall provide and maintain off-street facilities for receiving and loading merchandise, supplies and materials within a building or on the lot or tract. All drives and approaches shall provide adequate space and clearances to allow for the maneuvering of trucks off-street. Each site shall provide a designated on-site maneuvering area for trucks (see Illustration 2). Such off-street loading space may be adjacent to a public alley or private service drive or may consist of a truck berth within the structure. Such off-street loading space or truck berth shall consist of a minimum area of ten (10) by forty-five (45) feet, and such spaces or berths shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule: 
Total Square Feet of Gross Floor 
Area in Structure 	Minimum Required Spaces or Berths 
0 (zero) to 10,000 square feet 	None 
10,001 to 50,000 square feet 	1 
50,001 to 100,000 square feet 	2 
100,001 to 200,000 square feet 	3 
Each additional 100,000 square feet 	1 additional 
 
(b)  Childhood training facilities. 
(1)  Kindergartens, elementary schools, day schools and similar child training establishments shall provide loading and unloading space to accommodate student drop-off and pick-up. In addition to providing off-street parking, as required by these zoning codes, such designated drop-off and pick-up spaces [shall] be located to provide access to the facility without crossing vehicular traffic lanes. Designated drop-off and pick-up spaces have off-street queuing for vehicles waiting to pick-up or drop-off students. Such off-street queuing shall be designed in a manner that it does not inhibit traffic movement, and includes an "escape lane" to allow vehicles to exit the line. The number of off-street queuing spaces required shall be determined by the number of students in the largest scheduled admittance or dismissal period. Not less than one (1) off-street queuing space shall be provided for each ten (10) students for each scheduled admittance and dismissal time. 
(2)  Queuing shall be provided for each pick-up and drop-off space. 
(3)  Queuing for pick-up and drop-off spaces shall not inhibit traffic movement. 
(4)  Provide not less than one (1) off-street queuing space for each ten (10) students for each scheduled admittance and dismissal time. 
(5)  Queuing lines shall be equipped with an "escape lane" to allow vehicles to exit the line. 
(6)  Day care facilities shall provide designated drop-off/pick-up spaces located to provide access to the facility without crossing vehicular traffic lanes. In addition to providing off-street parking, as required by these zoning codes, there shall be a minimum of one (1) drop-off/pick-up space for each ten (10) children the facility is authorized to supervise. 
(c)  High schools and similar training establishments shall provide one (1) paved off-street pedestrian loading and unloading space for an automobile on a through, "circular" drive for each seventy-five (75) students. An additional lane shall also be required to allow pass by or through traffic to move while automobiles waiting or parked to pick up students occupy loading/unloading areas. 
(d)  All vehicles stored onsite and used in conjunction with any business will have available paved storage spaces for each vehicle stored in accordance with the paving requirement stated in section 23-5.1.3, whether such vehicles are for sale or rent, or for use of employees or students. These parking spaces shall be in addition to the minimum required parking stated in the use tables in section 23-4.1.2 for each use allowed within the city. 
(Ord. No. 06-276, § 17, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 08-345, § 7, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2018-655, § 19(Exh. C), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.1.5. - Parking access from a public street—All districts. 
(a)  In the approval of a detailed site plan, design consideration shall be given to providing entrance/exit drives which extend into the site to provide adequate queuing of vehicles on the site. 
(b)  In all districts (except all single-family and townhome zoning districts) building plans shall provide for entrance/exit drive(s) appropriately designed and located to minimize traffic congestion or conflict within the site and with adjoining public streets as approved by the planning and zoning administrator, or his designee. 
(1)  Based upon analysis by the city, if projected volumes of traffic entering or leaving a development are likely to interfere with the projected peak traffic flow volumes on adjoining streets, additional right-of-way and paving in the form of a deceleration lane or turn lane may be required of a developer in order to reduce such interference. 
(2)  The determination of additional right-of-way or paving requirements shall be made at the time the final site plan is submitted for approval. 
(c)  Vehicular access to non-residential uses shall not be permitted from alleys serving residential areas. 
(d)  Parking space configuration, location, arrangement, size and circulation in all districts shall be constructed according to Illustration 10.  
Sec. 23-5.1.6. - Schedule of parking space requirements. 
In all districts, the minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided shall be as follows (refer to section 23-4.1.2 for relation of parking groups to permitted uses): (Ord. No. 2001-71 § 12, 07-21-01) (Ord. No. 2006-276, § 18, 01-10-06) 
Group 	Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required 
1. 	1 per unit 
2. 	2 per unit 
3. 	2 per unit 
4. 	2 per unit — 2-car garage 
5. 	2 per unit — 1-car garage 
6. 	1 per 50 sq. ft. of gross floor area + 12 
7. 	1 per 100 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
8. 	1 per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
9. 	1 per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
10. 	1 per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
11. 	1 per 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
12. 	1 per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
13. 	1 per 600 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
14. 	1 per 800 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
15. 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area 
16. 	1 per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross site area 
17. 	1 per 1,500 sq. ft. of gross site area 
18. 	1 per 2,000 sq. ft. of storage yard 
19. 	1 per 3 students 
20. 	1 per 5 students 
21. 	1 per 15 students 
22. 	1 per 25 students 
23. 	1 per employee on largest shift + 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. 
24. 	1 per bay or pump island 
25. 	1 per guest room 
26. 	1 per 4 patrons 
27. 	1 per 4 beds 
28. 	1 per 2.5 seats 
29. 	1 per 4 seats 
30. 	1 per 6 machines 
31. 	5 per hole 
32. 	5 per alley or table 
33. 	3 queuing spaces per bay or stall 
34. 	5 queuing spaces per bay or stall 
35. 	1 per vehicle stored 
36. 	1 per each seat 
37. 	Reserved 
38. 	1 per 20 units 
39. 	2 per caretakers unit 
40. 	Less than 15,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area - 1 per 200 sq. ft. 
15,001-75,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area - 1 per 225 sq. ft. 
75,001 - 400,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area - 1 per 250 sq. ft. 
400,001-600,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area - 1 per 275 sq. ft. 
600,001 and greater sq. ft. of gross floor area - 1 per 300 sq. ft. 
 
* Surface parking shall not exceed 110% of minimum required. 
(Ord. No. 2001-71 § 12, 07-21-01; Ord. No. 2006-276, § 18, 01-10-06)  
Sec. 23-5.1.7. - Rules for computing number of parking spaces. 
In computing the number of parking spaces required for each of the above uses, the following rules shall govern: 
(a)  "Floor area" shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use. 
(b)  "Seat" shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  For fixed (e.g., church pews, grandstands, benches, etc.) seating, one (1) seat equals 1.75 feet of length; 
(2)  For flexible (e.g., folding chairs, etc.) seating areas, one (1) seat equals eight (8) square feet of floor area occupied by such seating area (includes aisles). 
(c)  Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be constructed up to the next whole number. 
(d)  The parking space requirements for a new or unlisted use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature. If the proposed use is not similar to any of the uses listed herein, a determination shall be made by the planning and zoning administrator, or his designee, in accordance with the requirements for the most closely related use specified in this section. 
(e)  Whenever a building or use is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten (10) percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. 
(f)  For buildings which have mixed uses within the same structure (such as retail and office), the parking requirement shall be calculated for the most intensive use. In cases where the design of the interior of the structure is not practical for alteration, the parking requirement may be calculated for each use within a structure for buildings over forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
(g)  Shared parking may be allowed in the case of mixed uses (different buildings) under the following conditions. Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking spaces required for a theater or other place of evening entertainment (after 6:00 p.m.), or for a church, may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, and similar uses not normally open, used, or operated during evening hours. Shared parking must be on the same parking lot. The planning and zoning administrator, or his designee shall determine reduction due to shared parking. To assure retention of the shared parking spaces, each property owner shall properly draw and execute a document expressing the same and shall file this agreement with the City of Cedar Hill. 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 19, 01-10-06)  
Sec. 23-5.1.8. - Location of parking spaces. 
All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except as follows: 
(a)  Where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two (2) or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located not to exceed six hundred (600) feet from any nonresidential building served. 
(b)  In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, approval by the planning and zoning commission and city council is required according to the following criteria: 
(1)  Off-site parking may be permitted on an immediately contiguous lot or tract, or on a lot or tract within one hundred fifty (150) feet, or one thousand (1,000) feet within the OT zoning district, of such building or structure providing: 
a.  That a permanent easement of the parking facilities in favor of the premises to be benefited shall be dedicated and recorded as a condition of such use, or that a long-term "Remote Parking Lease Agreement" be provided upon approval by the city as a condition of such use.  
Sec. 23-5.1.9. - Use of required parking spaces, non-residential districts. 
Required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be used only for these respective purposes and shall not be used for refuse containers, cart corrals, recycling kiosks, storage or permanent display of boats, trailers, campers, motor vehicles or other goods, materials, or products for sale.  
Sec. 23-5.1.10. - Fire lanes. 
Fire lanes shall be provided in all multi-family (and in some single-family attached) and nonresidential developments, as required by the adopted fire code of the city (also see the subdivision ordinance for certain fire lane regulations).  
DIVISION 5.2. - LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-655, § 20(Exh. D), adopted Sept. 25, 2018, amended Div. 5.2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 5.2, §§ 23-5.2.1—23-5.2.4, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2001-71, 7-21-01; Ord. No. 2003-156, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 2004-207, 8-10-04) 
 
Sec. 23-5.2.1. - Purpose. 
Landscaping provides environmental benefits to a community by cleaning the air and reducing the impacts from heat islands, stormwater runoff, lighting and glare, and noise. Additionally, landscaping adds value to property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 20(Exh. D), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.2.2. - General provisions. 
(a)  The requirements for preservation and mitigation of protected trees are located in chapter 13, article IV entitled "tree preservation" of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  All plantings shall be in accordance with Appendix E. Other species may be approved by the landscape administrator subject to environmental sustainability and the proposed planting locations. 
(c)  Tree specifications and definitions shall be as referenced in the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2004. 
(d)  Newly planted landscaping required by this section shall meet the following criteria upon installation. 
(1)  Shade trees—A minimum of three (3) caliper inches measured six (6) inches above grade. 
(2)  Screening trees—A minimum of six (6) feet in height measured above grade. 
(3)  Ornamental trees—A minimum of two (2) caliper inches measured six (6) inches above grade. 
(4)  Shrubs—A minimum of five (5) gallons and a minimum height of two (2) feet. 
(5)  Ornamental grasses—A minimum of three (3) gallons. 
(e)  Tree plantings shall not include more than thirty (30) percent of the same species unless otherwise approved by the landscape administrator. 
(f)  Minimum tree spacing for shade and screening trees shall be no less than twenty (20) feet and no greater than thirty (30) feet unless approved by the landscape administrator. 
(g)  A minimum distance of five (5) feet shall be maintained from the trunk distance to adjacent pavement. 
(h)  All required plantings that are adjacent to pavement shall be protected with concrete curbs or equivalent barriers when necessary and shall maintain a three-foot radius vegetation free zone around fire hydrants and FDC equipment. 
(i)  Plantings shall not be located within the visibility triangle. 
(j)  A three-inch layer of fibrous mulch or other material approved by the landscape administrator shall be provided in shrub beds and around trees. 
(k)  Under special circumstances, the installation of required plantings may be delayed up to six (6) months with issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy subject to approval by the building official. 
(l)  For all non-residential and multiple-family uses, landscaped areas shall be irrigated by an underground irrigation system. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 20(Exh. D), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.2.3. - Utilization of existing plantings. 
The utilization of existing plantings to comply with the requirements in this section shall meet the following criteria: 
(a)  Existing, desirable plantings that are in a healthy, growing state shall be preserved to the extent reasonably possible. To determine the feasibility of preserving existing plantings, consideration will be given to the buildable area on the property, topographical constraints on design, drainage, access, and utilities. 
(b)  The caliper inches of trees shall be measured four and a half (4½) feet above the ground. 
(c)  Existing trees shall be in a healthy, growing condition surrounded by a permeable area of at least two (2) feet. 
(d)  The area below the dripline shall remain undisturbed, either by cutting or filling, in the development process. 
(e)  The developer/owner shall not put an impervious material under the dripline. Permeable pavements will be considered as impervious materials. 
(f)  Existing trees should not be incorporated in areas less than seventy-five (75) percent of their critical root zones or drip lines. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 20(Exh. D), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.2.4. - Non-residential and multiple-family uses. 
(a)  Street yards. Property zoned "MF", "NS", "LR", "CC", "C", "I" or "IP" or non-residential uses on residentially-zoned property shall be required to have landscaping in the street yard when there is new construction on undeveloped property or when the expansion of a structure or impervious surface is located within a street yard or adjoins a street yard in accordance with this subsection. 
(1)  A minimum of twenty (20) percent of the street yard shall have non-impervious coverage that includes plantings in accordance with Appendix E. 
(2)  Street yards with an area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less—Plant one (1) shade tree per one thousand (1,000) square feet of street yard or fraction thereof within the street yard. 
(3)  Street yards with an area greater than ten thousand (10,000) square feet to one hundred ten thousand (110,000) square feet—Plant ten (10) shade trees plus one (1) shade tree per two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or fraction thereof within the street yard. 
(4)  Street yards with an area greater than one hundred ten thousand (110,000) square feet—Plant fifty (50) shade trees plus one (1) shade tree per five thousand (5,000) square feet within the street yard. 
(5)  Additionally, street yards with a minimum area of three thousand (3,000) square feet shall plant at least one (1) grouping of three (3) eastern red cedar tree species subject to the width of the planting area in accordance with the following criteria. 
Minimum Planting 
Width Required 	Minimum Spacing Required 
25 feet or greater 	1 grouping/150 linear feet (15 feet off-center, tri-spacing) 
24.9 feet—15 feet 	1 grouping/100 linear feet (10 feet off-center, tri-spacing) 
14.9 feet—10 feet 	1 grouping/50 linear feet (3 feet off-center, tri-spacing) 
 
(b)  Proximity to buildings. On property zoned "MF", "NS", "LR", "CC", "C", "I" or "IP" or a residential district with non-residential uses, landscaping shall be required within fifteen (15) feet of main buildings where the primary entrance(s) is/are located when it is new construction or expansion of the cumulative floor area by more than fifty (50) percent. Plantings shall include one (1) or a combination of the following options. 
(1)  Evergreen shrubs or ornamental grasses. 
i.  Installed with a minimum height of three (3) feet and shall not exceed a maximum height of four (4) feet. 
ii.  The planting area shall have a minimum depth of four (4) feet and a minimum length of fifty (50) percent of the length of the elevation where the primary entrance(s) is/are located. 
iii.  Plantings shall not be thorny, spiky, etc., adjacent to a pedestrian sidewalk. 
(2)  Shade, screening or ornamental trees. 
i.  The planting area shall have a minimum depth of ten (10) feet and a minimum length of fifty (50) feet, unless planted within a tree grate. 
ii.  A drainage system or method shall be provided to ensure that all tree pits within this area have proper drainage. 
(c)  Off-street parking areas. On property zoned "MF", "NS", "LR", "CC", "C", "I" or "IP" or a residential district with non-residential uses, shade trees shall be required in new off-street parking areas or in the expansion of existing off-street parking areas. 
(1)  A large or medium tree shall be located within fifty (50) feet of every parking space for an automobile, passenger vehicle, or heavy vehicle. 
(2)  If the required tree is within a parking landscape island, the island must be a minimum of one (1) parking space in size. 
(3)  The requirements for shade trees in off-street parking areas shall not apply to the old town districts. 
(d)  Screening of parking for automobiles. On property zoned "MF", "NS", "LR", "CC", "C", "I" or "IP" or a residential district with non-residential uses, screening shall be required of new parking areas for automobiles or for expansions of such existing parking areas that are within view of an existing or future public right-of-way or an existing or future park or trail. The screening shall be a minimum of three (3) feet tall and a maximum of four (4) feet tall. There shall be a two-foot overhang or a vehicle stopping device if parking spaces adjoin planting areas. Screening materials may consist of one (1) or a combination of the following materials. 
(1)  Shrubs forming a continuous hedge. 
(2)  An earthen berm. 
(3)  A screening wall constructed of a primary building material. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 20(Exh. D), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.2.5. - Residential uses. 
This subsection shall apply to property that permits single-family residential uses on platted and unplatted parcels of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less. Newly planted trees, shrubs and ornamental grasses shall be warranted for a period of not less than one (1) year from the date the dwelling is released by the city for occupancy. This warranty shall be completely transferable to any subsequent property owner and shall cover the plantings and their installation. 
(a)  Street yard. A minimum of two (2) shade or screening trees shall be planted in the street yard when there is new construction on undeveloped property or when the expansion of a structure or impervious surface is located within a street yard or adjoins a street yard. 
(b)  Proximity to buildings. Landscaping shall be required around the exposed base of a residential building's foundation when it is new construction or the floor area is expanded within a street yard or adjoining a street yard. Plantings shall meet the following criteria. 
(1)  Plantings shall be evergreen shrubs or ornamental grasses. 
(2)  Plantings shall be a minimum of five (5) gallons upon installation. 
(3)  Plantings shall be spaced appropriately to prevent over-crowding and per industry standard spacing requirements. 
(4)  The planting bed shall be the length of the building with the exception of pedestrian and vehicular entrances. 
(c)  Ground cover. With the exception of driveways, walkways, sidewalks, ponds and gardens, the street yard shall be planted with grass or contain a material approved by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 20(Exh. D), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.2.6. - Maintenance. 
Landscaping on the property shall be maintained and replaced on the property in accordance with the provisions in this subsection. 
(a)  Replacement of required trees. If a required tree is voluntarily or involuntarily removed or dies, it shall be replaced within ninety (90) days of removal or death consistent with the approved landscape plan, as applicable, in accordance with the following criteria. 
(1)  Shade, screening or ornamental trees less than eight (8) caliper inches—Replace with a minimum of one (1), three-inch caliper tree of a similar species and characteristics. 
(2)  Shade, screening or ornamental tree of eight (8) caliper inches or greater—Follow the requirements for tree mitigation described in chapter 13, article IV entitled "tree preservation" of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Replacement of shrubs, grasses and ground cover. If shrubs, grasses or ground cover are voluntarily or involuntarily removed or die, they shall be replaced within ninety (90) days of removal or death consistent with the approved landscape plan, as applicable, with a similar species and characteristics. 
(c)  The maintenance and pruning of trees and shrubs shall be in accordance with landscape industry best management practices, ANSI A300. 
(d)  No person or entity may use improper or malicious maintenance or pruning techniques which would likely lead to the death of the tree and/or plant. 
(e)  It is recommended that the property owner and/or developer consider the placement of signage on the property with respect to maintenance of the required plantings prior to approval of the landscape plan. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 20(Exh. D), 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 5.3. - FENCING, WALLS AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-655, § 21(Exh. E), adopted Sept. 25, 2018, amended Div. 5.3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 5.3, §§ 23-5.3.1, 23-5.3.2, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2001-71, 7-21-01; Ord. No. 2003-143, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 2004-201, 4-13-04; Ord. No. 2011-456, 9-13-11) 
 
Sec. 23-5.3.1. - Purpose. 
To encourage the most appropriate use of land and conserve and protect the privacy and value of adjacent permitted uses. Regulations are prescribed for the location and type of various screening devices to be used when required in the various zoning districts or in this division in accordance with the following standards. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 21(Exh. E), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.3.2 - Land uses. 
(a)  Multiple-family and non-residential uses adjoining single-family districts. When there is new construction or expansion of multiple-family and non-residential uses, such property shall provide screening in accordance with this section along the property line adjoining a single-family district or a portion of a planned development district designated for single-family residential uses. The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the required screening. 
(b)  Non-residential districts adjoining multiple-family districts. When there is new construction or expansion of non-residential uses in non-residential districts, such property shall provide screening in accordance with this section along the property line adjoining a multiple-family district or a portion of a planned development district designated for multiple-family uses. The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the required screening. 
(c)  When screening is required by this section, it shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Be constructed of a primary building material that is similar to the main building with the exception of glass walls; 
(2)  Be finished on both sides; and 
(3)  Have a minimum height of six (6) feet and a maximum height of eight (8) feet; or 
(4)  Provide a minimum fifty-foot wide conservation buffer consisting of dense foliage as determined by the planning director. 
(d)  Alternative screening. The planning and zoning commission and city council may approve alternative screening during consideration of the site plan application if it finds that the property proposes an adequate buffer from the adjacent single-family residential or multiple-family property. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 21(Exh. E), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.3.3. - Outdoor storage. 
Outdoor storage shall be screened by one (1) or a combination of the following methods. The minimum height shall be the taller of six (6) feet or one (1) foot above the height of the outdoor storage that is required to be screened. 
(a)  A fence or wall constructed of a primary building material that is similar to the main building. In the industrial and industrial park districts, the fence or wall may be constructed of materials made of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) if it is located in the side or rear yards that do not have street frontage. 
(b)  A berm. 
(c)  Large evergreen shrubs planted a maximum of four (4) feet apart that shall create a solid screen at the required height within two (2) years. 
(d)  Alternative screening. The planning and zoning commission and city council may approve alternative screening during consideration of the site plan application if it finds that the property proposes an adequate screening of the outdoor storage compatible with surrounding land uses. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 21(Exh. E), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.3.4. - Refuse storage areas. 
(a)  Location of refuse storage areas. 
(1)  Refuse storage areas shall be located on the side or rear of the building as to facilitate pickup by refuse collection agencies. 
(2)  Refuse storage areas shall not be located within required yard setbacks. 
(3)  Refuse storage areas shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of property zoned as a single-family residential district. 
(4)  Each refuse facility shall be located so as to facilitate pickup by refuse collection agencies with adequate reinforced paved areas for loading and unloading. 
(b)  Refuse storage that is not within a screened service area shall be screened on three (3) sides in accordance with one (1) of the following methods. The fourth side shall be utilized for pickup service with an optional gate to secure the area. The minimum height shall be the taller of six (6) feet or one (1) foot above the height of the refuse storage area that is required to be screened. 
(1)  A fence or wall constructed of a primary building material that is similar to the main building. 
(2)  Redwood, cedar, preservative pressure treated wood, or other similar materials, screened with large evergreen shrubs planted four (4) feet on center and staggered thirty (30) to thirty-six (36) inches. 
(3)  Fence posts shall be rust-protected metal, masonry or concrete. Six-inch concrete filled steel pipes, painted in a neutral color, shall be located to protect the enclosure from truck operations. 
(4)  The planning and zoning commission and city council may approve alternative screening during consideration of the site plan application if it finds that the property proposes an adequate screening of the refuse storage area compatible with surrounding land uses. 
 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 21(Exh. E), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.3.5. - Loading docks, service areas. 
(a)  Location of loading docks and service areas. 
(1)  Loading docks and service areas shall be at the side or rear of buildings. 
(2)  Loading docks and service areas shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of property that is designated for single-family residential uses unless wholly enclosed within a building. 
(3)  Loading docks and service areas shall not face an existing or future right-of-way, park or trail unless it is set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet and screened from view using a line of sight measured from a vertical height of five (5) feet. 
(b)  Loading docks and service areas shall be screened in accordance with one (1) of the following methods. The minimum height shall be the taller of six (6) feet or the height required to screen the line of sight described in this section at a linear distance equal to the exposed length. 
(1)  A fence or wall constructed of a primary building material that is similar to the main building. 
(2)  Loading docks and service areas that are adjacent to residential uses and in use between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. shall be enclosed on three (3) sides. 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission and city council may approve alternative screening during consideration of the site plan application if it finds that the property proposes an adequate screening of the loading docks or service area compatible with surrounding land uses. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 21(Exh. E), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.3.6. - Garage bays. 
(a)  Garage bays shall be at the side or rear of buildings. 
(b)  Garage bays shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of property that is designated for single-family residential uses. 
(c)  Garage bays shall be screened by one (1) or a combination of the following methods. The minimum height shall be four (4) feet. A wall or fence required to screen land uses described in this division may be utilized to meet the screening requirement for garage bays. 
(1)  A fence or wall constructed of a primary building material that is similar to the main building. 
(2)  Large evergreen shrubs planted a maximum of four (4) feet apart that shall create a continuous hedge. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 21(Exh. E), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.3.7. - Ground and wall-mounted mechanical equipment. 
(a)  Single-family residential uses. Ground and wall-mounted mechanical equipment shall not be located in the front street yard. Ground and wall-mounted mechanical equipment that is located in a side or rear street yard shall be screened in accordance with the provisions in this section. 
(b)  Non-residential and multiple-family uses. Ground and wall-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened in accordance with the provisions in this section when located: 
(1)  Facing an existing or future public right-of-way that is within one hundred (100) feet; 
(2)  Facing an existing or future park or trail that is within one hundred (100) feet; 
(3)  Facing a residential district or a portion of a planned development district designated for residential uses that is within one hundred (100) feet where a screening wall is not required; or 
(4)  On the side of the building containing the primary entrance(s). 
(c)  The minimum height and width of the screening shall be equivalent to the area of the equipment being screened and consist of one (1) or a combination of the following: 
(1)  A berm; 
(2)  A planting screen (hedge); or 
(3)  A wall utilizing primary building materials similar to those of the main building. 
(d)  Screening of utility structures shall be approved by the applicable utility company. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 21(Exh. E), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.3.8. - Fencing on property when screening is not required. 
Fencing that is not required for screening installed on property containing a non-residential or multiple-family use shall meet the following criteria. 
(a)  The fencing shall not be located within a street yard unless it meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The fencing is not located within the minimum required front yard setback; and 
(2)  The fencing is constructed of transparent materials such as wrought iron or a similar material approved by the building official. Chain-link fencing shall not be considered a similar material to wrought iron. 
(b)  Fencing that is located within a side or rear yard shall be constructed of one (1) of the following materials. 
(1)  A primary building material that is similar to the main building. 
(2)  Transparent materials such as wrought iron or a similar material approved by the building official. Chain-link fencing shall not be considered a similar material to wrought iron. 
(3)  In the industrial and industrial park districts, fencing may be constructed of materials made of polyvinyl chloride (PVC). 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 21(Exh. E), 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 5.4. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 23-5.4.1. - Setbacks and lot configuration. 
(a)  Measuring setbacks. All setback measurements shall be made in accordance with Illustrations 6, 7, and 8. 
(b)  Configuration of lots. Wherever possible, flag lots (i.e., lots with minimal, or panhandle type, frontage) shall be avoided. Similarly, through (i.e., double frontage) lots (particularly within residential zoning districts) shall also be avoided wherever possible. (Also see Subdivision Ordinance for regulations pertaining to the configuration of lots.)  
Sec. 23-5.4.2. - Front yard. 
(a)  On all corner lots, the front yard setback shall be observed along the frontage of both intersecting streets, unless approved specifically otherwise on a final plat. Where single-family and townhouse lots have double frontage, extending from one (1) street to another, or are on a corner, a required front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a side or rear yard building line has been established along one (1) frontage on the plat, in which event only one (1) required front yard need be observed. The side and/or rear yards in the case of single-family and townhouse uses shall be identified and the front of the structure shall not face the side or rear yard (see Illustration 9). 
(b)  Where the frontage on one (1) side of a street between two intersecting streets is divided by two (2) or more zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire frontage (see Illustration 3). 
(c)  The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, to the nearest supporting member of a covered porch or terrace, or to any attached accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions or a porch without posts or columns may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four (4) feet, and subsurface structures, platforms or slabs may not project into the front yard to a height greater than thirty (30) inches above the average grade of the yard (see Illustration 4). 
(d)  Lots fronting on the bubble portion of a cul-de-sac or "eyebrow" of a street shall have a minimum lot width of seventy (70) feet unless a lesser lot width is specified for the zoning district in which the lot is located. Measurement of the width of such lots shall be in a straight line from the points of the intersection of the building line with the side lot line. (See Illustration 6) 
(e)  Gasoline service station pump islands that parallel a public street may be located a minimum of eighteen (18) feet to the property line adjacent to a public street. For pump islands that are perpendicular or diagonal to a public street, the setback shall be thirty (30) feet in order to prevent vehicles stacking out into the street while waiting for a pump position. Pump islands may extend beyond the front building line as described above (provided that all other requirements of this chapter are met), but shall not be closer than fifteen (15) feet to any property line that is not adjacent to a public street. 
(f)  Where a future right-of-way line has been established for future widening or opening of a street or thoroughfare, upon which a lot abuts, then the front, side, or rear yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 2002-103, § 1, 3-26-02)  
Sec. 23-5.4.3. - Side yards. 
(a)  On a corner lot used for one- or two-family dwellings, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards on all lots, except where one (1) street exposure is designated as a side yard and separated from the adjacent lot by an alley. In such case, a building line may be designated on the final plat by the planning and zoning administrator, or designee, with a minimum side yard of fifteen (15) feet. On lots which were official lots of record prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, the minimum side yard adjacent to a side street shall comply with the minimum required side yard for the respective district. 
(b)  Every part of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices, and other architectural features not to exceed twelve (12) inches into the required side yard, and roof eaves projecting not to exceed thirty-six (36) inches into the required side yard. Air conditioning compressors and similar equipment are permitted in the side yard. 
(c)  Where a future right-of-way line has been established for future widening or opening of a street or thoroughfare, upon which a lot abuts, then the front, side, or rear yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line.  
Sec. 23-5.4.4. - Special height regulations. 
(a)  In the districts where the height of buildings is restricted to two (2) or two and one-half (2.5) stories, cooling towers may extend for an additional height not to exceed fifty (50) feet above the average grade line of the building. Water stand pipes and tanks, church steeples, domes and spires, school buildings, and institutional buildings may be erected to exceed the height limit, specified in the particular zoning district, provided that one (1) additional foot shall be added to the width and depth of front, side, and rear yards for each foot that such structures exceed the district height limit. 
(b)  In any district where a structure is permitted to be constructed above two (2) stories, an additional setback shall be required from any existing single-family residential use or zoning district. The additional setback shall be two (2) feet for every one (1) foot in height above two (2) stories from the single-family district boundary line or property line, whichever is closer. A conditional use permit shall be required for any request involving a building taller than the maximum height allowed in a nonresidential district. 
(Ord. No. 2004-208 § 3, 06-22-04)  
Sec. 23-5.4.5.1. - Telecommunications facilities. 
Except for facilities listed in section 23-5.4.6(a), in all districts in which telecommunications facilities are authorized and in addition to use limitations contained in Article 4, the following standards and procedures apply to such uses. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Antenna: A metallic, graphite, fiberglass or other device which is attached to a transmission tower, cellular tower, monopole, mast, building or other structure for transmitting and receiving electromagnetic waves. 
(2)  Building-mounted facility: A telecommunications facility in which antennas are mounted to the roof or facade of a building. 
(3)  Cellular communications facility: A telecommunications facility, including but not limited to an antenna or tower. 
(4)  Lattice tower: A guyed or self-supporting three- or four-sided, open steel frame structure used to support telecommunications equipment. 
(5)  Monopole: A single, self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors, usually consisting of a galvanized or other unpainted metal or a wooden pole, with below grade foundations that is intended to support antennas necessary to deliver and receive cellular or personal communications services transmissions. 
(6)  Telecommunications tower: A free-standing structure consisting of a support structure, antenna and associated equipment. The support structure may be a wooden pole, monopole, lattice tower, light standard or other vertical support. 
(7)  Telecommunications facility: An unmanned facility consisting of equipment for the reception, switching or receiving of wireless telecommunications. 
(b)  Height and setback standards for telecommunications towers. 
(1)  Except as provided in section 23-5.4.5.1(b)(2), the height of a telecommunications tower, excluding antenna array, shall be a function of distance of the tower from any residential use, and shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  No tower shall be erected within two hundred (200) feet of any residential use. 
b.  The height of the tower shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet in height, if the tower is located two hundred (200) or more feet and less than two hundred fifty (250) feet from any residential use. 
c.  The height of the tower shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet in height, if the tower is located two hundred fifty (250) or more and less than five hundred forty (540) feet from any residential use. 
d.  The height of the tower shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) feet in height, if the tower is located five hundred forty (540) feet or more from any residential use. 
e.  Only monopole towers shall be allowed within five hundred forty (540) feet of any residential use. 
f.  The antenna array shall not exceed the allowed tower height by more than ten (10) feet. 
g.  All guys and guy anchors shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any property line. 
h.  The tower shall be erected and operated in compliance with current Federal Communication Commission and other applicable federal and state standards. 
(2)  The height limitations in section 23-5.4.5.1(b)(1) shall not apply in the following circumstances: 
a.  There are no more than two residential uses within two hundred (200) feet of the tower base. 
b.  The proposed tower is erected to replace existing poles and either: 
i.  The pole replaced is a functioning utility pole or light standard within a utility easement or public right-of-way, recreation facility light pole or telecommunication tower; or 
ii.  Replacement tower height, including antenna array, does not exceed: 
(a)  The height of the original utility, light standard, or recreation facility pole by more than ten (10) feet; and 
(b)  The replacement tower does not obstruct a public sidewalk, public alley, or other public right-of-way, and 
(c)  Pole function is not significantly altered. 
c.  Towers erected to be used by a public agency, including those for police, fire, EMS, 911, or other similar public emergency communications for the city. 
(3)  For the purpose of applying the restrictions set forth in section 23-5.4.5.1(b)(2) subsections a., b., and c., the term "residential use" has the meaning set forth in section 23-4.1.2, use charts, but excludes property that is: 
a.  Vacant and unplatted; or 
b.  Used as a college dormitory. 
(4)  Distances in this section shall be measured along a single straight line between the center of the tower base and the nearest point on any property line of a residential zoning district or use. 
Building-mounted facilities. 
Antennas on the rooftop or above a structure shall be screened, constructed and/or colored to match the structure to which they are attached and may not exceed the height of the rooftop or structure by more than ten (10) feet. 
Antennas mounted on the side of a building or structure shall be painted to match the color of the building or structure or the background against which they are most commonly seen. 
Antennas may be located wholly within any building authorized in the zoning district. 
If an accessory equipment shelter is present, it must blend with the surrounding building(s) in architectural character or color. 
Landscaping. The entire facility must be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with its environment. The telecommunications tower itself must be camouflaged to blend with the surrounding environment through the use of color, materials and design. The entire facility and its landscape must be maintained in accordance with division 5.2 of these zoning district regulations. A sample of the intended design must be submitted to the city at the time of application. 
Accessory buildings. A single-story unmanned accessory building of no more than three hundred (300) square feet gross floor area is permissible to store equipment needed to send and to receive transmissions but may not include offices or long term storage of vehicles. 
Inspections. The city reserves the right to make inspections of any telecommunication facility with corporate limits of the city to ensure structural integrity. Based upon the results of the inspection, the city may require repair or removal of the telecommunications facility. 
Application requirements. Any person, firm, corporation, or any other entity desiring to build a telecommunication facility within the corporate city limits of the city must obtain a building permit, pay appropriate fees and submit a signed application that includes all materials and information detailed herein. 
Name of applicant. 
Address of applicant. 
Location of proposed site. 
Type of support structure and antenna and height. 
Photos and/or drawings of all equipment, structures and antennas. 
Names and addresses of telecommunication providers or users of the proposed tower or antenna. 
Applicants master antenna/tower plan for the city and surrounding area, if necessary. 
Detailed account of co-location efforts. 
If a new tower is allowed, the owner must certify in writing a willingness to allow co-location at the new site, as well as the technological and fiscal feasibility of co-location. 
Any other requirement of this chapter. 
Application fee. The city will charge an application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for telecommunications towers located within the corporate city limits of the city.  
Sec. 23-5.4.5.2. - Broadcast towers and antennas. 
Except for facilities listed in section 23-5.4.6(a), in all districts in which broadcast towers and antennas are authorized and in addition to use limitations contained in Article 4, the following standards and procedures apply to such uses. 
(a)  Design requirements: 
(1)  The tower and guy wires must all be located on same tract of land. 
(2)  All tower properties shall be surrounded by a fence. Tower base and guy anchors should be protected by a six-foot tall fence with at least three (3) strands of barbed wire on top. All fences shall be kept in good repair. 
(3)  All towers to be constructed shall be able to support equipment that is capable of transmitting five (5) television broadcast signals and ten (10) FM broadcast signals. 
(4)  All antennas required by this section shall be located at or above one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet above sea level. 
(5)  A panel antenna maybe used to meet the FM broadcast signal requirements. 
(6)  A tower cross section showing antenna types and locations shall be provided by the applicant. 
(7)  Steel antenna towers and antenna supporting structures shall be designed and engineered in compliance with Ansi/TIA/EIA-222-F-1996, or to current design standard. 
(b)  Site plan required. A site plan must be submitted showing the following: 
(1)  Property boundaries and adjacent properly lines and streets. 
(2)  Tower and guy wire locations. 
(3)  Building location and square feet. 
(4)  Drive and parking area location and material. 
(5)  Fence locations with height and material specified. 
(6)  Tower cross section showing antenna types and location with elevations above sea level specified. 
(c)  Building permit required. A building permit is required before adding or replacing any antenna, transmission line, or appurtenance involving a three-inch or larger line. A permit is also required for adding or replacing antenna or transmission line located more than five hundred (500) feet above the tower base. In addition to all other requirements, an applicant for a building permit shall submit the following: 
(1)  A certification signed and sealed by a registered Engineer of the State of Texas attesting to structural integrity of the tower as it is planned to be loaded and during all points of construction. The certification shall include a written description of the method, materials, equipment, tools, and personnel to be used in the installation of the antenna and a statement that the tower is structurally capable of withstanding such construction activities. 
(2)  Provide city with projected fall pattern for all new towers. 
(3)  An indemnity agreement approved by the city attorney. 
(4)  For tower applications, FAA's Determination of No Hazard to Air Navigation. 
(5)  In addition to the requirements of this section 23-5.4.5.2(c), the requirements of section 23-5.4.5.1(a)(2) and section 23-5.4.6 apply to applications for a building permit for existing towers.  
Sec. 23-5.4.6. - Regulations applicable to all towers and antenna. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  The following regulations apply to all commercial and amateur antennae and support structures, unless expressly exempted in subsection (2). A building permit shall be required prior to erection or installation of any antenna, antenna support structure and related structures/equipment, except for those facilities expressly exempted in subsection (2). 
(2)  The following types of direct broadcast satellite reception antennae, multi-channel multi-point distribution (as defined by the FCC) antennae, television reception antennae, or amateur radio antennae that are not mounted on a pole or mast that is twenty (20) feet or more in height are exempt from the regulations in this section, except as provided in subsection (3). 
a.  Antennae that are one (1) meter or less in diameter in residential zoning districts, and antennae that are two (2) meters or less in diameter, in nonresidential zoning districts; 
b.  Antennae designed to only receive television broadcasts; 
c.  Amateur radio antennae concealed behind or located upon or within attics, eaves, gutters or roofing components of the building; and 
d.  Amateur radio ground-mounted whips and wire antennae. 
(3)  The regulations contained in sections 23-5.4.6(d)(1), 23-5.4.6(d)(5), and 5.4.6.D.11, apply to all commercial and amateur antennae and support structures. 
(b)  Modifications and maintenance. 
(1)  Steel antenna towers and antenna supporting structures shall submit to the city a structural analysis performed by a registered professional structural engineer whenever there is a change in antennas, and/or appurtenances, involving three-inch or larger transmission lines. 
(2)  Owners of towers shall perform periodic tower inspection and maintenance to assure safety and extend the tower's service life. Commencing in 1998 for existing guyed towers approved during or prior to 1995 and for existing monopoles and self-supporting towers approved during or prior to 1993, a major inspection of each tower shall be performed, and thereafter, every three (3) years for guyed towers and every 5 years for monopoles and self supporting towers. For guyed towers approved after 1995, inspections shall commence three (3) years from the date of approval of the building permit authorizing construction of the tower and every three (3) years thereafter. For monopoles and self-supporting towers approved after 1993, inspections shall commence five (5) years from the date of approval of the building permit authorizing construction of the tower and every five (5) years thereafter. 
(3)  A report containing information on the following items shall be submitted to the city upon completion of each inspection: 
a.  A tower inspection crew is to be hired by the tower owner to perform the tower inspection. 
b.  Tower inspection crews shall use a city-provided inspection report (see forms provided by the city). 
c.  The inspection crews report will then be reviewed by a registered professional engineer familiar with tower construction to review the report and make repair recommendations. 
d.  The registered professional engineer will them submit a letter to the city verifying that the repairs have been made to the tower. 
e.  The tower inspection crew and registered professional engineer shall be hired by the tower owner and be an independent contractor. 
f.  Once the inspection process is completed, the tower owner shall provide the city with the tower inspection report, engineer repair recommendation letter, engineer repairs and maintenance completed letter. 
(c)  Nonconformity and termination of use. Towers and antennas which are not in use for six (6) months shall be deemed abandoned and shall be removed by the owner of the facility within ninety (90) days of the end of such six-month period. Upon removal, the site shall be re-vegetated to blend with the existing surrounding vegetation., and otherwise shall be returned to its original condition. 
(d)  General requirements 
(1)  No amateur or commercial antenna, antenna support structure, microwave reflector/antenna, or associated foundations or support wires or appurtenances shall be located within any required setback area for the front, side or rear yards. 
(2)  All antennae and support structures must meet or exceed the current standards and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and/or all other applicable federal, state and local authorities. If those standards change, then the owner/user of an antenna or support structure must bring the antenna/structure into compliance within six (6) months or as may otherwise be required by the applicable regulating authority. 
(3)  All installations shall comply with applicable federal, state and local building codes and the standards published by the Electronic Industries Association. Owners/users shall have thirty (30) days after receiving notice that an installation is in violation of applicable codes in order to bring it into full compliance. 
(4)  Antennae (amateur or commercial) shall not create electromagnetic or other interference with the City of Cedar Hill's and the county's radio frequencies and public safety operations, as required by the FCC. Antennae also shall not interfere with radio or television reception of nearby property owners. In no manner shall the use of such equipment infringe upon adjoining property owners. 
(5)  No antenna or support structure shall be located so as to create a visual obstruction within critical visibility areas (such as at street intersections or where a private driveway enters a roadway) or a traffic safety problem. 
(6)  Safeguards shall be utilized to prevent unauthorized access to an antenna installation (e.g., on a water tower or utility structure, a freestanding installation, etc.).Safeguards include certain devices identified/recommended by the manufacturer of the antenna or support structure, a fence, a climbing guard, or other commercially available safety devices. Climbing spikes, if utilized, shall be removed immediately following use. 
(7)  Temporary antennae shall only be allowed in the following instances: 
a.  In conjunction with a festival, carnival, rodeo or other special event/activity. 
b.  In case of an emergency (e.g., severe weather, etc.) or a news coverage event; 
c.  When needed to restore service on a temporary basis after failure of an antenna installation. The city must be notified within seventy-two (72) hours of the placement of a temporary antenna. If the temporary antenna is to be needed for more than seven (7) days, then the owner/user must apply for and acquire a permit for the temporary installation on or before the eighth (8th) day following initial placement of the antenna. 
(8)  Collocation is greatly encouraged by the city. 
a.  All new support structures over fifty (50) feet in height shall be constructed to support antennae for at least two carriers, unless the structure is an alternative or stealth design, or the support structure is replacing an existing utility structure or light standard. Sufficient area for associated structures and equipment shall also be provided. 
b.  A support structure which is modified or reconstructed in order to accommodate collocation shall be of the same type, design and height as the existing structure, and it may be moved on the same property within fifty (50) feet of its original location provided that it is not moved any closer to residentially zoned property (if the structure was allowed by CUP, then its new location shall be within the physical/land boundaries of the CUP). The original (i.e., former) support structure shall be removed from the property within ninety (90) days following completion of the new structure. 
c.  Where an additional antenna is to be attached to an existing support structure that already has an antenna mounted upon it, the new antenna shall comply with and be compatible with the design of the existing antenna on the collocated structure. 
(9)  Support buildings and equipment storage areas/buildings shall be screened from public view if mounted on a rooftop. When ground mounted, they shall meet all applicable front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the applicable base zoning district. They shall also be of a neutral color and shall use exterior finish colors and materials that are compatible with nearby structures. They shall be screened from public view by a dense, opaque evergreen landscaped screen with an initial planting height of three (3) feet, and which will attain an ultimate height of six (6) feet at maturity. A six-foot solid masonry wall may be used in lieu of the landscaped screen provided exterior finish materials are compatible with nearby structures. The use of a wood fence for screening is prohibited, and wrought iron or chain link may only be used in conjunction with a landscaped screen as specified above. 
(10)  Satellite dishes and other similar antennae shall be permitted on the roof of a building, as long as satellite dishes do not exceed one (1) meter (thirty-nine (39) inches) in diameter and antennae do not extend over twelve (12) feet above the roof of the building. A letter certifying the roof's/building's structural stability shall be written and sealed by a registered architect or engineer, and shall be submitted to the city manager, or his/her designee, prior to any approval of a roof-mounted antenna. Roof-mounted antennae that comply with the provisions of these regulations do not require additional yard setbacks or setbacks from residential areas or dwellings. 
(11)  Only one (1) amateur antenna/support structure shall be permitted per residential lot, except that a maximum of two (2) satellite dishes may be allowed if both units are no larger than one (1) meter (thirty-nine (39) inches) in diameter (only one (1) allowed if over one (1) meter in diameter). Satellite dishes in any residential district shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in diameter, and must be permitted by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(12)  All commercial signs, flags, lights and attachments other than those required for emergency identification, communications operations, structural stability, or as required for flight visibility by the FAA and/or FCC shall be prohibited on any antenna or antenna support structure. However, lights may remain or be placed upon light standards that are altered or replaced in order for them to serve as antenna support structures provided that said lights are not commercial (i.e., for-profit) in nature, and provided that said lights are placed/replaced as the same size, configuration, number of bulbs, degree of luminance, etc. as they previously existed prior to support structure modification/replacement. 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 20, 1-10-06)  
Sec. 23-5.4.7. - Sight visibility. 
Visual clearance shall be provided in all zoning districts so that no fence, wall, architectural screen, earth mounding or landscaping thirty (30) inches or higher above the street center line obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any street, alley, or driveway intersection as follows: 
(a)  At a street intersection, clear vision must be maintained for a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet across any lot measured from the corner of the property line in both directions (see Illustration 12). 
(b)  At an intersection with an alley, this clearance must be maintained for ten (10) feet (see Illustration 12). 
(c)  Shrubs and hedges that are typically less than thirty (30) inches in height at maturity, as measured from the centerline of the street, may be located in the visual clearance areas of all districts. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 22, 9-25-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-665, § 22, adopted Sept. 25, 2018 renumbered § 23-5.4.10 as 23-5.4.7. The previous § 23-5.4.7 was reserved.  
Sec. 23-5.4.8. - Nonresidential uses in residential zoning districts. 
Nonresidential uses (e.g., churches, schools, day/child care centers, etc.) permitted in residential zoning districts shall conform to the LR zoning district standards unless otherwise stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 23, 9-25-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-665, § 23, adopted Sept. 25, 2018 renumbered § 23-5.4.11 as 23-5.4.8. The previous § 23-5.4.8 pertained to open storage areas and derived from original content.  
Sec. 23-5.4.9. - Certain large domestic animals allowed within specific districts. 
The stabling of horses, cattle, sheep and goats may be kept within any zoning district subject to the requirements of the Cedar Hill Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2004-201, § 12, 4-13-04; Ord. No. 2018-665, § 24, 9-25-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-665, § 24, adopted Sept. 25, 2018 renumbered § 23-5.4.12 as 23-5.4.9. The previous § 23-5.4.9 pertained to outdoor sales, storage and display and derived from Ord. No. 2004-207, § 4, 8-10-04.  
Sec. 23-5.4.10. - Veterinarian uses within nonresidential districts. 
Veterinarian clinics or hospitals shall be authorized within nonresidential districts if conforming to the following provisions: 
(a)  An indoor clinic or hospital run under the direction of a veterinarian shall be located entirely within a completely enclosed, soundproofed, and air conditioned building and any noise or odors created by activities within shall not be perceptible beyond the property line. No animals are kept outside the building at any time. Sufficient area for outdoor exercise will be fully screened from view of any public right-of-way with a six (6) to eight (8) foot screening wall conforming to section 23-5.3.2, fencing walls and screening requirements. 
(b)  An indoor/outdoor clinic or hospital run under the direction of a veterinarian shall be located entirely within a completely enclosed, soundproofed, and air conditioned building and any noise or odors created by activities within shall not be perceptible beyond the property line. Sufficient area for pens, kennels, and outdoor exercise area shall be provided and pens and kennels shall be enclosed by a permanent type of fencing. All outdoor areas shall be fully screened from view of any public right-of-way with a six (6) to eight (8) foot screening wall and the outdoor pen, kennel, and exercise area shall be set back at least one hundred fifty (150) feet and likewise screened from a residentially-zoned district, measured in a straight line from the outdoor pen area. These screening walls shall be in conformance with section 23-5.3.2, fencing walls and screening requirements - screening of nonresidential and multi-family areas. 
(Ord. No. 2004-201, § 12, 4-13-04; Ord. No. 2018-655, § 25, 9-25-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-665, § 25, adopted Sept. 25, 2018 renumbered § 23-5.4.13 as 23-5.4.10. See also note to § 23-5.4.7.  
DIVISION 5.5. - PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 23-5.5.1. - Conformance. 
In all zoning districts, any use indicated in the permitted use list shall conform in operation, location, and construction to the performance standards as administered by county, state, or federal agencies. All uses, including those, which may be allowed by PD or CUP, shall conform in operation, location, and construction to appropriate performance standards for noise, smoke, and particulate matter, odorous matter, fire, or explosive hazard material, toxic and noxious matter, vibration, and glare.  
Sec. 23-5.5.2. - Noise and requirements for toxic waste disposal observed. 
All federal and state pollution, noise, and requirements for toxic waste disposal shall be observed.  
Sec. 23-5.5.3. - Noise. 
(a)  Definitions: 
Weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibel as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighing network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
Background noise means noise from all sources other than that under specific consideration including traffic operating on public thoroughfare, and is established by measuring the noise level over an eight minute period of time. 
Bounding lot line means the far side of any street, alley, stream, or other permanently dedicated open space from the stationary source when such open space exists between the lot line of the stationary source and adjacent property. When no such open space exists, the common line between two pieces of property shall be interpreted as the bounding lot line. 
Daytime means the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any given day. 
Decibel (dB) means a unit for measuring the volume of a sound, equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 Micropascals (20 Micronewtons per square meter). 
Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
Sound means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighing network such as A, B, or C as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI SI.4-1971, or the latest approved revision thereto). If the frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply. 
Sound level meter means an instrument which includes a microphone amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels. 
Sound pressure means the instantaneous difference between the actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in space, as produced by sound energy. 
Sound pressure level (SPL) means 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of 20 Micropascals (20 x 10-6 N/m2). The sound pressure level is denoted LP or SPL and is expressed in decibel. 
Time weighted means an established period of time during which the sound pressure levels are averaged. 
(b)  General provisions. A person shall not conduct a use that creates a noise level that exceeds the standards established in this section. 
A sound level meter that meets the standards of the American Standards Association must be used to determine whether a noise level violates a noise standard in this section. The instrument must be maintained in a good working condition. A calibration check should be made prior to and following any noise investigation. 
Traffic, aircraft, and other background noises are not considered in measuring noise levels except when such noises are being generated on and as a result of the uses of a property being investigated for a potential noise violation. 
For purposes of this section, identifiable portions of a planned development district (PD) used for residential uses shall be treated as a residential zoning district. Identifiable portions of a planned development district (PD) used for nonresidential uses permitted in all nonresidential districts except commercial (C), industrial park (IP) and industrial (I) shall be treated as a nonresidential district. Identifiable portions of a planned development district (PD) used for uses allowed only in commercial (C), industrial park (IP) and industrial (I) shall be treated like an industrial/commercial district. 
The requirements of this section do not apply to: 
(a)  Noises coming from daytime construction and maintenance activities performed on structures housing legal uses. 
(b)  Noises from safety signals, warning devices or other sound generating equipment used to warn the public of an emergency or for public safety. 
(c)  Lawn maintenance, repair of personal vehicles, and home repair of places of residences as long as these activities are conducted in the daytime hours as a normal function of a permitted use and the equipment is maintained in proper working order. 
(c)  Maximum permissible sound pressure levels. At no point at the bounding property line of any use shall the sound pressure level of any operation or activity exceed the standards specified in the following table. 
Zoning district 	Maximum permissible daytime decibel limit at bounding property line 	Maximum permissible daytime decibel limit at nearest specified zoning district line 
Uses located in residential districts (RR, SF-E, SF-22, SF-10, SF-8.5, SF-7, TH and MF) 	56 dBA 	56 dBA 
Uses located in nonresidential districts (OT, NS, LR, CC), excluding industrial/commercial districts (C, IP, I) 	63 dBA 	56 dBA at residential zoning district boundaries, 
63 dBA at nonresidential districts excluding industrial districts. 
Uses located in industrial or heavy commercial districts (C, IP and I) 	70 dBA 	56 dBA at residential zoning district boundaries, 
63 dBA at nonresidential districts excluding industrial districts. 
Planned development districts or portions thereof used for residential uses 	56 dBA 	56 dBA 
Planned development districts or portions thereof used for nonresidential uses 	63 dBA 	56 dBA at residential zoning district boundaries, 
63 dBA at nonresidential districts excluding industrial districts. 
Planned development districts or portions thereof used for industrial/heavy commercial uses 	70 dBA 	56 dBA at residential zoning district boundaries, 
63 dBA at nonresidential Districts excluding Industrial Districts. 
 
(d)  Noise level adjustments. The maximum noise levels permitted in subsection (c) shall be adjusted by subtracting seven (7) dBA for noise present at night time. 
The maximum noise levels permitted in subsection (c) shall be adjusted by subtracting seven (7) dBA for noise that is impulsive (meter reading changes at a rate greater than ten (10) decibels per second). 
The maximum noise levels permitted in subsection (c) shall be adjusted by adding 10dBA when: 
Noise has an "on time" of no more than: 	and an "off time" between successive "on times" of at least 	Decibels added to permitted noise level 
0.5 minutes 	one half hour 	10 
5.0 minutes 	one hour 	10 
10.0 minutes 	two hours 	10 
20.0 minutes 	four hours 	10 
 
"Off time" is when the level of the primary noise being measured does not exceed that of the background noise by more than five (5) dBA.  
Sec. 23-5.5.4. - Smoke and particulate matter. 
No operation or use shall cause, create, or allow the emission for more than three (3) minutes in any one (1) hour of air contaminants which at the emission point or within the bounds of the property are: 
As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 2 on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines Information Circular 7118. 
Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in the standard prescribed in 3-1302-1 above except that, when the presence of uncombined water is the only reason for failure to comply or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building which prevents their escape into the atmosphere, the standards specified in 3-1302-1 and -2 shall not apply. 
The emission of particulate matter from all sources shall not exceed 0.5 pounds per acre of property within the plant site per any one (1) hour. 
Open storage and open processing operations, including on-site transportation movements which are the source of wind or air borne dust or other particulate matter; or which involves dust or other particulate air contaminants, generating equipment such as used in paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage or sand blasting shall be so conducted that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not transported across the boundary line of the tract on which the use is located in concentrations exceeding four grains per one thousand (1,000) cubic feet of air.  
Sec. 23-5.5.5. - Odorous matter. 
(a)  No use shall be located or operated which involves the emission of odorous matter from a source of operation where the odorous matter exceeds the odor threshold at the bounding property line or any point beyond the tract on which such use or operation is located. 
(b)  The odor threshold as herein set forth shall be determined by observation by a person or persons. In any case, where uncertainty may arise or where the operator or owner of an odor emitting use may disagree with the enforcing officer or where specific measurement of odor concentration is required, methods and procedures shall be used according to accepted industry standards.  
Sec. 23-5.5.6. - Fire or explosive hazard material. 
(a)  No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted except that chlorates, nitrates, perchlorates, phosphorus, and similar substances and compounds in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the Fire Marshal of the City of Cedar Hill. 
(b)  The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents, and petroleum products shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the standards and regulations of the City of Cedar Hill Fire Code or are approved by the fire marshall.  
Sec. 23-5.5.7. - Toxic and noxious matter. 
No operation or use shall emit a concentration across the bounding property line of the tract on which such operation or use is located of toxic or noxious matter which will exceed ten (10) percent of the concentration (exposure) considered as the threshold limit for an industrial worker as such standards are set forth by the Texas State Department of Health in "Threshold Limit Values Business Health Regulation No. 3," a copy of which is hereby incorporated by reference. No nuclear or radioactive manufacturing or disposal shall be permitted unless approved by the fire marshall.  
Sec. 23-5.5.8. - Vibration. 
No operation or use shall at any time create earth-borne vibrations which when measured at the bounding property line of the source operation exceed the limits of displacement set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges specified: 
Frequency cycles per second 	Displacement in inches 
0 to 10 	0.0010 
10 to 20 	0.0008 
20 to 30 	0.0005 
30 to 40 	0.0004 
40 and over 	0.0003 
  
DIVISION 5.6. - LIGHTING AND GLARE STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 23-5.6.1. - Purpose. 
Standards for controlling lighting and glare are set forth to reduce the annoyance and inconvenience to property owners and traffic hazards to motorists. These standards are intended to allow reasonable enjoyment of adjacent and nearby property by their owners and occupants while requiring adequate levels of lighting of parking areas.  
Sec. 23-5.6.2. - Nonresidential site lighting and glare standards. 
(a)  Any use shall be operated so as not to produce obnoxious and intense glare or direct illumination across the bounding property line from a visible source of illumination of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use or enjoyment of adjacent property. All outside lights shall be made up of a light source and reflector so selected that acting together, the light beam is controlled and not directed across any bounding property line above a height of three (3) feet. All lighting shall have full cut-off lenses per IESNA (Illuminating Engineering Society of North America) standards and be directed toward the area it is intended to illuminate. The allowable maximum intensity measured at the property line of a residential use in a residential district shall be 0.50 foot candles. Light poles shall be placed on the site a setback equal to its height from all adjacent residential property. All existing lighting shall install full cutoff lenses per IESNA (Illuminating Engineering Society of North America) standards as replaced or be feature-focused. All façade lights and up-lights shall be limited to facades only. 
(b)  All off-street parking areas for non-residential uses in non-residential districts which are used after dark shall be illuminated beginning one-half (½) hour after sunset and continuing throughout the hours of business operation. If only a portion of a parking area is offered for use after dark, only that part is required to be illuminated in accordance with these standards. However, the portion offered for use shall be clearly designated. Lighting within the parking areas shall meet the following minimum intensity requirements: 
(1)  Minimum at any point on the parking area surface to be at least 0.6 foot candles initial, and at least 0.3 foot candles maintained or one-third ( 1/3 ) of the average, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Illumination shall not exceed an average of one (1) foot candle at ground level and shall distribute not more than 0.50 foot candles of light upon any adjacent residentially zoned area. 
(3)  The maximum illumination under canopies shall be 50-foot candles of light. 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 22, 01-10-06)  
Sec. 23-5.6.3. - Residential lighting and glare standards. 
Residential lighting for security and night recreation use is permitted in all residential districts provided the following requirements are met: 
(1)  Direct lighting over ten (10) feet in height is shielded from adjacent property. 
(2)  No light source shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. Street lights and other traffic safety lighting are exempt from this standard. 
(3)  Lighting shall not directly shine on adjacent dwellings.  
Sec. 23-5.6.4. - Luminaries. 
Light sources shall be of a down-light type, indirect, diffused, or shielded type luminaries installed and maintained so as to reduce glare effect and consequent interference with use of adjacent properties and boundary streets. Bare bulbs above seventy-five (75) watts and strings of lamps are prohibited, except for temporary lighting as provided in section 23-5.6.5 below.  
Sec. 23-5.6.5. - Special or temporary lighting—Low wattage. 
Bare bulbs or strings of lamps are prohibited, except during holidays special lighting shall be permitted for a maximum time period of forty-five (45) days for each holiday used.  
DIVISION 5.7. - BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-655, § 26(Exh. F), adopted Sept. 25, 2018, amended Div. 5.7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 5.7, §§ 23-5.7.1, 23-5.7.2, pertained to exterior construction requirements, and derived from original content. 
 
Sec. 23-5.7.1. - Purpose. 
The regulations in this division are intended to promote development that will be sustainable over multiple end-users by utilizing durable, weather-resistant building materials and encouraging creative design consistent with the community's vision for distinctive character. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 26(Exh. F), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.7.2. - Applicability. 
(a)  The applicability of these provisions to main and accessory buildings are described in the subsequent subsections. 
(b)  Buildings that are not required to adhere to certain provisions in this [division] as a result of limited expansions shall comply with the applicable regulations in effect prior to September 25, 2018. 
(c)  Buildings that do not meet provisions of this [division] that were effective on September 25, 2018, shall be deemed conforming if they were legally constructed in accordance with the regulations in effect at the time building permits were issued. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 26(Exh. F), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.7.3. - Exterior building materials. 
The exterior building materials described in this section shall be required for all main buildings subject to their respective zoning districts when there is new construction on undeveloped property, when the building is expanded by more than a cumulative of fifty (50) percent, or when the exterior building materials are changed on existing buildings. This section shall also apply to buildings for non-residential uses on residentially-zoned property. 
(a)  "MF", "NS", "LR", "CC", and "C" districts. 
(1)  Required exterior building materials. 
i.  A minimum of seventy (70) percent of each wall surface area excluding windows and doors shall be finished with at least one (1) primary building material. 
ii.  A minimum of ten (10) percent of each wall surface area excluding windows and doors on property located within the uptown overlay shall also be finished with a stone material. 
iii.  A maximum of thirty (30) percent of each wall surface area excluding windows and doors may be finished with secondary building materials. Acrylic matrix or synthetic plaster finish and stucco are prohibited on the bottom eight (8) feet of the structure. 
iv.  A maximum of ten (10) percent of each wall surface area excluding windows and doors may be finished with an accent building material. 
(2)  Variety in exterior building materials. With the exception for buildings constructed of glass walls, a minimum of two (2) primary and secondary exterior building materials shall be utilized on each building elevation excluding windows and doors. Two (2) distinctive types of brick or stone materials may be utilized to meet this requirement. 
(3)  Harmonious design. Side and rear building elevations shall be finished in a similar color, texture and design as the front building elevation. 
(b)  "I" and "IP" districts. 
(1)  Main buildings within two hundred (200) feet of a residential district or a portion of a planned development district designated for residential uses; or adjoining Highway 67 or a right-of-way designated on the Thoroughfare Plan shall have each elevation finished with at least one (1) of the following materials: 
i.  Brick material; 
ii.  Concrete masonry units; 
iii.  Concrete panel construction; 
iv.  Glass walls; 
v.  Stone material; 
vi.  Stucco - prohibited on the bottom eight (8) feet of the structure; 
vii.  Acrylic matrix or synthetic plaster finish - a maximum of thirty (30) percent and prohibited on the bottom eight (8) feet of the structure; 
viii.  Fiber cementitious material - a maximum of thirty (30) percent. 
(2)  Main buildings not subject to the aforementioned criteria shall have the bottom four (4) feet of the front building elevation finished with a primary building material. All other building elevations shall consist of at least one (1) of the following materials: 
i.  Brick material; 
ii.  Concrete masonry units; 
iii.  Concrete panel construction; 
iv.  Fiber cementitious material; 
v.  Glass walls; 
vi.  Metal with baked or enamel finish or painted to manufacturer's standards; 
vii.  Stone material; 
viii.  Stucco - prohibited on the bottom eight (8) feet of the structure; 
ix.  Acrylic matrix or synthetic plaster finish - a maximum of thirty (30) percent and prohibited on the bottom eight (8) feet of the structure. 
(3)  Harmonious design. Side and rear building elevations shall be finished in a similar color, texture and design as the front building elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 26(Exh. F), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.7.4. - Wall articulation. 
(a)  The requirements for wall articulation in this section are applicable to building elevations of all main buildings when there is new construction on undeveloped property or when a building is expanded by more than a cumulative of fifty (50) percent. This section shall also apply to buildings for non-residential uses on residentially-zoned property: 
(1)  Located on property zoned "MF", "NS", "LR", "CC", or "C"; and 
(2)  Facing an existing or future public right-of-way that is within one hundred (100) feet; facing an existing or future park or trail that is within one hundred (100) feet; or facing a residential district or a portion of a planned development district designated for residential uses that is within one hundred (100) feet where a screening wall is not required; or 
(3)  Containing the primary entrance(s). 
(b)  Horizontal articulation. No wall surface area shall extend for a distance greater than three (3) times the mean elevation of the wall's height without having an off-set of fifteen (15) percent or more of the wall's height. This off-set shall extend for a distance equal to at least twenty-five (25) percent of the maximum length of either adjacent plane. 
(c)  Vertical articulation. No horizontal wall surface area shall extend for a distance greater than three (3) times height of the wall without changing height by a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the wall's height. This height change shall continue for a minimum distance equal to at least twenty-five (25) percent of the maximum length of either adjacent plane. 
 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 26(Exh. F), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.7.5. - Transparency. 
(a)  The requirements for transparency in this section are applicable to the following ground story, building elevations of all main buildings subject to their respective zoning districts when there is new construction on undeveloped property or when a building is expanded by more than a cumulative of fifty (50) percent. This section shall also apply to main buildings for non-residential uses on residentially-zoned property: 
(1)  Facing an existing or future public right-of-way that is within one hundred (100) feet; or facing an existing or future park or trail that is within one hundred (100) feet; or 
(2)  Containing the primary entrance(s). 
(b)  "MF", "NS", "LR", "CC", and "C"—Minimum thirty (30) percent. 
(c)  Uptown overlay—Minimum fifty (50) percent. 
(d)  Buildings that were constructed prior to August 1, 2018 and do not meet the minimum transparency requirement shall not have window or door coverings. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 26(Exh. F), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.7.6. - Building colors. 
The use of high intensity or fluorescent colors is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 26(Exh. F), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.7.7. - Architectural features in the uptown overlay. 
In addition to the provisions in this division, the requirements in this section shall also be applicable to main buildings located within the uptown overlay when there is new construction on undeveloped property or when the building is expanded by more than a cumulative of fifty (50) percent. 
(a)  All primary structures shall be designed with classical architectural elements, such as a distinct base, wall and cornice or top. 
(b)  The use of arcades, covered walkways, architectural awnings, canopies, or porticos is required along twenty-five (25) percent of wall surface areas that face an existing or future public right-of-way; face an existing or future park or trail; or face a residential district or a portion of a planned development district designated for residential uses. 
(c)  Exterior colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth tone colors. The use of high intensity, primary, black, or fluorescent colors is prohibited, except as trim or accent areas. Where used as trim or accents, those colors shall not exceed ten (10) percent of each wall surface area excluding windows and doors. 
(d)  Buildings containing ground story, residential dwelling units that face an existing or future public right-of-way or an existing or future park or trail shall meet the following: 
(1)  Building elevations shall include a usable front porch. Small covered entries are not considered to be front porches. 
(2)  Building elevations shall include gable windows, turrets, or bay windows. 
(3)  Transom windows with at least twenty (20) percent glazing. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 26(Exh. F), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.7.8. - Roof line variations. 
A minimum of two (2) elements for variations in the roof lines described in this section shall be required for all main buildings when there is new construction on undeveloped property or when a building is expanded by more than a cumulative of fifty (50) percent. This section shall apply to main buildings on property zoned "MF", "NS", "LR", "CC", and "C" and to non-residential uses on residentially-zoned property. 
(a)  Overhanging eaves, extending no less than three (3) feet past the supporting walls. 
(b)  Two (2) or more roof slope planes. 
(c)  Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of the supporting walls, and that have an average slope of at least five (5) in twelve (12). Sloped roofs shall be finished with standing seam metal, corrugated metal, tile, or 30-year or better composite shingle. 
(d)  Parapet walls may be utilized to simulate any of the above elements. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 26(Exh. F), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.7.9. - Rooftop equipment. 
All rooftop and wall-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened on all sides from the view at ground level. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 26(Exh. F), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.7.10. - Accessory buildings 
(a)  Accessory buildings with a cumulative floor area that exceeds two hundred forty (240) square feet shall be subject to the regulations applicable to the main buildings. 
(b)  Accessory buildings with a cumulative floor area of two hundred forty (240) square feet or less on property zoned "MF", "NS", "LR", "CC", "C", "I" and "IP" are exempt from the provisions in this division if they are not located within the street yards of the main buildings. This exemption shall also apply to non-residential uses on residentially-zoned property. The color of the building materials shall be consistent with the main buildings. 
(c)  Accessory buildings with a cumulative floor area of two hundred forty (240) square feet or less that are accessory to single-family residential uses are exempt from the requirements for minimum exterior building materials in their respective districts if they are not located within the street yards of the main buildings. The color of the building materials shall be consistent with the main buildings. 
(d)  Accessory buildings on property zoned for single-family residential uses with a minimum area of three (3) acres that are utilized for agricultural purposes are exempt from the requirements for minimum exterior building materials in their respective districts. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 26(Exh. F), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.7.11. - Temporary construction and storage. 
Temporary buildings, temporary building material storage areas and temporary containers to be used for construction purposes may be permitted for a specific period of time in accordance with a permit issued by the building official and subject to periodic renewal by the inspector for cause shown. Upon completion or abandonment of construction or expiration of permit, such field offices and buildings shall be removed at the direction of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 26(Exh. F), 9-25-18)  
Sec. 23-5.7.12. - Alternative exterior building materials and design. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission may approve alternative exterior building materials on property in all zoning districts with the exception of the old town districts upon finding that the alternative materials are equivalent in maintenance and durability to the building materials required by this chapter. 
(b)  The planning and zoning commission may approve alternative architectural design standards for the minimum or maximum percentage of primary and secondary building materials, wall articulation, transparency, architectural features, and roof line variations on property in all zoning districts with the exception of the old town districts upon the following findings. 
(1)  The proposed building materials are equivalent or superior in durability and maintenance for the local environment. 
(2)  The alternative design utilizes creativity consistent with the community's vision for distinctive character. 
(Ord. No. 2018-655, § 26(Exh. F), 9-25-18)  
DIVISION 5.8. - DEFINITIONS 
Definitions. For the purpose of these regulations, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word shall is mandatory and not directory. For any term or use not defined herein, Webster's Dictionary (latest edition) shall be used. 
No use or activity defined herein shall be construed to permit a sexually oriented use or activity except for those uses defined and permitted under section 23-4.1.7 of the zoning ordinance. 
Accessory apartment. See "Servant's Quarters". 
Accessory building (residential). In a residential district, a subordinate building attached or detached and used for a purpose customarily incidental to the main structure such as a private garage for automobile storage, tool house, lath or greenhouse as a hobby (no business), home workshop, children's playhouse, storage house or garden shelter, but not involving the conduct of a business. 
Accessory building (business or industry). In the nonresidential districts, a subordinate building to the main building, limited in height to not over the height of the main building and not exceeding fifty (50) percent of the floor area of the main building and used for purposes directly accessory and incidental to the main use. 
Accessory use. A use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land or building(s) and located upon the same lot therewith. 
Adult day care facility. A facility with a structured, comprehensive program that is designed to meet the needs of adults with functional impairments through an individual plan of care by providing health, social, and related support services in a protective setting that provides services under an adult day care program on a daily or regular basis, but not overnight, to four or more elderly or handicapped persons who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner of the facility. The owner must be licensed to establish or operate an adult day care facility in Texas and be in compliance with Texas Administrative Code § 40(1)(98). 
Airport or landing field. A place where an aircraft can land and take off, usually equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair and various accommodations for passengers. 
Alcoholic beverages. 
Alcoholic beverage. Alcohol, or any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted, excepting any alcoholic beverage specifically made for clerical or religious purposes as described by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
Alcoholic beverage manufacturing. An establishment for the manufacture, blending, fermentation, processing and packaging of alcoholic beverages. This use excludes the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption and the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premise consumption. 
Beer. Malt beverages with more than a half percent alcohol by volume, but not more than four (4) percent alcohol by weight (five (5) percent alcohol by volume). 
Liquor. Any alcoholic beverage containing alcohol in excess of four (4) percent by weight, unless otherwise indicated. Proof that an alcoholic beverage is alcohol, spirits of wine, whiskey, liquor, wine, brandy, gin, rum, ale, malt liquor, tequila, mescal, habanero or barreteago, is prima facie evidence that it is liquor. 
Liquor store. A business that sells liquor for consumption off-premises. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "liquor store" shall exclude general merchandise and food stores in which only beer and/or wine is offered for sale as a minor part of an overall larger inventory of goods. 
Microbrewery. An establishment for the manufacture, blending, fermentation, processing and packaging of beer with a floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less that takes place primarily inside a building. A facility that only provides on-premise consumption or retail sale of alcoholic beverages is not a microbrewery. 
Mixed beverage. An alcoholic beverage served for consumption on the premises where it is sold by the holder of a mixed beverage or private club permit. It could be beer, malt liquor/ale, wine or spirits. 
Wine. Alcoholic beverages made by fermenting juice from fruit, grapes, berries or honey. 
Winery. An establishment for the manufacture, blending, fermentation, processing and packaging of wine with a floor area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less that takes place primarily inside a building. A facility that only provides on-premise consumption or retail sale of alcoholic beverages is not a winery. 
Alley. A minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
Ambulance service. Provision of private (not operated by the City of Cedar Hill) emergency transportation which may include medical care, and including storage and maintenance of vehicles. 
Animal boarding and kennels. Facility where small domesticated household animals are temporarily housed, groomed, bred, boarded, training, or sold for commercial purposes in indoor kennels. See "domesticated household animals (indoor)" 
Animal boarding and kennels (indoor/outdoor). Facility where small or large domesticated household animals are temporarily housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold for commercial purposes in indoor or outdoor kennels or pens. See "domesticated household animals (outdoor)". 
Antenna. The arrangement of wires or metal rods used in transmission, retransmission and/or reception of radio, television, electromagnetic, or microwave signals (includes microwave reflectors/antennas and satellite dishes). 
Antenna support structure. Any tower, mast, pole, tripod, box frame, or other structure utilized for the purpose of transmission, retransmission, and/or reception of electromagnetic, radio, television, or microwave signals. Erected means a tower or pole designed for the sole purpose of antenna support while mounted or attached means the use of an existing structure for antenna support. 
Antique shop, sales indoors. A retail establishment engaged in the selling of works of art, furniture or other artifacts of an earlier period, with all sales and storage occurring inside a building. 
Apartment. See "multi-family dwelling". 
Appliance repair. See "household appliance service and repair". 
Art gallery or museum. An institution for the collection, display and distribution of objects of art or science and which is sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency and which facility is open to the general public. 
Artist studio. A workplace for the teaching, preparation, or practice of an art such as animation, ceramics, dance, graphic design, music, painting, photography, pottery, scrapbooking, and sculpture. 
Asphalt batching plant. See "concrete batching plant". 
Assembly, heavy. A business where parts, manufactured elsewhere, are assembled with the assistance of power-driven machines and materials-handling equipment, and manipulated primarily by lifting machinery which produces low dust and fiber, and all materials are assembled within an enclosed building. 
Assembly, light. A business where parts, manufactured elsewhere, are assembled with the assistance of power-driven machines and materials-handling equipment, and manipulated primarily by hand which produces low dust and fiber, and all materials are assembled and stored within an enclosed building. 
Assisted living facility. A congregate residence facility for ten or more elderly (over fifty-five (55) years of age) persons, regardless of legal relationship, who need limited assistance with daily living activities. A limited number of support services such as meals, laundry, housekeeping, transportation and social or recreational services may be provided or associated with the assisted living facility. Units may be attached or detached, single- or double-occupancy, and may include limited or full kitchen facilities. Full-time medical or nursing care is not typically provided by the facility, but may be privately arranged for by individual residents on a part-time or temporary basis (e.g., visiting nurses, etc.). 
Audio recording studio. A studio where tapes, records, or other electronic media are recorded for the distribution of audio recordings. 
Audio recording studio retreat. A residential facility that includes the secondary use of audio recording studio on the premises and provides an environment for the purposes of writing, collaborating, preforming, instruction, preparing, or completing audio recordings. This facility may include overnight accommodations for users of the facility and their guests and shall be occupied by a single family or care taker. 
Auto auction. See "auto storage". 
Auto laundry or car wash. Washing, waxing or cleaning of automobiles or light duty trucks. 
Auto finance and leasing. Leasing of automobiles, motorcycles, and light load vehicles but no outside storage. 
Auto parts and accessory sales (indoors). The use of any building or other premise for the primary inside display and sale of new or used parts for automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles. 
Auto rental. Storage or renting of automobiles and light trucks. 
Auto sales (new & used). Retail sales of new automobiles or light load vehicles, including, as a minor part of the business, the sales of used automobiles or light load vehicles and the service of new or used vehicles. 
Auto sales (used). Retail sales, or offering for sale, used automobiles or light load vehicles. 
Auto salvage/wrecking yard. See "salvage/reclamation yard". 
Auto storage or auto auction. The storage or impoundment, on a lot or tract, paved in accordance with parking lot paving requirements set forth in the Code of Ordinances, of operable automobiles for the purpose of holding such vehicles for sale or distribution. 
Auto tow service. See "wrecker or tow service". 
Automobile. A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people including but not limited to the following: passenger cars, trucks, buses, motor scooters and motorcycles. 
Automobile accessory installation (minor). Minor installation of minor automobile accessories such as car alarms, radio and stereo equipment, window tinting, pin striping, cellular telephones and similar accessories. 
Automobile repair garage. An establishment providing major or minor automobile repair services to all motor vehicles with the exception of heavy load vehicles. 
Automobile repair, major. General repair or reconditioning of engines, air-conditioning systems and transmissions for motor vehicles; wrecker service; collision services, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair; customizing; painting; vehicle steam cleaning; undercoating and rust-proofing; those uses listed under "automobile repair, minor"; and other similar uses. 
Automobile repair, minor. Minor repair or replacement of parts, tires, tubes, and batteries; diagnostic services; minor motor services such as grease, oil, spark plug, and filter changing; tune-ups; emergency road service; replacement of starters, alternators, hoses, brake parts; automobile washing and polishing; performing state inspections and making minor repairs necessary to pass said inspection; normal servicing of air-conditioning systems, and other similar minor services for motor vehicles except heavy load vehicles, but not including any operation named under "automobile repair, major" or any other similar use. 
Automotive gasoline or motor fuel service station. Any building, land area or other premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or sales of automobile fuels, lubricants, and automobile accessories, including those operations listed under minor automobile repair. Vehicles, which are inoperative or are being repaired, may not remain parked outside an automobile service station for a period greater than forty-eight (48) hours. 
Bakery or confectionery (wholesale or commercial). A manufacturing facility over two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet for the production and distribution of baked goods and confectioneries to retail outlets. 
Bank. An establishment for the custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds. A bank does not include a credit access business. 
Barn. A structure intended for the purpose of storage of farming and ranching related equipment. 
Basement (or cellar). A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises. 
Base zoning district. Underlying district which shows on the most recently adopted zoning map. 
Bed and breakfast inn or facility. a dwelling occupied as a permanent residence by an owner or renter which serves breakfast and provides or offers sleeping accommodations in not more than five (5) rooms for transient guests for compensation. 
Block. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the director of planning shall determine the outline of the block. 
Boarding or rooming house. A dwelling other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals, or lodging and meals are provided. 
Broadcast tower. See "radio, television and broadcast tower." 
Building. Any structure intended for shelter, occupancy, housing or enclosure for persons, animals or chattel. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such structure so separated shall be deemed a separate building. 
Building elevation. The exterior wall of a building or structure. 
(1)  Front building elevation. The non-residential or multiple-family building elevation that has frontage on an existing or future right-of-way. Exterior walls that are perpendicular and between walls with frontage on a right-of-way shall be considered part of the front building elevation. 
Building height. The height of a building, or portion of a building, shall be measured from the average established grade at the street lot line or from the average natural ground level, if higher, or if no street grade has been established, to the highest point of the roof's surface if a flat surface; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and the mean height level between eaves and ridge for hip and gable roofs. In measuring the height of a building, the following structures shall be excluded: chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, tanks, water towers, radio towers, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires, and parapet walls not exceeding four (4) feet in height. 
Building line. A line parallel or approximately parallel, to any lot line at a specific distance there from, marking the minimum distance from the lot line that a building may be erected. (See Illustration 6) 
Building, main or primary. A building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is situated is conducted. In a residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated. 
Building materials (categories). 
(1)  Primary building materials. The following exterior building materials shall be considered primary building materials: brick material, concrete masonry units, glass walls, and stone material. 
(2)  Secondary building materials. The following exterior building materials shall be considered secondary building materials: acrylic matrix or synthetic plaster finish, concrete panel construction, fiber cementitious material, stucco, and tile. 
(3)  Accent building materials. The following exterior building materials shall be considered accent building materials: cedar wood products, metal cladding, and other materials subject to approval by the building official. 
Building materials (types). 
(1)  Acrylic matrix or synthetic plaster finish. A three-component finish system consisting of one hundred (100) percent acrylic matrix ceramically colored aggregate and sealer, or one hundred (100) percent synthetic plaster having two (2) types of applications: spraying or troweling. Exterior coats may be 1/16-inch to 3/32-inch in thickness. Each product can be applied to a variety of backing such as gyp sheathing, plywood, particle board, or foam board. A base coat and fiberglass mesh is used to smooth and level surfaces, corners and joints. 
(2)  Brick material. A building material that is hard-fired (kiln fired) clay or slate material which meets the latest version of ASTM standard C216, Standard Specification for Facing Brick (Solid Masonry Unit Made of Clay or Shale), shall be severe weather (SW) grade, and type FBA or FBS or better. Unfired or under-fired clay, sand, and shale brick are not allowed. 
(3)  Concrete masonry units. A building material that meets the latest version of the following applicable specifications: ASTM C90, Standard Specification for Hollow Load Bearing Concrete Masonry Units; ASTM C145, Standard Specification for Solid Load Bearing Masonry Units; ASTM C129, Standard Specification for Hollow and Solid Non-Load Bearing Units. Concrete masonry units shall have an indented, hammered, split face finish or other similar architectural finish, integrally colored, subject to approval by the building official. Lightweight concrete block or cinder block construction is not acceptable as an exterior finish. 
(4)  Concrete panel construction. Concrete finish, pre-cast panel or tilt wall construction shall be painted, fluted, or exposed aggregate. Other architectural concrete finish is subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission. Smooth or untextured concrete finishes are not acceptable unless painted. 
(5)  Fiber cementitious material. An exterior building material composed of reinforced cement and cellulose fibers. 
(6)  Glass walls. An exterior wall with a maximum reflectance of twenty (20) percent, which carries no structural loads and consists of a combination of metal, glass, or other surfacing material supported in a metal framework. Glass walls include glass curtain walls or glass block construction. 
(7)  Stone material. A building material that consists of granite, marble, limestone, slate, river rock, and other hard and durable naturally occurring all weather stone. Cut stone and dimensioned stone techniques are acceptable. 
(8)  Stucco. An approximately 7/8-inch, cement-based, three-coat system that is applied over an approved, weather-resistive barrier and metal lath by spraying or troweling. The three-coat system is comprised of a scratch coat, brown coat and a finish coat that is color integrated and sealed. 
Building official. The inspector or administrative official charged with responsibility for issuing permits and enforcing the zoning ordinance and building code. 
Building site. See "lot" definition. 
Bus repair or leasing. See "truck and bus repair or leasing". 
Bus station or terminal. Any premises for the transient housing or parking of motor-driven buses and the loading and unloading of passengers. 
Cafeteria. See "restaurant or cafeteria". 
Camper sales. See "recreational vehicle/camper sales". 
Camping trailer. See "trailer, travel or camping". 
Caretakers' or guards' residence (nonresidential). A residence located on premises with a main residential or non-residential use and occupied only by a caretaker or guard employed on the premises. 
Carnival, circus or tent service (temporary). Outdoor or indoor commercial amusement provided on a temporary basis. 
Carport. A structure open on a minimum of two sides designed or used to shelter not more than three (3) vehicles and not to exceed twenty-four (24) feet on its longest dimension. Also called "covered parking area." 
Car wash. See "auto laundry". 
Cement manufacturing. The act of making hydraulic or Portland cement by mixing various components such as powder of alumina, silica, lime, iron oxide, or magnesium oxide, burned together in a kiln and finely pulverized and used as an ingredient of mortar and concrete. 
Cement product. Any product made by the addition of Portland cement with other ingredients to produce any cement-based product, including, but not necessarily limited to, concrete, mortar, stucco, grout and terrazzo. 
Cement product forming/molding/casting (indoors only). The process of manufacturing by shaping or injecting cement product(s) into a rigid frame, mold, cast or matrix to create a finished product or structure. The mold, frame, cast or matrix may or may not become part of the finished product or structure and without any outdoor sales, storage or display of any commodity or materials and where all work is performed wholly within an enclosed building. 
Cemetery or mausoleum. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematories, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery. 
Cemetery, animal. Same as cemetery except for only the burial of dead animals. 
Certificate of occupancy. An official certificate issued by the city through the building official which indicates conformance with the zoning regulations and building codes and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued; may be referred to as an occupancy permit. 
Chemical and allied product manufacturing (non-hazardous). The manufacturing of products primarily by chemical processes which, by way of example, may include industrial chemicals, plastics materials and synthetic resins, synthetic rubber, manmade fibers except glass, medicinal chemicals and botanical products; pharmaceutical products; biological products, except diagnostic substance, soaps, detergents, and cleaning products; perfumes, cosmetics, and other toilet preparations. This definition does not include mining of natural chemicals and fertilizers, nor does it include establishments primarily engaged in packaging, repackaging and bottling of purchased chemical products. 
Child care center (or day care center). A commercial institution or place designed for the care or training of twelve (12) or more unrelated children under fourteen (14) years of age for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
Church, rectory, or temple. A building for regular assembly for religious worship which is used primarily and designed for such purpose and those accessory activities which are customarily associated therewith, and the place of residence for ministers, priests, nuns or rabbis on the premises (tax exempt as defined by state law). For the purposes of this chapter, bible study and other similar activities which occur in a person's primary residence shall not apply to this definition. 
City council. The governing body of the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
Civic center. A building or complex of buildings that house municipal offices and services, and which may include cultural, recreational, athletic, convention or entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a municipality. 
Civic club. See "fraternal organization, lodge, civic club, fraternity/sorority club, or union". 
Cleaning plant. See "laundry and dry cleaning" or "laundry and dying plant". 
College or university. An academic institution of higher learning, accredited or recognized by the State and covering a program or series of programs of academic study. 
Commercial amusement (indoor). See "amusement, commercial (indoor)". 
Commercial amusement, other than listed (indoor). An amusement enterprise wholly enclosed in a building which is treated acoustically so that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property line and including, but not limited to, a bowling alley, billiard parlor, bingo facility, skating rink, and amusement devices. For the purpose of this definition, amusement devices shall not include games of chance; gambling-like device versions of bingo, keno, blackjack, lottery, roulette, video poker, eight-liners or similar electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical games, or facsimiles thereof; children's rides; or jukeboxes or similar electronic or mechanical music machines that do not involve games of skill for interactive amusement. 
Commercial amusement, other than listed (outdoor). Any amusement enterprise offering entertainment or games of skill to the general public for a fee or charge wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open including, but not limited to, archery range, miniature golf course, and go-cart race tracks. 
Commercial amusement (outdoor). See "amusement, commercial (outdoor)". 
Commercial school. See "trade and commercial school". 
Communications operations (amateur). The transmission, retransmission and/or reception of radio, television, electromagnetic, or microwave signals for private or personal use and not for the purpose of operating a business and/or for financial gain. 
Communications operations (commercial). The transmission, retransmission, and/or reception of radio, television, electromagnetic, or microwave signals primarily for the purpose of operating a business and/or for financial gain. 
Community center (public). A building or complex of buildings that house cultural, recreational, athletic, or entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a governmental agency or private non-profit agency. 
Community home. A place where not more than six (6) physically or mentally impaired or handicapped persons are provided room and board, as well as supervised care and rehabilitation by not more than two (2) persons as licensed by the Texas Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation (also see Chapter 123 of the Texas Human Resources Code). 
Comprehensive plan. Document adopted by the city that consists of graphic and textual policies which govern the future development of the city and which consists of various components governing specific geographic areas and functions and services of the city. 
Concrete or asphalt batching plant (permanent). A permanent manufacturing facility for the production of concrete or asphalt. 
Concrete or asphalt batching plant (temporary). A temporary manufacturing facility for the production of concrete or asphalt during construction of a project, and to be removed when the project is completed. 
Congregate housing. See "retirement housing for the elderly." 
Construction yard or field office. See "temporary field office". 
Continuing care retirement community. A housing development designed to provide a full range of accommodations for older adults (55 years of age or older), including independent living, assisted living and skilled full-time nursing or medical care. Residents may move from one (1) level to another as their needs change. 
Contractor's shop with outside storage. A building or part of a building that is used in conjunction with a land area for the storage of construction materials, equipment, tools, product and vehicles. 
Convalescent home. See "skilled nursing facility". 
Convenience store. A small retail establishment that sells gasoline or diesel fuel and convenience goods, such as prepackaged food and beverage items for off-premise consumption, tobacco, periodicals, and household goods. It is designed to attract a large volume of stop-and-go traffic. 
Copy shop or printing. An establishment that reproduces, in printed form, individual orders from a business, profession, service, industry or government organization and occupies less than four thousand (4,000) square feet. 
Country club (private). A land area and buildings that may include a golf course, clubhouse, dining room, swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational or service uses available only to members and their guests. 
Court. An open, unobstructed space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has one (1) side open to a street, alley, yard, or other permanent open space. 
Coverage. The lot area covered by all buildings located thereon, including the area covered by all overhanging roofs. 
Credit access business. The meaning given that term in Section 393.601 of the Texas Finance Code, as amended. 
Crematorium. A facility licensed, or qualified to be licensed, by the State of Texas for the cremation of human remains. 
Custom personal service shop. See "personal service shop". 
Dance hall. An establishment with dancing by patrons or customers. 
Dance studio. See "gymnastics or dance studio". 
Day camp for children. A facility arranged and conducted for the organized recreation and instruction of children including outdoor activities on a daytime basis 
Day care center. See "child care center". 
Density. The total number of residential buildings allowed upon a given tract of land usually expressed in total number of units per gross acres or net acre. 
Deny with prejudice. This action, from an appointed or elected body charged with rendering decisions, bars the same case from again being brought for consideration to the body within twelve (12) months of the decision. 
Detached. Having no physical connection above the top of the floor line of the first floor with any other building or structure. 
Distribution center. Building or facility used for the storage and distribution of wholesale items/products. 
Domesticated household animals (indoor). The following captive born species shall include: Dog, Budgerigar (Parakeet), Cat, Canary, Guinea Pig, Pigeon, Rabbit, Other Common Cage Birds, Mouse, Aquarium Fish (Captive Born), Rat, Psittacine (Captive Bred [Parrot and Parrot-Like Birds]), Gerbil, Finch (Captive Bred), Golden Hamster, Ferret, and Chinchilla. 
Domesticated household animals (outdoor). The following captive born species, are included: Horse, Domestic Fowl, Donkey, Goose, Pig, Duck (Mallard Type or Muscovy), Sheep, Turkey, Goat, Guinea Fowl, Cattle, Peafowl, Llama, Alpaca, and Honey Bee in addition to those listed in Domesticated Animals (Indoor). 
Drapery or furniture upholstering shop. An establishment for the production, display and sale of draperies and soft coverings for furniture. 
Drive-through facility. A vehicular driveway or stacking lane that traverses through a building or on the exterior facade of a building for service and/or delivery of goods to the occupant(s) of the vehicle. 
Drug store. A retail establishment that offers for sale the following items: nonprescription medicines that do not contain tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and/or are not derived from the plant Cannabis Sativa L; prescription drugs; and personal care products. Drug stores may also sell, in limited amounts, household products, food and beverages, and other related items. 
Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one (1) or more families. 
Dwelling, single-family attached (townhouse). See "single-family (attached)". 
Easement. A grant of one (1) or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity. 
Eating place. See "restaurant or cafeteria". 
Electrical substation (high voltage bulk power). A subsidiary station in which electric current is transformed. 
Enclosed building. A structure that is floored, roofed and surrounded by at least three (3) outside walls. 
Engine repair/motor manufacturing/remanufacturing and/or repair. The repair and maintenance of commercial and industrial machinery and equipment. Establishments engaged in either sharpen/install commercial and industrial machinery blades and saws that provide welding (e.g., automotive, general) repair services, or repair agricultural and other heavy and industrial machinery and equipment (e.g., forklifts, and other materials handling equipment, machine tools, commercial refrigeration equipment, construction equipment and mining machinery). 
Extended stay motel. See "residential hotel". 
Fairgrounds or exhibition area. An area or space either outside or within a building for the display of topic-specific goods or information. 
Family. one (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption; or a group not to exceed four (4) persons not all related by blood or marriage, adoption or guardianship, occupying a dwelling unit. 
Family home (child care in place of residence). A facility that regularly provides care in the caretaker's own residence for not more than five (5) children under fourteen (14) years of age, excluding the caretaker's own children. No outside employment is allowed at the facility. This facility shall conform to Chapter 42 of the Human Resources Code of the State of Texas, as amended, and in accordance with such standards as may be promulgated by the Texas Department of Human Resources 
Farm, ranch, garden, crops or orchard. An area used for growing usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, trees, and grain and for the raising thereon of the usual farm animals such as horses, cattle, and sheep and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law. 
Farmers market. A retail establishment at which fruits, vegetables, breads, eggs, milk, cheese, meat, flowers, and the like are sold by persons who typically grow, harvest, or process such items from their farm or agricultural operation with the exclusion of a winery or microbrewery. 
Federal government building. See "public building". 
Feed and grain store. An establishment for the selling of corn, grain and other food stuffs for animals and livestock, and including implements and goods related to agricultural processes, but not including farm machinery. 
Fire, police or municipal building. Any public service building of the municipal government including a library or City Hall, but excluding storage yards, utility shops and equipment centers. 
Flea market (indoor). An indoor premise where the main use is the sale of new and used household goods, personal effects, tools, art work, small household appliances, and similar merchandise, objects, or equipment, in small quantities, in broken stalls, lots or parcels, not in bulk, for the use or consumption by the immediate purchaser in a building, open air, or partly enclosed booths or stalls not within a wholly enclosed building. The term flea market shall not be deemed to include wholesale sales establishments or rental services establishments, but shall be deemed to include personal service establishments, food services establishments, retail services establishments, and auction establishments. 
This definition does not pertain to retail sidewalk sales or garage sales. Arts and crafts shows or sales held by non-profit organizations are also not included under this definition. 
Floodplain. An area of land subject to inundation by a 100-year frequency flood as determined using standard engineering practices and generally as shown on the FIRM Flood Insurance Rate Map of the City of Cedar Hill. 
Floor area. The total gross square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, but excluding carports, open porches, residential garages, accessory buildings, and breezeways. 
Floor area ratio (FAR). The floor area of a main building or buildings on a lot, divided by the lot area. (See Illustration 1) 
Florist shop. An establishment for the display and retail sale of flowers, small plants and accessories. 
Forestry and tree harvesting. The use of designated, managed land for the raising and harvesting of timber, pulp woods, and other forestry products for commercial purposes, including the temporary use of a sawmill and/or chipper to process the timber cut from that parcel or contagious parcels. Excluded from this definition shall be the cutting of timber associated with land development approved by the City of Cedar Hill, which shall be considered accessory to the development of property. 
Franchised private utility (not listed). A utility such as one (1) distributing heat, chilled water, closed circuit television or similar service and requiring a franchise to operate in the City of Cedar Hill. 
Fraternal organization, lodge, civic club, fraternity/sorority club, or union. An organized group having a restricted membership and specific purpose related to the welfare of the members such as Elks, Masons, Knights of Columbus, or a labor union. 
Front yard. See "yard, front". 
Funeral home or mortuary. A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation, or a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation. 
Furniture, home furnishings or appliance stores. This group includes retail stores selling new goods for furnishing the home including, but not limited to furniture, floor coverings, draperies, glass and chinaware, domestic stoves, refrigerators, and other household electrical and gas appliances. 
Furniture store (new and used). Same as above except sales may include used items. 
Garage, private. An enclosed (on at least three (3) sides) accessory building, or a part of a main building, used for storage of automobiles and used solely by the occupants and their guests. Also called "enclosed parking space." 
Garage/accessory/conversion dwelling. A residential dwelling unit attached to or over a garage but not attached to the main residential structure. 
Garden shop. A facility which is engaged in the selling of flowers, ornamental plants, shrubs, trees, seeds, garden and lawn supplies, and other materials used in planting and landscaping, but not including cultivation and propagation activities outside a building. 
Gasoline and fuel sales. Any building, land area or other premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the dispensing of gasoline and fuel for retail sales. 
Gasoline service or filling station. See "automobile gasoline or motor fuel service station". 
General manufacturing. See "industrial, general". 
General merchandise store. A retail store for the sale of new general merchandise including clothing and other apparel, equipment for hobbies and sports, gifts, flowers and household plants, dry goods, toys, furniture, books and stationery, pets, pharmaceutical items, personal care items, household goods, and auto parts and accessories. This use does not include other uses in this chapter that are specifically listed. 
General merchandise store other than listed. A retail establishment other than those listed or defined in this chapter. 
Golf course. An area of twenty (20) acres or more improved with trees, greens, fairways, hazards, and which may include clubhouses. 
Grocery store. A retail establishment where most of the floor area is devoted to the sale of food and beverage products for home preparation and consumption, which typically also offers other home care and personal care products, and which are substantially larger and carry a broader range of merchandise than variety stores and convenience stores. 
Group day-care home. See "registered family home". 
Guest house. See "servant's quarters". 
Gymnastic or dance studio. A building or portion of a building used as a place of work for a gymnast or dancer or for instructional classes in gymnastics or dance. 
Half-way house. See "rehabilitation care facility". 
Hauling or storage company. See "motor freight company". 
Heavy load vehicle. A self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's recommended gross vehicle weight (GVW) of greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds (including trailers), such as large recreational vehicles (originally manufactured as RVs, not converted), tractor-trailers, buses, vans, and other similar vehicles. The term "truck" shall be construed to mean "heavy load vehicle" unless specifically stated otherwise. 
Heavy machinery sales and storage. A building or open area used for the display, sale, rental or storage of heavy machinery, tractors or similar machines, or a group of machines which function together as a unit. 
Heliport. An area of land or water or a structural surface which is used, or intended for use, for the landing and taking off of helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used, or intended for use for heliport buildings and other heliport facilities. 
Helistop. The same as a heliport, except that no refueling, maintenance, repairs or storage of helicopters is permitted. 
Home for aged, residence. A home where elderly people are provided with lodging and meals without nursing care being a primary function. 
Home improvement center. A facility where materials, tools, and hardware customarily used in the construction of buildings and other structures are sold primarily to the general public and may include the indoor or outdoor storage of such products. 
Home occupation or home-based business. Any occupation or activity carried on principally by the inhabitants of a dwelling which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main building; provided that no trading in merchandise or selling of goods or services is carried out on a regular basis and in connection with which there is no display of merchandise and no mechanical equipment is used, except such as is customary for purely domestic or household purposes and does not create obnoxious noise or other conditions such as odor, increased traffic, smoke or electrical interference. 
Horse stables. See "stable". 
Hospice. Facility or program designed to provide a centralized program of palliative and supportive services to dying persons and their families in the form of physical, psychological, social and spiritual care either directly or on a consulting basis with the patient's physician. 
Hospital (acute care). An institution where sick or injured patients are given medical or surgical treatment intended to restore them to health and an active life and which is licensed by the State of Texas. 
Hospital (chronic care). An institution where those persons suffering from illness, injury, deformity or deficiency of age are given care and treatment on a prolonged or permanent basis and which is licensed by the State of Texas. 
Hotel. See "motel and hotel". 
Household appliance service and repair. The maintenance and rehabilitation of appliances customarily used in the home including but not limited to washing and drying machines, refrigerators, dishwashers, trash compactors, ovens and ranges, countertop kitchen appliances, vacuum cleaners and hair dryers. 
Household care facility. A dwelling unit which provides residence and care to not more than nine persons, regardless of legal relationship, who are elderly; disabled; orphaned, abandoned, abused, or neglected children; victims of domestic violence; or rendered temporarily homeless due to fire, natural disaster or financial setbacks, living together with not more than two supervisory personnel as a single housekeeping unit. This definition is subject to Art. 4442c-4 (Personal Care Facility Licensing Act) V.A.C.S. (Tex.) and ART. 1011n (Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act) V.A.C.S. (Tex.) as they presently exist or may be amended in the future. 
Household care institution. A facility which provides residence and care to ten or more persons regardless of legal relationship who are elderly; disabled; orphaned, abandoned, abused, or neglected children; victims of domestic violence; convalescing from illness; or temporarily homeless due to fire, natural disaster, or financial setback together with supervisory personnel. 
HUD Code manufactured home. See "mobile home". 
Incidental or accessory retail and service uses. Any use different from the primary use but which compliments and/or supplements the primary use. Incidental shall mean an area which constitutes not more than fifteen (15) percent of the main use. 
Independent living center. See "retirement housing for the elderly". 
Industrial, manufacturing. Establishments engaged in the manufacturing or transformation of materials into new products. These establishments are usually described as plants and factories, and characteristically use power driven machines and materials handling equipment. Manufacturing production is usually carried on for the wholesale market, rather than for direct sale to the domestic consumer. 
Industrialized home or modular home. Means a structure or building module as defined, under the jurisdiction and control of the Texas Department of Labor and Standards and that is installed and used as a residence by a consumer, transportable in one (1) or more sections on a temporary chassis or other conveyance device, and designed to be used on a permanent foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. The term does not include a mobile home as defined in the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Article 5221f V.T.C.S.); nor does it include building modules incorporating concrete or masonry as the primary structural component. 
Inoperable vehicle holding yard (private). See "salvage/reclamation yard". 
Institution for alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients, also rehabilitation care institution. An institution offering resident or out-patient treatment to alcoholic, narcotic or psychiatric patients. 
Junk yard. See "wrecking yard". 
Kennels (indoor pens). An establishment with indoor pens in which more than four (4) dogs or domesticated animals more than one (1) year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold for commercial purposes. 
Kennels (outdoor pens). An establishment with outdoor pens in which more than four (4) dogs or domesticated animals more than one (1) year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold for commercial purposes. 
Kindergarten or nursery school (private). An establishment where more than three (3) children are housed for care or training during the day or portion thereof. 
Kiosk. A small, free-standing, one-story accessory structure having a maximum floor area of one hundred (100) square feet and used for retail purposes, such as automatic teller machines or the posting of temporary information and/or posters, notices and announcements. If a kiosk is to be occupied, it shall have a minimum floor area of fifty (50) square feet. 
Laboratory equipment manufacturing. A facility that makes or produces equipment or products used for research or testing. 
Laboratory, scientific or research. An establishment that engages in research, testing or evaluation of materials or products. 
Landscape administrator. The planning director or his/her designee. 
Landscape material sales. The outdoor or indoor display, storage, sale and staging for delivery of organic and inorganic materials, such as soil and soil amendment, grass, sod, grass seed, gravel, pea gravel, hardscape products, crushed rock, river rock, sand, stone, and landscape boulders primarily used for landscaping purposes. 
Landscaping. Material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees or palms, and non-living durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences, but excluding paving. 
Laundromat (or self-serve washateria). A facility where patrons wash, dry or dry clean clothing and other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. 
Laundry or dry cleaning (pick-up and/or self service). A custom cleaning shop not exceeding three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area and may include customer self-service laundry and cleaning. 
Lawn/landscaping maintenance service. Business that routinely services residential and commercial landscaping. All storage of materials machinery and supplies shall be within the building. All vehicles that are used for this service will have dedicated parking. 
Laundry or dying plant (commercial/wholesale). An industrial facility where fabrics are cleaned with substantially non-aqueous organic solvents on a commercial or wholesale basis. 
Light load vehicles. A self-propelled vehicle having a manufacturer's recommended gross vehicle weight (GVW) not greater than fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds, and having no more than two (2) axles, such as pick-up trucks, vans, recreational vehicles (less than thirty-two (32) feet in length), campers and other similar vehicles but not including automobiles and motorcycles. 
Light manufacturing or industrial use. Manufacturing of finished products or parts, predominantly from previously prepared materials, including fabrication, assembly, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. 
Liquor store. A business that sells liquor for consumption off-premises. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "liquor store" shall exclude convenience stores, drug stores, general merchandise stores, general merchandise stores other than listed, grocery stores, specialty food stores, super stores, and variety stores in which only beer and/or wine is offered for sale as a minor part of an overall larger inventory of goods. 
Loading space. An off-street space or berth used for the delivery and loading or unloading of vehicles. 
Local utility line. The facilities provided by a municipality or a franchised utility company for distribution or collection of gas, water, surface drainage water, sewage, electric power or telephone service including pad and pole mounted transformers. 
Lot. Platted land (as specified in § 212 of the Texas Local Government Code) occupied or intended to be occupied by one (1) main building and the required parking, or a group of main buildings, and accessory building and uses, including such open spaces as are required by the ordinance, and other laws or ordinances, and having its principal frontage on a public street or officially approved place. (See Illustrations 6, 7 and 8) 
Lot area. The total area, measured on a horizontal plane, included within lot lines. 
Lot, corner. A lot which has at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. (See Illustration 9) 
Lot depth. The closest horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. (See Illustration 7) 
Lot, double frontage. A lot having a frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. (See Illustration 5) 
Lot, flag. A lot having access to a street by means of a parcel of land generally having a depth greater than its frontage, but not less than thirty-five (35) feet. 
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot frontage. That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot. 
Lot line, front. The narrower side of the lot abutting a street. Where two (2) lot lines abutting streets are of equal length, the owner shall have a choice in designating which shall be the lot frontage. For a lot which has a boundary line which does not abut the front street line, is not a rear lot line and lies along the same general directional orientation as the front and rear lot lines, said line shall be considered a front lot line in establishing minimum setback lines. (See Illustration 6) 
Lot, key. A corner lot whose exterior side is adjacent to the front yard of another lot. 
Lot line, rear. The lot line farthest from and most parallel to the front lot line. For triangular lots, the point opposite the front lot line shall be considered the rear lot line and have a value of zero. (See Illustration 8). 
Lot line, side. Any lot line not the front or rear lot line. 
Lot lines or property lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
Lot of record. A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Dallas County. 
Lot width. The horizontal distance measured between side lot lines parallel to the front lot/property line, and measured from the point on the building line which is closest to the front building setback line. (See Illustration 6) 
Machine shop. A shop wherein there are facilities and tools, which are utilized in the shaping and forging, welding or fabrication of metal products and related items. 
Main building. The building or buildings on a lot which are occupied by the primary use. 
Manufactured home display or sales (new). The offering for sale, storage, or display of new trailers or mobile homes on a parcel of land but excluding the use of such facilities as dwellings either on a temporary or permanent basis. 
Masonry construction. Exterior construction materials including brick, stone, granite, marble, concrete and other built up/tilt panels. 
Mausoleum. Property used for the interring of the dead and where bodies are interred above ground in stacked vaults. 
Medical facilities. 
(a)  Dental, medical, or chiropractic clinic. A facility or group of offices for one (1) or more physicians for the examination and treatment of ill and afflicted human outpatients provided that patients are not kept overnight except under emergency conditions. 
(b)  Dental office or doctors office. Same as dental or medical clinic. 
(c)  Hospital. An institution providing health services primarily for human inpatient medical or surgical care for the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central services facilities, and staff offices which are an integral part of the facilities. 
(d)  Massage establishment. Any place of business in which massage therapy is practiced by a massage therapist, as defined and licensed by state law. "Massage therapy", as a health care service, means the manipulation of soft tissue for therapeutic purposes. The term includes, but is not limited to, effleurage (stroking), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration, friction, nerve strokes, and Swedish gymnastics, either by hand or with mechanical or electrical apparatus for the purpose of body message. Massage therapy may include the use of oil, salt glows, heat lamps, hot and cold packs, tub, shower or cabinet baths. Equivalent terms for "massage therapy" are massage, therapeutic massage. Massage and "therapeutic" do not include diagnosis, the treatment of illness or disease, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry is required by law. 
(e)  Public health center. A facility primarily utilized by a health unit for providing public health services including related facilities such as laboratories, clinics and administrative offices operated in connection therewith. 
(f)  Sanitarium. An institution providing health facilities for inpatient medical treatment or treatment and recuperation making use of natural therapeutic agents. 
(g)  Surgical out-patient facility. An establishment offering any type of surgical procedures and related care which, in the opinion of the attending physician, can be performed safely without requiring inpatient overnight hospital care and exclusive of such surgical and related care as licensed physicians ordinarily may elect to perform in their private offices. 
Massage therapist. See "medical facility: Massage establishment". 
Microwave reflector/antenna. An apparatus constructed of solid, mesh, or perforated materials of any configuration that is used to receive and/or transmit microwave signals from a terrestrial or orbitally-located transmitter or transmitter relay. The definition is meant to include, but is not limited to, what are commonly referred to as satellite receive only earth stations, or satellite dishes. (Also see section 23-5.4.5.) 
Mini-warehouse (also termed self-storage). Small individual storage units for rent or lease, restricted solely to the storage of items. The conduct of sales, business or any other activity within the individual storage units, other than storage, shall be prohibited. 
Mobile hom or HUD code manufactured home. A dwelling designed to be transported on its own chassis on the highway in one (1) or more sections by a prime mover and which is constructed with a base section so as to be independently self-supporting and not requiring a permanent foundation for year-round living. 
Mobile home as a fixed dwelling. A dwelling designed to be transported intact or in major sections on the highway and which is placed on a standard building lot, connected to utilities, placed on permanent supports and occupied as a fixed dwelling. 
Mobile home display or sales (used). The offering for sale, storage, or display of used trailers or mobile homes on a parcel of land but excluding the use of such facilities as dwellings either on a temporary or permanent basis. 
Mobile home park. A parcel of land not less than five (5) acres nor greater than twenty-five (25) acres which has been designed, improved, or intended to be used or rented for occupancy by one (1) or more mobile homes or trailer houses in designated spaces. 
Mobile home subdivision. A parcel of land which has been designed, platted, improved, and is intended for the placement of individually owned mobile home units on platted lots which can be purchased outright by the owners of the mobile home units. 
Model home. A dwelling in a developing subdivision located on a legal lot of record that is limited to temporary use as a sales office for the subdivision and to provide an example of the dwellings which have been built or which are proposed to be built in the same subdivision. 
Mortuary. See "funeral home". 
Motel or hotel. A facility offering temporary lodging accommodations or guest rooms on a daily rate to the general public and providing additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, maid service and recreational facilities. A guest room shall be defined as a room designed for the overnight lodging of hotel guests for an established rate or fee. 
Motorcycle. A usually two-wheeled self-propelled vehicle having one (1) or two (2) saddles or seats, and which may have a sidecar attached. For purposes of this ordinance, motorbikes, ATVs, motor-scooters, mopeds, and similar vehicles are classified as motorcycles. 
Motorcycle sales and repair service. The display, sale and servicing, including repair work, of motorcycles. 
Motor freight company. A company using trucks or other heavy load vehicles to transport goods, equipment and similar products. Includes companies that move residential or commercial belongings. 
Motor vehicle. Any vehicle designed to carry one (1) or more persons which is propelled or drawn by mechanical power, such as automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, and buses. 
Multiple-family dwelling (apartment). Three (3) or more dwelling units on a single lot designed to be occupied by three (3) or more families living independently of one another, exclusive of hotels or motels. 
Municipally-owned facilities and uses. Any area, land, building, structure, and/or facility owned, used, leased, or operated by the City of Cedar Hill, Texas. 
Nature center (private). An activity center featuring passive recreational or educational pursuits, to include but not be limited to interpretive programs and trail systems that take advantage of unusual geological, biological or scenic resources. 
Nonconforming use. A building, structure, or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto, but which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated. 
Nursery school. See "kindergarten". 
Nursing, convalescent or rest home. See "skilled nursing facility". 
Occupancy. The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants. 
Offices, professional and general business. A room or group of rooms used for the provision of executive, management, or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices, and services including real estate, insurance, property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, and business offices of public utilities, organizations and associations, but excluding medical offices. 
Office center. A building or complex of buildings used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government, or like activity, that may include ancillary services for office workers such as a coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand. 
Office showroom. An establishment with no more than twenty-five (25) percent of its total floor area devoted to storage and warehousing, but not accessible to the general public. The remaining area may include retail and wholesale sales areas, sales offices, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing areas. 
Office warehouse. An establishment with more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area devoted to storage and warehousing, but not generally accessible to the public. 
Officially approved place of access. Access, other than a dedicated street, to a property that is approved by the City of Cedar Hill. 
Off-street parking incidental to main use. Off-street parking spaces provided in accordance with the requirements specified by this chapter and located on the lot or tract occupied by the main use or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of such lot or tract and located within the same zoning district as the main use. 
Open space. An open area or recreational facility which is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation and meets the requirements of section 23-3.10.4. 
Open storage. See outside storage. 
Outdoor display. See outside display. 
Outdoor storage. See outside storage. 
Outside display. Outside temporary display of finished goods specifically intended for retail sale but not displayed outside on a permanent basis. 
Outside storage. The permanent or continuous keeping, displaying, or storing of unfinished goods, material, merchandise, equipment or heavy vehicles outside of a building on a lot or tract for more than twenty-four (24) hours. Also referred to as "open storage" and "outdoor storage". 
Overlay zoning district. An area where certain additional requirements are superimposed upon one (1) or more base zoning districts or underlying districts in which the requirements of the base of underlying district may or may not be altered. 
Paint shop. A commercial establishment where painting services are performed. 
Parcel. Any unplatted or portion of an unplatted tract of land. (Also see "tract") 
Park or playground (private). A recreation facility, recreation center, or park not owned or operated by a public agency such as a city or school district and available to the general public. 
Parking lot. An off-street, ground level area, paved in accordance with City of Cedar Hill parking lot standards, for the temporary storage of motor vehicles. 
Parking lot or structure, commercial (auto). An area or structure devoted to the parking or storage of automobiles for a fee, may include, in the case of a parking structure only, a facility for servicing of automobiles provided such facility is primarily an internal function for use only by automobiles occupying the structure and creates no special problems of ingress or egress. 
Parking space. See City of Cedar Hill Parking Lot Standards and Illustration 10. 
Patio home (zero lot line dwelling). A lot which is designed in such a manner that the side yard and adjacent use easement make maximum use of available land area to preserve an open, yet private, use of the side yard, and permits construction of a detached single-family dwelling with one (1) side of such dwelling placed on the side property line. 
Pawn shop. An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property pledged in the keeping of the owners (pawnbroker). Retail sales also take place of primarily used items. 
Personal service shop or custom personal services. Establishments less than two thousand (2,000) square feet in gross floor area, primarily engaged in providing services generally involving the care of the person or his apparel including but not limited to barber and beauty shops, dressmaking, shoe shining, dry-cleaning and laundry pick-up stations, tailor or seamstress, and reducing salons/health clubs (no outside storage). 
Pet and animal grooming shop. A retail establishment offering small animals, fish or birds for sale as pets and where such creatures are housed within the building, including the grooming of dogs, cats, and similar animals. 
Petroleum extraction. See "sand, gravel, stone or petroleum extraction". 
Plastic product manufacturing. The manufacturing of a range of plastic finished products thru the forming or molding of plastic beads or reclaimed plastic. Product examples many include housewares, building materials, motor vehicle parts, resilient floor coverings, and appliance parts. This definition does not pertain to plastic film, sheet, bags, profile shapes, pipe fittings, laminates, foam products and bottles. 
Planned development district. Planned associations of uses developed as integral land use units such as industrial parks or industrial districts, offices, commercial or service centers, shopping centers, residential developments of multiple or mixed housing, including attached single-family dwellings or any appropriate combination of uses which may be planned, developed or operated or integral land use units either by a single owner or a combination of owners. 
Planning and zoning commission. A board, appointed by the city council as an advisory body, authorized to recommend changes in the zoning and other planning functions as delegated by the city council. Also referred to as the "commission." 
Plant nursery. An establishment situated in a building, or partly in a building and partly in a land area, used for the growth, indoor or outdoor display and/or sale of plants, shrubs, and trees, and other materials used for indoor or outdoor planting. 
Plat. A plan of a subdivision of land creating building lots or tracts and showing all essential dimensions and other information essential to comply with the subdivision standards of the City of Cedar Hill and approved by the City of Cedar Hill and recorded in the plat records of Dallas County. 
Platted lot. See "lot of record." 
Playfield or stadium (private). An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by an agency other than the City of Cedar Hill or Cedar Hill Independent School District. 
Playfield or stadium (public). An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by a public agency for the general public including a baseball field, football field or stadium which may be lighted for nighttime play. 
Portable building sales (outdoor display). An establishment which displays and sells structures capable of being carried and transported to another location, but not including mobile homes. 
Premises. Land together with any buildings or structures situated thereon. 
Primary use. The principal or predominant use of any lot or building. 
Principal building. Same as main building. 
Printing. See "copy shop". 
Private club. An establishment providing dining facilities which may provide alcoholic beverage service, to an association of persons, and otherwise falling within the definition of, and permitted under the provisions of, that portion of Title 3, Chapter 32, Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, Alcoholic Beverage Code, as the same may be hereafter amended, and as it pertains to the operation of private clubs. 
Private recreation facility or private park. A recreation facility operated for the exclusive use of private residents or neighborhood groups and their guests, and not the general public. 
Produce stand. A seasonal use for which the primary purpose and design is to sell fruit, vegetables, and similar foods. No cooking of produce occurs on the site. 
Professional offices. See "offices, professional and general business". 
Professional service. Work performed which is commonly identified as a profession, and which may be licensed by the State of Texas. 
Promotional sales, commercial. See "temporary outdoor retail sales/commercial promotion". 
Propane sales. Retail sales of propane or butane. 
Property line. See "line, property". 
Public or municipal building or facility. Any building (except a building used primarily for general office purposes) which is owned, leased, primarily used and/or primarily occupied by the State of Texas, the United States, the City of Cedar Hill, or any subdivision or agency of the State of Texas, the United States or the City of Cedar Hill, or other public utility or agency. 
Public building, shop or yard of local, state or federal agency. Facilities such as office buildings, other than City Hall, library, police or fire station, maintenance yards and shops required by branches of local, state or federal agencies for service to an area such as highway department yard, city service center or experiment station. 
Public parking lot—Municipal. Paved parking and maneuvering area owned by a municipality to be used for the benefit of citizens with or without payment of a fee. 
Public view. Public view means areas that can be seen from the closest public street. 
Quarry. See "sand, gravel, stone, or petroleum extraction". 
Radio, television or microwave tower. Structures supporting antennae for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio spectrum, but excluding noncommercial antennae installations for home use of radio or television. (Also see section 23-5.4.5.) 
Ranch. See "farm, ranch, garden, crops, or orchard". 
Rear yard. See "yard, rear". 
Recreational vehicle (RV). A portable or mobile living unit used for temporary human occupancy away from the place of permanent residence of the occupants and self-propelled (motorized). Also see "heavy load vehicle". A recreational vehicle park is an area or commercial campground for RVs and similar vehicles or trailers to reside, park, rent, or lease on a temporary basis. 
Recycling facility. See "salvage/reclamation yard". 
Registered family home. Facility that regularly provides care for six (6) to twelve (12) children for less than twenty-four (24) hours in a day. 
Rehabilitation care facility (halfway house). A dwelling unit which provides residence and care to not more than nine (9) persons regardless of legal relationship who have demonstrated a tendency towards alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct living together with not more than two supervisory personnel as a single housekeeping unit. 
Rehabilitation care institution. A facility which provides residence and care to ten (10) or more persons, regardless of legal relationship, who have demonstrated a tendency toward alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct together with supervisory personnel. 
Rental, tools and machinery. See "tools and machinery rental shop". 
Residence. Same as a dwelling; also, when used with district, an area of residential regulations. 
Residence hotels or extended stay motels. A multi-dwelling unit extended stay lodging facility consisting of efficiency units or suites with a complete kitchen suitable for long term occupancy. Customary hotel services such as linen, maid service, telephone, and upkeep of furniture shall be provided. Meeting rooms, clubhouse, and recreational facilities intended for the use of residents and their guests are permitted. This definition shall not include other dwelling units as defined by this ordinance. 
Rest home. See "skilled nursing facility". 
Restaurant. A food establishment that is open to the public, where food and beverages are prepared, served, and consumed primarily on the premises. 
Restaurant (carry-out or delivery). A food establishment that is open to the public, where food and beverages are prepared primarily for carry-out by the consumer or for delivery by the establishment to the consumer for consumption off the premises. This classification does not include mobile food establishments. 
Restaurant (drive-in service). A food establishment that is open to the public, where food and beverages are prepared and served to customers primarily for consumption in motor vehicles. 
Retail/residential. Building or structure where a residence is in the same building or structure, and is accessible to a retail sales area. 
Retirement community—Continuing care. See "continuing care retirement community". 
Retirement housing for the aged or elderly (also termed independent living center or congregate housing). A development providing self-contained dwelling units specifically designed for the needs of the elderly. Units may be rented or owner-occupied. To qualify as retirement housing, a minimum of eighty (80) percent of the total units shall have a household head 55 years of age or greater. No long-term or permanent skilled nursing care or related services are provided. 
Reverse vending machine. Automated machine accepting material for recycling. 
Room. A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as living or sleeping quarters but not including toilet or cooking facilities. 
Rooming house. See "boarding house". 
Rubber products manufacturing. The manufacturing of finished products or parts predominately from natural, and synthetic or reclaimed rubber materials into intermediate or final products using process such as vulcanizing, cementing, molding, extruding, and lathe-cutting. 
RV park. A place where recreational vehicles, motor homes, and travel trailers are accommodated on a temporary basis. The maximum length of stay shall be one (1) month. (No sale of RVs, motor homes or travel trailers on-site). 
RV/camper sales. An establishment that sells new and used travel trailers, motor homes, campers and similar recreational vehicles. 
Salvage or reclamation of products. A parcel of land where damaged, inoperable, obsolete or used, secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, temporarily stored, processed or handled. Materials include but are not limited to scrap iron and other ferrous metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, bottles, discarded goods, machinery, or more than two inoperable motor vehicles. Includes light and heavy processing facilities for recycling. Also referred to as auto salvage, wrecking yard and recycling facilities. 
Sand, gravel, stone or petroleum extraction. The process of extracting sand, gravel, stone or petroleum from the earth. 
School, business. A business organized to operate for a profit and offering instruction and training in a service or art such as secretarial school, barber college, beauty school or commercial art school, but not including manual trade schools. 
School, commercial trade. A business organized to operate for a profit and offering instruction and training in a trade such as welding, brick laying, machinery operation and similar trades. 
School, private, primary or secondary. A school under the sponsorship of a private agency or corporation other than a public or religious agency, having a curriculum generally equivalent to public elementary or secondary schools. 
School, public or parochial. A school under the sponsorship of a public or religious agency providing elementary or secondary curriculum, but not including private trade or commercial schools. 
Scientific and industrial research laboratories. Facilities for research including laboratories, experimental equipment, and operations involving compounding or testing of materials or equipment. 
Scrap/waste recycling collection and/or storage. See "salvage/reclamation yard". 
Screened. Shielded, concealed, and effectively hidden from view by a person standing at ground level on an abutting site, or outside the area or feature so screened, by a fence, wall, hedge, berm, or similar architectural or landscape feature. 
Seasonal uses. Seasonal uses include the sale of Christmas trees, pumpkins, and other temporary uses which occur at certain times of the year. 
Self-storage warehouse. See "mini-warehouse" 
Servant's quarters or guest house (accessory apartment). An accessory dwelling in a residential district for the sole use and occupancy of a member of the immediate family or a person or persons employed on the premises by the occupant on a full time basis as domestic help, such as a maid, yard man, chauffeur, cook or gardener, but not involving the rental of such facilities or the use of separate utility connections. 
Sexually oriented business. See article 4, section 23-4.1.7(c), definitions. 
Side yard. See "yard, side". 
Single-family dwelling (attached). A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one (1) or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall and which is designed for occupancy by one (1) family and is located on a separate lot delineated by front, side and rear lot line. Also termed "townhouse." 
Single-family dwelling (detached). A dwelling designed and constructed as a free standing structure for occupancy by one (1) family and located on a lot or separate building tract and having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract and occupied by one (1) family. 
Skilled nursing facility (also termed nursing home, convalescent home or long-term care facility. A residence providing primarily in-patient health care, personal care, or rehabilitative services over a long period of time to persons chronically ill, aged or disabled who need ongoing health supervision but not hospitalization. 
Small engine repair shop. Shop for repair of lawn mowers, chain saws, lawn equipment, and other machines with one-cylinder engines. 
Solar panel system. A combination of equipment and/or controls, accessories, interconnecting means and terminal elements for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy. Solar panel systems do not include individually powered outdoor solar lights, such as garden lights, accent lights, security lights, or flood lights. 
Solar panel system (accessory use). A solar panel system that primarily produces electrical energy for use on site, though excess energy may be stored or put back into the power grid. 
Solar panel system (primary use). A solar panel system that primarily produces electrical power to be put back into the power grid. 
Solar panel systems—roof mounted. A solar panel system affixed to a principal or accessory building. 
Solar panel systems—ground mounted. A solar panel system with a supporting framework that is placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that is independent of any building or other structure. 
Specialty food store. A retail establishment that specializes in the sale of one (1) type or line of foods primarily for home preparation and consumption, such as gourmet foods, meat, seafood, cheese, oils, vinegars, and confections. 
Stable, (commercial; as a principal use). A stable used for the rental of stall space or for the sale or rental of horses or mules. 
Stable, (private). An area used solely for the owner's private purposes for the keeping of horses, mules or ponies, and not kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
Stadium. See "playfield". 
Storage or wholesale warehouse. A building used primarily for the wholesale storage of goods and materials. 
Story. That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. The average height for a residential story shall be defined as twelve (12) feet. The average height for a non-residential story shall be defined as thirty (30) feet. The definition of a story does not include parapets, gables, and other normal roof structures. 
Story, half. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet above the top floor level, and in which space not more than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the floor area is finished off for use. A half story containing independent apartment or living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 
Street. Any dedicated public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. A street is termed a major thoroughfare or arterial when the right-of-way is greater than sixty (60) feet. 
Street, intersection. Any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other. 
Street yard. The area of a lot, which lies on the street side of the actual front wall line of the principle building(s), as such building wall line extends from the outward corners of the building, parallel to the street, until it intersects the side property lines. In determining the actual definition, steps and enclosed porches shall be excluded, but such building wall line shall follow and include the irregular indentions of the building. A front building wall is a building wall fronting on a street. 
On corner lots, the street yard shall consist of all the area of such lot between all abutting street right-of-way lines and their corresponding actual front building wall lines, as such lines are imaginarily extended in the manner provided above. 
When there are multiple buildings on a lot, the street yard shall consist of all the area of the lot between the street right(s)-of-way and an imaginary line beginning at one (1) side of the property line, running parallel to the street, connecting the front most walls of al buildings fronting on the street, and then extending to the other side property line, running parallel to the street. If a building has a rounded front, the front building wall corners shall be the points closest to the side boundaries. Provided, that isolated buildings, (i.e., fast food restaurants in a shopping center, photo processing drop-offs, bank drive through windows, etc.) shall not be considered in delineating the street yard. 
Notwithstanding all of the foregoing, on land for which a use is established that does not contain any buildings, such as land used only for parking purposes or only as a commercial or private lot, the street yard shall consist of the entire lot. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground (also see definition of "building"). 
Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as load bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
Studios for radio and television. A building or portion of a building used as a place for radio or television broadcasting (without a tower). 
Super store. A retail establishment with a floor area exceeding seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet that offers for sale food and beverage products for home preparation and consumption, household merchandise, personal care products, clothing, and a variety of other retail goods. These items may be sold in bulk. In some cases, limited medical and personal service uses such as a pharmacies, optometrists and salons may be included. 
Swimming instruction as a home occupation. The teaching of swimming in a private swimming pool. In a residential area, the offering of swimming instruction in a private pool is subject to the approval of a conditional use permit which may specify operating conditions and standards and may limit the number of students and operating time. 
Swimming pool (commercial). A swimming pool with accessory facilities, not part of the municipal or public recreational system and not a private swim club, but where the facilities are available to the general public for a fee. 
Swimming pool (private). A swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of the residents of a one-family, two-family or multiple-family dwelling and located, fenced and built in accordance with Article 3.500, Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code of the City of Cedar Hill Code of Ordinances. A private swimming pool shall not be operated as a business nor maintained in a manner to be hazardous or obnoxious to adjacent property owners. 
Telemarketing or E-commerce agency. An office where the primary function is to sell via telephone or over the Internet products or services that are not produced, prepared, performed, stored or distributed on or from the office location. 
Telephone and exchange, switching or relay or transmitting station. A line for the transmission of telephone signals and a central office in which telephone lines are connected to permit communication but not including a business office, storage or repair yards. 
Television tower. See "radio, television, and broadcast tower". 
Temporary. Used or lasting for only a limited period of time; not permanent. 
Temporary building. Any nonresidential pre-manufactured structure which is not originally manufactured or constructed at its use site, required on-site installation of utilities and/or foundation. 
Temporary field office or construction yard or office. A structure or shelter used in connection with a development or building project for housing on the site of temporary administrative and supervisory functions and for sheltering employees and equipment. Temporary permits for one (1) year for a specific time and location as determined may be issued by the building official and shall be subject to review and renewal for reasonable cause. 
Temporary outdoor retail sale/commercial promotion. An outdoor retail sale or commercial promotion, not in excess of thirty (30) days during any twelve-month period, adjacent to an existing permanent business operated in the city where the products displayed or sold outdoors are the same as those sold inside the existing permanent business and where such activity is incidental to the normal conduct of business operated by the same merchant or his employer in an on-site building for which a valid certificate of occupancy exists and when permitted by the city. A temporary outdoor retail sale/commercial promotion shall be limited to a total of thirty (30) days during any twelve (12) month period. 
Tennis court, private. A surface designed and constructed for playing the game of tennis along with all fencing, nets and related appurtenances but excluding lighting for night play in residential areas except as may be otherwise permitted. 
Theater (indoor). A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of motion pictures, or for dramatic, musical or live performances. 
Theater (open drive-in). An open lot with its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles. 
Theater (outdoor). An outdoor establishment that is open to the public and used for dramatic, operatic, musical, motion picture, or other related entertainment performances. This category includes drive-in theaters. 
Tire dealer, no open storage. A retail establishment engaged in the sale and/or installation of tires for vehicles, but without open storage. 
Tire dealer, with open storage. A retail establishment engaged in the sale and/or installation of tires for vehicles, with open storage. 
Tool and machinery rental shop. A building or a portion of a building used for the display and rental of tools, machinery and instruments. 
Tow service. See "wrecker or tow service". 
Townhouse. See "single-family dwelling [attached]". 
Tract. A single individual parcel or lot. 
Tractor sales. See "heavy machinery sales and storage". 
Trade and commercial schools. Establishments, other than public or parochial schools, private primary or secondary schools, or colleges, offering training or instruction in a trade, art or occupation. 
Trailer court. See "mobile home park". 
Trailer, hauling. A vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats. 
Trailer home. See "mobile home" or "recreational vehicle". 
Trailer (travel) or mobile home space. A plot of ground within a mobile home park, trailer court, or mobile home subdivision designed for the accommodation of one (1) manufactured home or travel trailer. 
Trailer rental. The display and offering for rent of trailers designed to be towed by light load vehicles. 
Trailer, travel or camping trailer. A portable or mobile living unit used for temporary human occupancy away from the place of residence of the occupants and not constituting the principal place of residence of the occupants or designed to be towed behind another vehicle. 
Transmission lines. See "utility distribution/transmission lines". 
Transparency. The total area of uncovered window and door openings filled with transparent glass, expressed as a percentage of the wall surface area. 
Transportation and utility structures/facilities. Permanent facilities and structures operated by companies engaged in providing transportation and utility services including, but not limited to, railroad track rights-of-way, sewage pumping stations, telephone exchanges, transit station turnarounds, water reservoirs and water pumping stations. 
Truck. A light or heavy load vehicle (see definition for "light and heavy load vehicle"). 
Truck and bus repair. An establishment providing major and minor automobile repair services to heavy load vehicles. 
Truck and bus leasing. The rental of new or used panel trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles or motor-driven buses in operable condition and where no repair work is done. 
Truck parking lot. Area for parking heavy load vehicles. 
Truck sales (heavy trucks). The display, sale or rental of new or used heavy load vehicles in operable condition. 
Truck terminal. An area and building where cargo is stored and where trucks, including tractors and trailer units, load and unload cargo on a regular basis. May include facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to shipment. 
Truck tow service. See "wrecker or tow service". 
Two-family dwelling, ("duplex"). Two (2) attached dwellings in one (1) structure, each designed to be occupied by one (1) family. 
Undeveloped property. A platted or unplatted property that has not been developed with buildings, structures or paving. 
Upholstery shop. See "drapery or furniture upholstery shop". 
Use. The purpose for which land or buildings are or may be occupied in a zoning district. 
Utility distribution/transmission lines. Facilities which serve to distribute and transmit electrical power, gas and water, including but not limited to electrical transmission lines, gas transmission lines, telephone lines and metering stations, whether operated by the city or private utility company. 
Utility facilities. See "transportation and utility structures/facilities". 
Variance. An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of the zoning ordinance to a particular parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances of hardship peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district. Only the Board of Adjustment of the City of Cedar Hill can grant a variance. 
Variety store. A retail establishment that offers for sale an assortment of inexpensive or discounted physical goods, products or merchandise directly to the consumer such as food or beverages for off-premise consumption, household products, personal grooming and health products and other consumer goods. Variety stores do not include retail stores that: contain a prescription pharmacy; sell gasoline or diesel fuel; or primarily sell specialty food items (e.g. meat, seafood, cheese, oils and vinegars, or confectioneries). 
Veterinarian. A clinic or hospital where small and large domestic household animals and pets are seen or admitted for examination and medical treatment. May include indoor or outdoor kennels or pens, See "animal boarding and kennels (indoor or outdoor)". 
Visibility triangle. The area of public and private property within a triangle formed by two (2) intersecting streets, commercial driveway or alley is called a visibility triangle. The legs of the triangle are formed by the curb line of the streets and are extended to the point at which they intersect, which usually forms a ninety-degree angle. Each of the legs are attached at the end by a diagonal line (the hypotenuse), which forms a triangle. Dimensions of a visibility triangle are based on speed, type of roadway and curvature of the roadway. 
Wall surface area. The area of a wall derived by multiplying the distance between the foundation and the upper-most, top plate line times the width of the wall including all surface areas above the roof line as seen from a direction perpendicular to the façade or building face. 
Wind-powered generator (personal). A wind energy conversion system consisting of any combination of the following: Blades, wind turbine, supporting structure, and associated control of conversion electronics, which, in combination with each other, concerts wind energy into electrical energy, has a rated capacity of not more than 25kW and which is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power. 
Wrecker or tow service. Establishment that provides for the removal and temporary storage of vehicles but does not include disposal, permanent disassembly, salvage or accessory storage of inoperable vehicles. 
Wrecking yard (junkyard or auto salvage). Any lot upon which two or more motor vehicles of any kind, which are incapable of being operated due to condition or lack of license, have been placed for the purpose of obtaining parts for recycling or resale. 
Yard. An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in this chapter that the building or structure may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the shortest horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. (See Illustration No. 6 for example) 
Yard, front. A yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and extending across a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the outside wall of the main building. (See Illustration 6) 
Yard, rear. The area extending across the rear of a lot measured between the lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the outside wall of the main building. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. (See Illustration 8) 
Yard, side. The area between the building and side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall of the side of the main building. (See Illustration 8) 
Zero lot line dwelling. See "patio home". 
Zoning district. A classification applied to any certain land area within the city stipulating the limitations and requirements of land usage and development. 
Zoning district map. The official map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of the zoning ordinance. (See division 1.3, zoning district map and division 1.4, zoning district boundaries). 
Zoo (private). A facility housing and displaying live animals, reptiles or birds, privately-owned and operated for a fee or for the promotion of some other enterprise. 
Zoo (public). A publicly-owned zoo or similar facility owned and operated by the city or a nonprofit zoological society where live animals, birds and reptiles are domiciled and displayed. 
(Ord. No. 2003-143, §§ 9, 10, 2-25-03; Ord. No. 2004-201, §§ 13, 14, 4-13-04; Ord. No. 2006-276, § 21, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 2008-345, § 10, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2009-377, § 3, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2010-418, §§ 4, 5, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 2011-435, § 6, 4-12-11; Ord. No. 2011-442, § 1, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 2011-461, § 1, 10-11-1; Ord. No. 2012-494, §§ 2—6, 10-23-12; Ord. No. 2014-542, §§ 2, 4, 7-22-14; Ord. No. 2015-557-A, § 1, 5-12-15; Ord. No. 2015-569, § 2, 9-22-15; Ord. No. 2016-580, § 1, 3-8-16; Ord. No. 2016-605, § 1, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 2018-655, §§ 27, 28, 9-25-18; Ord. No. 2019-669, §§ 8—10, 3-26-19; Ord. No. 2020-699 , §§ 5—7, 6-9-20)  
ARTICLE 6. - PENALTIES AND NONCONFORMITIES  
DIVISION 6.1. - EFFECT OF INTERPRETATION 
 
Sec. 23-6.1.1. - Minimum requirements. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, or general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.  
DIVISION 6.2. - PRESERVING RIGHTS IN PENDING LITIGATION AND VIOLATIONS UNDER EXISTING ORDINANCES 
 
Sec. 23-6.2.1. - Pending litigation and violations under existing ordinances. 
By the passage of this chapter, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this chapter that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty, or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, incurred prior to the time the exiting zoning ordinance was repealed and this zoning ordinance adopted, shall be discharged or affected by such repeal; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties, or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending proceeded with in all respects as if such prior ordinance had not been repealed.  
DIVISION 6.3. - PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 23-6.3.1. - Penalty. 
Any person or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined any sum not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and each and every day that the provisions of this chapter are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the said penalty provided for, the right is hereby conferred and extended upon any property owner owning property in any district, where such property owner may be affected or invaded, by a violation of the terms of the chapter, to bring suit in such court or courts having jurisdiction thereof and obtain such remedies as may be available at law and equity in the protection of the rights of such property owners.  
DIVISION 6.4. - VALIDITY 
 
Sec. 23-6.4.1. - Validity. 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
APPENDIX A. - RETAINED PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS 
The following list of Planned Development Districts have been incorporated within this Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance pursuant to Section 3.19.11 and are subject to any limitations set forth therein. Each district is identified by the number of the ordinance that originally created the district. Such ordinance number appears to identify the PD district on the City's official zoning map. An asterisk (() following the ordinance number indicates that only a portion of the land subject to the original ordinance establishing the district has been incorporated as a Planned Development District by this Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. 
ORDINANCE # 	LOCATION 
82-625* 	The Highlands 
83-647 	Bryan Place 
83-670 	Hillcrest #2 
84-698* 	High Pointe 
84-713 	Stonewood Heights 
84-718* 	Somerset Village 
84-733* 	Waterford Oaks 
84-739 	Bryan Place Replat 
85-750* 	Springfield 
85-767 	Parkerville Place 
85-769 	Highlands # 6 
85-776* 	Bear Creek Crossing 
85-807* 	High Point LR 
86-834 	Lake Ridge 
86-862* 	Lake Ridge Village I and II (Wildwood) 
86-870* 	Windsor Park 
87-900 	Hillcrest #3 
87-944 	High Pointe 
94-190 	Lake Ridge, Section 1 
95-200 	Waterford Oaks West 
95-210* 	Lake Ridge 2,3,4 & 8 
95-221 	Lake Ridge 5 
95-247* 	High Pointe 
96-263* 	High Pointe 
96-284 	Meadow Vista 
96-287 	Lake Ridge 6, 7 & 13 
97-313 	Lake Ridge 10, 10-I- A 
98-372-A 	Parkway Place 
98-376 	41.35 acres south of Bentle Branch 
(Preliminary Plat-Terrace Heights) 
98-383 	Covenant Group 
99-405 	The Reserves at High Pointe 
99-406 	Heritage II 
99-413 	Park Plaza 
99-428 	Winding Hollow I-A 
99-431 	High Pointe Manor 
99-452 	Lake Ridge 15 
00-012 	Lake Ridge 15-3 
00-019 	Lake Ridge 16 
00-024 	10.27 acres south of Crawford Park 
(Preliminary Plat - Sherwood Forest) 
00-029 	Cedar Crest II 
  
APPENDIX B. - REPEALED PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS AND PLANNED DEVELOPMENT COMBINING DISTRICTS 
The following table contains the ordinances establishing planned development districts have been repealed in whole or in part pursuant to section 23-3.19.12 of this Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, the number that designates a planned development combining district, which incorporates by reference the uses, standards and conditions applicable within the former planned development district, and which regulations combine with those of associated base districts listed in the last column, as set forth in section 23-3.19.12. An asterisk (() following the establishing planned development districts ordinance number indicates that only a portion of the land subject to the original ordinance establishing the district has been incorporated within a planned development combining district by this comprehensive zoning ordinance. A planned development combining district number followed by a suffix indicates that more than one (1) planned development combining district has been established for the land originally subject to the ordinance creating the original planned development district. Such ordinance number appears to identify the planned development combining district on the city's official zoning map. The last column contains the base district associated with the planned development combining district. 
Repealed PD Districts & Adopted PDC Districts 
* = Only a portion of the PD district has been incorporated into a PDC district. 
Planned Development Repealed in Whole or Part 	Planned Development Combining (PDC) Districts 	Associated PDC Base District 
83-661 	83-661 	SF-E 
84-694 	84-694 	SF-7 
84-696 	84-696 	SF-E 
84-697 	84-697-A 	SF-7 
	84-697-B 	LR 
84-698* 	84-698 	SF-22 
84-704 	84-704 	SF-7 
84-718* 	84-718-A 	SF-8.5 
	84-718-B 	SF-8.5 
84-733* 	84-733-A 	SF-10 
	84-733-B 	SF-8.5 
	84-733-C 	SF-7 
	84-733-D 	LR 
	84-733-E 	LR 
85-750* 	85-750-A 	LR 
	85-750-B 	LR 
85-770 	85-770 	SF-10 
85-776* 	85-776-A 	SF-10 
	85-776-B 	RR 
85-803 	85-803-A 	SF-8.5 
	85-803-B 	SF-8.5 
85-817 	85-817-A 	LR 
	85-817-B 	SF-10 
85-817 	85-817-C 	LR 
86-862* 	86-862-A 	SF-E 
	86-862-B 	LR 
	86-862-C 	SF-E 
	86-862-D 	SF-7 
	86-862-E 	NS 
	86-862-F 	SF-22 
	86-862-G 	SF-E 
	86-862-H 	SF-E 
	86-862-J 	SF-22 
86-870* 	86-870-A 	LR 
	86-870-B 	LR 
	86-870-C 	SF-8.5 
87-895 	87-895-A 	SF-10 
	87-895-B 	LR 
87-944 	87-944 	SF-10 
95-210* 	95-210-A 	NS 
	95-210-B 	SF-7 
95-244 	95-244-A 	SF-8.5 
	95-244-B 	SF-8.5 
95-247* 	95-247-A 	SF-8.5 
	95-247-B 	SF-8.5 
95-248 	95-248 	SF-8.5 
96-263* 	96-263-A 	SF-8.5 
	96-263-B 	SF-8.5 
96-277 	96-277-A 	RR 
	96-277-B 	LR 
96-284 	96-284 	LR 
97-317 	97-317 	SF-10 
97-319 	97-319 	LR 
98-364 	98-364 	SF-E 
98-365* 	98-365-A 	SF-E 
	98-365-B 	SF-E 
99-452 	99-452 	LR 
  
APPENDIX C. - REPEALED ZONING DISTRICTS AUTHORIZING SPECIAL USES 
The following ordinances establishing zoning districts authorizing special uses have been repealed pursuant to section 23-3.20.10 of this Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. Each district is identified by the number of the ordinance that originally created the district. 
2000-42 	95-208 	88-979 	85-802 	73-339 
2000-34 	94-181 	88-978 	85-796 	73-336 
2000-28 	94-173 	88-964 	85-795 	67-246 
2000-23 	93-162 	87-943 	85-791 	67-242 
2000-18 	93-161 	87-942 	85-784 	63-187 
2000-07 	93-159 	87-941 	85-774 	63-180 
99-453 	93-145 	87-927 	85-753 	
99-441 	92-135 	87-916 	84-700 	
99-440 	92-132 	87-915 	83-666 	
99-433 	92-131 	87-914 	83-659 	
99-429 	92-113 	87-904 	83-657 	
99-427 	91-095 	87-903 	81-584 	
98-401 	91-082 	87-902 	80-581 	
98-386 	91-049 	87-892 	80-576 	
98-370 	90-040 	86-884 	80-574 	
98-353 	90-024 	86-878 	80-546 	
97-329 	90-009 	86-877 	78-489 	
96-300 	90-006 	86-866 	78-479 	
96-284 	89-1025 	86-865 	75-386 	
96-283 	89-1011 	86-863 	74-372 	
95-249 	89-1004 	86-832 	73-352 	
95-212 	88-995 	86-832 	73-346 	
  
APPENDIX D. - HIGH POINTE OVERLAY DISTRICT STANDARDS 
STANDARDS, RESTRICTIONS AND SPECIAL CONDITIONS 
I.  RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT 
A.  GENERAL 
1.  Garage conversions. Owners of homes may not alter or convert the two-car garage in any way that would prevent the use of the garage as enclosed parking for two automobiles. 
2.  Building line. In single-family residential detached districts, the width of lot listed shall be at the building line due to culs-de-sac and irregular shaped lots. 
3.  Driveway access. Rear entry homes serviced by an alley cannot have a front entry access driveway. 
B.  PERIMETER FENCING AND LANDSCAPING 
1.  Perimeter screening fences. A uniform perimeter screening fence shall be required along all public streets where residential lots back up to a public street. (If there is an alleyway between the residential lots and the public street, see section B-4 of this appendix below for alleyway screening requirements.) This fence shall be constructed on private property along the street right-of-way and shall be contained within a ten-foot wide fence easement. There shall be a minimum of four (4) feet of sodded turf established between the required fence and the sidewalk. An underground automatic electric irrigation system shall be provided within the right-of-way along all required screening fences. The screening fence, landscaping and irrigation shall be placed in fence and landscape easements granted to the District for access for maintenance. Any warranty for said fence should be transferred over to the district. 
2.  Fence design and materials. All required perimeter screening fences shall conform with one of the following options: 
a)  OPTION A. The perimeter-screening fence shall be an eight (8) feet masonry wall constructed of Granbury stone or approved equal with a buff color mortar and a cast stone cap. See Attachment A-I for wall detail. 
b)  OPTION B. The uniform screening fence shall be an eight-foot board on board wood fence constructed of #1 premium grade cedar, with two "3/8" galvanized posts set on eight-foot centers, constructed with a minimum thirty-inch footing depth. The fence shall include 2' × 2' × 8'½? masonry columns of Granbury stone (or approved equal) with a buff color mortar. The columns shall be placed on a maximum of twenty-seven-foot centers with a capstone cap. See Attachment A-2-A for wood fence detail and Attachment A-2-B for column detail. 
c)  OPTION C. The uniform screening fence shall be an eight-foot tan vinyl privacy fence constructed of a quality, durable PVC vinyl material. The fence shall include 2' × 2' × 8'½? masonry columns of Granbury stone (or approved equal) with a buff color mortar. The columns shall be placed on a maximum of twenty-seven-foot centers with a capstone cap. See Attachment A-3 for vinyl fence detail and Attachment A-2-B for column detail. 
3.  Fence offsets. Offsets shall be provided in the perimeter fence to provide a look of interest and depth from the street. Offsets shall be a maximum of twenty-seven (27) feet wide and a minimum of five (5) feet deep. There shall be no more than eighty (80) feet of continuous fence run without an offset. See Attachment B for fence offset detail. Landscape improvements to include trees, shrubs, flowers, decorative lights and street furniture shall be installed in the offsets of the required screening fence described above. Trees planted should be minimum of 3-inch caliper, locally adaptable and drought tolerant. All trees shall be staked and guyed or kept vertical by other acceptable methods. 
4.  Screening for alleyways. A uniform screening fence shall be required where alleys back up to a public street or are adjacent to public rights-of-way. All required alleyway screening fences shall conform with one of the following options: 
a)  OPTION A. The perimeter-screening fence shall be an eight-foot masonry wall constructed of Granbury stone or approved equal with a buff color mortar and a cast stone cap. See Attachment A-I for wall detail. 
b)  OPTION B. The uniform screening fence shall be an eight-foot board on board wood fence constructed of #1 premium grade cedar, with 2' 3/8 ? galvanized posts set on 8-foot centers, constructed with a minimum thirty-inch footing depth. The fence shall include 2' × 2' × 8'½? masonry columns of Granbury stone (or approved equal) with a buff color mortar. The columns shall be placed on a maximum of twenty-seven-foot centers with a capstone cap. See Attachment A-2-A for wood fence detail and Attachment A-2-B for column detail. 
c)  OPTION C. The uniform screening fence shall be an eight-foot tan vinyl privacy fence constructed of a quality, durable PVC vinyl material. The fence shall include 2' × 2' × 8'½? masonry columns of Granbury stone (or approved equal) with a buff color mortar. The columns shall be placed on a maximum of twenty-seven-foot centers with a capstone cap. See Attachment A-3 for vinyl fence detail and Attachment A-2-B for column detail. 
d)  OPTION D. The uniform alleyway screening fence shall be a six-foot solid wrought iron fence (no tubular) with solid wrought iron spears with 2' × 2' × 6'½? masonry columns of Granbury stone (or approved equal) with buff color mortar. See Attachment A-4 for wrought iron fence detail and Attachment A-2-B for column detail. A screening hedge shall be installed adjacent to and along the entire wrought iron fence. The screening hedge shall be a dense, evergreen hedge that is locally adaptable and drought tolerant. Plant material shall be able to achieve a minimum height of four (4) feet within three (3) years of planting. An underground automatic electric controlled irrigation system shall be provided along all required alleyway screening fences. 
C.  ADDITION ENTRY FEATURES 
1.  Signage. 
a)  Entry signs, which identify the residential project, shall be constructed at each major addition entryway. There shall be defined by the developer at least one (1) major addition entryway for approximately every twenty (20) acres. Each major addition entryway shall have two (2) entry sign walls, one (1) on each comer of the entry into the addition. Each entry sign wall shall be a masonry wall, approximately 24' × 1' × 8'½?, constructed of Granbury stone (or approved equal) with buff color mortar. The entry wall shall contain a 2' × 8' cast stone sign with the name of the development in large letters with "at High Pointe" below in smaller letters. Sign wall shall be illuminated by upright from the grade in front of the wall. All electrical work needed to operate the sign wall lighting shall be provided by the developer. Sign walls shall be installed with a concrete foundation and quality stone masonry. See Attachment "C" for sign wall detail. All entry sign walls shall be constructed in fence and landscape easements granted to the district for maintenance purposes. 
b)  All other signage shall comply with Cedar Hill City codes. 
2.  Landscaping 
a)  A generously landscaped bed shall be constructed in front of each sign wall. See Attachment "D" for detail of landscaped bed. Required landscaping shall include an area for annual color and an area for other landscaping that is generally locally adaptable and drought tolerant. An underground automatic electric controlled irrigation system is required and is subject to approval from the Cedar Hill public works department. 
b)  The developer shall provide street furniture and lighting that is comparable in design and quality material to that existing in the neighborhood at each major addition entryway. 
D.  LANDSCAPED MAJOR INTERSECTION FEATURES 
1.  Signage 
a)  Feature sign walls, which identify the residential project, shall be constructed at each major intersection. Major intersections are defined on the map (see Attachment E). Each major intersection comer shall have one (1) feature sign wall with a landscaped bed. Each feature sign wall shall be a masonry wall, approximately 24' × 1' × 8'½? constructed of Granbury stone (or approved equal) with buff color mortar. The feature sign wall shall contain a 2' × 8' cast stone sign with the name of the development in large letters with "at High Pointe" below in smaller letters. Feature sign wall shall be illuminated by upright from the grade in front of the wall. All electrical work needed to operate the feature sign wall lighting shall be provided by the developer. Feature sign walls shall be installed with a concrete foundation and quality stone masonry. See Attachment "C" for feature sign wall detail. All major intersection feature sign walls shall be constructed in fence and landscaped easements granted to the district for maintenance purposes. 
b)  All other signage shall comply with Cedar Hill City codes. 
2.  Landscaping 
a)  A generously landscaped bed shall be constructed in front of each feature sign wall. See Attachment "D" for detail of landscaped bed. Required landscaping will include an area for annual color and an area for other landscaping that is generally locally available, adaptable and drought tolerant. An underground automatic electric irrigation system is required and is subject to approval from the Cedar Hill public works department. 
b)  The developer shall provide street furniture and lighting that is comparable in design and quality material as that existing in the neighborhood at each major intersection comer. 
II.  RETAIL DEVELOPMENT 
A.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
1.  Storage. No outside storage is permitted for any use. 
2.  Exterior finish. Building structure exterior masonry shall be one hundred (100) percent brick and/or stone, similar in color and style to that of surrounding residential entry and feature walls. Feature sign walls, columns and other landscape masonry structures shall be constructed of one hundred (100) percent brick and/or stone, similar in color and style as that of surrounding residential entry and feature walls. 
3.  Retail buffer. The developer should provide buffer areas between retail property and adjacent residentially zoned property by providing screening walls and landscaping. 
4.  Screening walls. The retail developer shall erect an eight-foot decorative masonry screening wall that is compatible in design to any existing masonry structures in the area when retail property is adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
a)  Screening wall setback between retail property and alleys. Where the retail property is adjacent to residential alleys, the masonry wall should have a five-foot setback. The developer shall install and maintain a five-foot irrigated and landscaped area adjacent to and along the entire length of the masonry wall on the retail property side of the masonry wall. Developer shall install and maintain drought tolerant and locally adaptable landscaping on the residential side of the masonry wall to act as a visual buffer. Screening wall shall prohibit retail or commercial traffic any access to residential alley. 
b)  Screening wall setback between retail property and all other residential property. Where the retail property is adjacent to other residentially zoned property, the masonry wall shall be placed on the retail property line. The developer shall install and maintain a five-foot irrigated and landscaped area adjacent to and along the entire masonry wall on the retail property side of the masonry wall. 
5.  Building setbacks. Buildings shall have a three-foot setback for every foot of building height with a minimum of fifty-foot setback. 
6.  Additional regulations. All other regulations and requirements are found in the Cedar Hill Zoning Ordinance, Neighborhood Services District. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
APPENDIX E. - APPROVED PLANT LIST 
"Y": Denotes Yes 
Plant Name 	Plant Type 	Size 
at Maturity 	Plants Acceptable for Specific Areas 	Water Use 		Sun Needs 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 	Evergreen/Deciduous 	Height 	Spread 	Building Proximity 	Screening 	Parking Lot 	Street Yard 	Low 	Med 	Wet Areas 	Full Sun 	Part Shade 	Full Shade 
Shade Trees 
Acer saccharum var. caddo 	Caddo Maple 	D 	60' 	30' 			Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 		
Acer x freemanii 'Autumn Blaze' 	Autumn Blaze Maple 	D 	40' 	30' 			Y 	Y 						
Carya illinoensis 	Pecan 	D 	100' 	70' 			Y 	Y 	Y 			Y 		
Fraxinus texensis 	Texas Ash 	D 	50' 	40' 			Y 	Y 	Y 			Y 		
Magnolia grandiflora 	Southern Magnolia 	E 	60' 	30' 	Y 	Y 				Y 		Y 		
Pistacia chinensis 	Chinese Pistachio 	D 	35' 	30' 	Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 		Y 		
Planttanus mexicana 	Mexican Sycamore 	D 	60' 	40' 			Y 	Y 		Y 		Y 		
Quercus buckleyi 	Texas Red Oak 	D 	30' 	30' 			Y 	Y 	Y 			Y 		
Quercus fusiformis 	Live Oak 	E 	50' 	60' 		Y 		Y 	Y 			Y 		
Quercus macrocrapa 	Bur Oak 	D 	80' 	70' 				Y 	Y 			Y 		
Quercus muhlenbergii 	Chinquapin Oak 	D 	80' 	60' 				Y 	Y 			Y 		
Quercus shumardii 	Shumard Oak 	D 	80' 	80' 				Y 	Y 			Y 		
Quercus virginiana 	Southern Live Oak 	E 	50' 	60' 		Y 		Y 	Y 			Y 		
Taxodium distichurn 	Bald Cypress 	D 	80' 	50' 	Y 	Y 		Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 		
Ulmus crassifolia 	Cedar Elm 	D 	80' 	60' 			Y 	Y 	Y 			Y 		
Ulmus parvifolia 	Lacebark Elm 	D 	60' 	40' 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 			Y 		
Screening Trees 
Cedrus deodera 	Deodera Cedar 	E 	40' 	30' 		Y 				Y 		Y 		
Cupressocyparis leylandii 	Leyland Cypress 	E 	30' 	12' 	Y 	Y 			Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	
Ilex x attenduata 'Fosteri' 	Foster Holly 	E 	20' 	15' 	Y 	Y 				Y 		Y 	Y 	
Ilex x. 'Nellie R. Stevens' 	Nellie R. Stevens Holly 	E 	20' 	15' 	Y 	Y 						Y 	Y 	
Juniperus chinensis 'Blue Point' 	Blue Point Juniper 	E 	15' 	8' 	Y 	Y 			Y 			Y 		
Juniperus virginiana 	Eastern Red Cedar 	E 	40' 	20' 		Y 			Y 			Y 		
Juniperus virginiana 'Brodie' 	Eastern Red Cedar 'Brodie' 	E 	25' 	12' 	Y 	Y 						Y 		
Juniperus virginiana 'Taylor' 	Eastern Red Cedar 'Taylor' 	E 	30' 	4' 	Y 	Y 						Y 		
Magnolia grandiflora 'Little Gem' 	Little Gem Magnolia 	E 	20' 	10' 	Y 	Y 				Y 	Y 	Y 		
Pinus Eldarica 	Elderica Pine 	E 	30' 	30' 		Y 				Y 		Y 		
Pinus thunbergiana 	Japanese Black Pine 	E 	20' 	15' 		Y 			Y 			Y 		
Ornamental Trees 
Cersis canadensis 	Red Bud 	D 	20' 	15' 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 			Y 	Y 	
Cersis canadensis var. mexicana 	Mexican Redbud 	D 	15' 	15' 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 			Y 	Y 	
Cersis canadensis var. texensis 	Texas Redbud 	D 	20' 	20' 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 			Y 	Y 	
Chilopsis linearis 	Desert Willow 	D 	25' 	15' 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 			Y 		
Crataegus reverchonii 	Hawthorn 	D 	20' 	15' 	Y 				Y 			Y 	Y 	
Ilex vomitoria 	Yaupon Holly 	E 	20' 	20' 	Y 	Y 			Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 
Lagerstroemia indica 	Crape Myrtle (tree form) 	D 	20' 	15' 	Y 				Y 			Y 		
Ligustrum lucidum 	Japanease Ligustrum 	E 	20' 	20' 	Y 	Y 			Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	
Vitex agnus-castus 	Vitex 	D 	20' 	15' 	Y 				Y 			Y 	Y 	
 
Plant Name 	Plant Type 	Size 
at Maturity 	Plants Acceptable for Specific Areas 	Water Use 	Sun Needs 
Scientific Name 	Common Name 	Evergreen/Deciduous 	Height 	Spread 	Building Proximity 	Parking Lot 
Screening 	Other 
Screening 	Parking Lot 	Street Yard 	Low 	Med 	Full Sun 	Part Shade 	Full Shade 
Shrubs 
Abelia x grandiflora 'Confetti' 	Confetti Abelia 	E 	3' 	3' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	
Abelia x grandiflora 'Prostrata' 	Prostrate Abelia 	E 	1.5' 	3' 	Y 			Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	
Abelia x. 'Edward Goucher' 	Eward Goucher Abelia 	E 	5' 	5' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	
Abelia x. grandiflora 	Glossy Abelia 	E 	6' 	6' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
Abelia x. grandiflora 'Kaleido- 
scope' 	Kaleido- 
scope 	E 	3' 	4' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	
Agave ovatifolia 	Whale's Tongue 	E 	3' 	4' 	Y 			Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	
Berberis thunbergii 'atropurpurea' 	Purpleleaf Japanese Barberry 	D 	5' 	4' 	Y 			Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	
Buxus microphylla japonica 	Boxwood 	E 	5' 	5' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	
Callicarpa americana 	American Beautyberry 	D 	5' 	5' 	Y 			Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
Chaenomeles japonica 	Flowering Quice 	D 	4' 	6' 	Y 			Y 	Y 			Y 	Y 	
Cleyera japonica 	Cleyera 	E 	10' 	8' 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	
Contoneaster glaucophylla 	Coton- 
easter 	E 	4' 	4' 	Y 			Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	
Dasylirion texanum 	Texas Sotol 	E 	5' 	5' 	Y 			Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 		
Dasylirion wheeleri 	Wheeler Sotol 	E 	5' 	5' 	Y 			Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 		
Eleagnus pungens 'fruitiandi' 	Eleagnus 	E 	6' 	6' 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	
Gardenia jasminoides 	Gardenia 	E 	5' 	5' 	Y 			Y 	Y 		Y 		Y 	
Ilex cornuta burfordi 'Pygmy' 	Dwarf Burford Holly 	E 	5' 	3' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
Ilex vomitoria 'nana' 	Dwarf Yaupon Holly 	E 	3' 	3' 	Y 			Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		
Lagerstroemia indica 	Dwarf Crepe Myrtle (shrub form) 	D 	5' 	6' 	Y 			Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	
Leucophyllum candidum 'Silver Cloud' 	Silver Cloud Texas Sage 	E 	4' 	4' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	
Leucophyllum candidum 'Thunder Cloud' 	Thunder Cloud Texas Sage 	E 	3' 	4' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	
Leucophyllum frutescens 'Compacta' 	Compact Texas Sage 	E 	5' 	5' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	
Leucophyllum sp 	Texas Sage 	E 	5' 	5' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 		
Lonicera albiflora 	Texas Honey- 
suckle 	D 	4' 	4' 	Y 			Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	
Lonicera fragranussima 	Winter/Bush Honey- 
suckle 	E 	15' 	10' 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	
Mahonia bealeii 	Leatherleaf Mahonia 	E 	5' 	4' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 			Y 	Y 
Myrica pusilla 	Dwarf Wax Myrtle 	E 	4' 	4' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
Nandina domestica compacta 	Compact Nandina 	E 	3' 	3' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 
Rhaphiolepis indica 	Indian Hawthorn 	E 	4' 	4' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		
Rhus aramatica 	Aromatic Sumac 	D 	4' 	6' 	Y 			Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	
Sabal Minor 	Dwarf Palmetto 	D 	4' 	4' 	Y 			Y 	Y 		Y 		Y 	Y 
Skimmia japonica 'nana' 	Skimmia 	E 	4' 	4' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 		Y 	Y 
Spiraea sp 	Spiraea/Bridal Wreath 	D 	6' 	6' 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	
Syphoricarpos orbiculatus 	Coralberry 	E 	2' 	2' 	Y 			Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	
Yucca filamentosa 'Color Guard' 	Color Guard Yucca 	E 	2' 	2' 	Y 			Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	
Yucca recurvifolia 	Softleaf Yucca 	E 	4' 	4' 	Y 			Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	
Ornamental Grasses 
Calamagrostis acutiflora 'Karl Foerster' 	Karl Foerster Grass 	D 	4' 	2' 	Y 			Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		
Cortaderia selloana pumila 	Dwarf Pampas Grass 	D 	5' 	4' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		
Miscanthus sinensis 'Adagio' 	Dwarf Maiden Grass 	D 	2.5' 	2' 	Y 			Y 			Y 	Y 		
Miscanthus sinensis 'Gracillimus' 	Maiden Grass 	D 	6' 	5' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		
Miscanthus sinensis 'Variegatus' 	Variegated Japanese Silver Grass 	D 	6' 	5' 	Y 			Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		
Muhlenbergia capillaris 	Gulf Muhly 	D 	3' 	2' 	Y 			Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		
Muhlenbergia rigens 	Deer Muhly 	D 	3' 	3' 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 		
Nassella tenuissima 	Mexican Feathergrass 	D 	2' 	2' 	Y 			Y 		Y 		Y 	Y 	
Pennisetm a 'Hameln' 	Hameln's Fountain Grass 	D 	2' 	2' 	Y 			Y 			Y 	Y 	Y 	
Groundcover and Turf Grass 
Buchloe dactyloides 	Buffalograss 	D 			Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 		
Cynodon dactylon 	Bermuda 	D 			Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 				
Juniperus sabina tamariscifolia 	Tamarix Juniper 	E 	2' 	10' 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 		
Liriope muscari 	Liriope 	E 	1.5' 	1' 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 
Nandina domestica 'Harbor Dwarf' 	Harbor Dwarf Nandina 	E 	2' 	2' 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 					
Ophiopogon intermedius 	Aztec Grass 	E 	1' 	1' 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 		Y 	Y 
Stenotaphrum secundatum 	St. Agustin grass 	D 			Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 		Y 	Y 
Zoysia sp. 	Zoysia 	D 			Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 	Y 		Y 	Y 
 
(Ord. No. 2006-276, § 23, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 2018-655, § 29(Exh. G), 9-25-18)  
ILLUSTRATIONS -   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
