CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF COLLEGE STATION, TEXAS VOLUME I 
____________ 
Published in 2017 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
COLLEGE STATION OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Karl Mooney 
Mayor 
____________ Blanche Brick (Place 1) 
Jerome Rektorik (Place 2) 
Linda Harvell (Place 3) 
Barry Moore (Place 4) 
Julie Schultz (Place 5) 
James Benham (Place 6) 
City Council 
____________ 
Kelly Templin 
City Manager 
____________ 
Carla Robinson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Sherry Mashburn 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of College Station, Texas. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2011 Republication, as supplemented through October 13, 2016, and ordinances adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2011 Republication, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently re arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. In many cases sections of the 2011 Republication have been made articles or divisions. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant State law have been included. A table listing the State law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of Chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between Sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are the parts of this Code and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1  
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Amy Norton, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Carla Robinson, City Attorney, Ms. Mary Ann Powell, Deputy City Attorney, Mr. Adam C. Falco, Senior Assistant City Attorney, Mr. John Haislet, Senior Assistant City Attorney, Ms. Sherry Mashburn, City Secretary, and Ms. Tanya McNutt, Deputy City Attorney, for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of College Station, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of College Station, Texas. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of College Station, Texas. 2017. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2017-3915 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF COLLEGE STATION, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, PROVIDING A SEVERABILITY CLAUSE; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF COLLEGE STATION, TEXAS: 
PART 1 : The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of College Station, Texas", (Code) published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 107 and an Appendix, each inclusive, is adopted as set out in Exhibit A "Code of Ordinances, City of College Station, Texas", attached hereto and made a part of this adopting ordinance for all purposes. 
PART 2 : All ordinances enacted on or before April 13, 2017, and not included in the Code are repealed. 
PART 3 : Any ordinances of a general and permanent not previously codified including, but not limited to ordinances related to zoning, franchises or City budgets are not repealed by this ordinance and remain in full force and effect. 
PART 4 : The repeal provided in this ordinance shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
PART 5 : Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a Code violation shall be punished: 
(a)  By a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00. The $25.00 minimum fine does not apply to parking violations. 
(b)  By a fine not less than $25.00 and not more than $2,000.00 if the violation governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, other than the dumping of refuse. 
(c)  By a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $4,000.00 if the violation governs the dumping of refuse. 
(d)  By a fine not exceeding $500.00 if a culpable mental state for the commission of a violation of this Code is not required or been dispensed with the prosecuting attorney. 
PART 6 : If it is not required that a Code violation be a knowing, intentional or willful violation, then no culpable mental state is required. The penalty imposed for a violation of this Code shall not exceed or be less than the penalty prescribed by state law for the same or a similar offense. 
PART 7 : Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(a)  With respect to Code violations that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(b)  With respect to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this ordinance, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed in this ordinance, the City of College Station may pursue any other remedies available such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
PART 8 : Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
PART 9 : Ordinances adopted after April 13, 2017, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
PART 10 : That if any Code provision shall be held to be void or unconstitutional, such holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining provisions or sections of this ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
PART 11 : This Code is a penal ordinance and becomes effective ten (10) days after its date of passage by the City Council, as provided by City of College Station Charter Section 35. 
PASSED, ADOPTED and APPROVED this this 10 th day of August, 2017. 
ATTEST:      APPROVED 
___________       ___________ 
City Secretary      Mayor 
APPROVED : 
___________ 
City Attorney 
  
  
  
Exhibit A 
Code of Ordinances, City of College Station, Texas 
That Code of Ordinances, City of College Station, Texas", published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 107 and an Appendix is adopted and enacted and is to read as follows: 
ON FILE WITH THE CITY SECRETARY 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord./Res. No. Date Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1 2016-3835 11-10-2016 Included 2017-3893  7-13-2017 Included 2017-3894  7-13-2017 Included 2017-3895  7-13-2017 Included 2017-3911  8-10-2017 Included 2017-3912  8-10-2017 Included 2017-3913  8-10-2017 Included 2017-3914  8-10-2017 Included 2017-3915  8-10-2017 Included 2017-3916  8-10-2017 Included 08-10-17-2q(Res.)  8-10-2017 Included 2017-3918  8-24-2017 Included 2017-3923  8-24-2017 Included 2017-3924  9-11-2017 Included 2017-3926  9-11-2017 Included 2017-3927  9-11-2017 Included 2017-3928  9-11-2017 Included 2017-3931  9-11-2017 Included 2017-3932  9-25-2017 Included 2017-3933  9-25-2017 Included 2017-3934  9-25-2017 Included 2017-3938  9-25-2017 Included 2017-3945 10-12-2017 Included 2017-3946 10-12-2017 Included 2017-3947 10-12-2017 Included 2017-3953 10-26-2017 Included 2017-3955 11- 9-2107 Included 2017-3963 12-14-2017 Included Memorandum of 1-5-2018  1- 5-2018 Included Supp. No. 2 2017-3886  5-11-2017 Included 2017-3906  7-27-2017 Included 2017-3961 11-20-2017 Included 2017-3967 12-14-2017 Included 2018-3970  1-11-2018 Included 2018-3971  1-11-2018 Omitted 2018-3972  1-11-2018 Omitted 2018-3973  1-11-2018 Omitted 2018-3977  1-25-2018 Included 2018-3978  1-25-2018 Included 2018-3982  2- 8-2018 Included 2018-3984  2- 8-2018 Included 2018-3990  2-22-2018 Included 2018-3991  2-22-2018 Included 2018-3992  3- 5-2018 Included 2018-3995  3-22-2018 Included 2018-3996  3-22-2018 Included 2018-3999  4-12-2018 Included 2018-4000  4-12-2018 Omitted 2018-4001  4-12-2018 Included 2018-4014  6-14-2018 Included 2018-4015  6-14-2018 Included 2018-4016  6-14-2018 Included 2018-4018  6-14-2018 Included 2018-4020  6-28-2018 Included 2018-4022  6-28-2018 Included 2018-4024  7-12-2018 Included 2018-3985  2- 8-2018 Included 2018-4027  7-26-2018 Included 2018-4028  7-26-2018 Included 2018-4029  7-26-2018 Included 2018-4030  7-26-2018 Included 2018-4034  8-23-2018 Included 2018-4038  9-13-2018 Included 2018-4040  9-13-2018 Included 2018-4041  9-13-2018 Omitted 2018-4042  9-27-2018 Included 2018-4043  9-27-2018 Included 2018-4045  9-27-2018 Included 2018-4046  9-27-2018 Included 09-27-18-2e(Res.)  9-27-2018 Included 2018-4056 11-19-2018 Included 2018-4057 11-19-2018 Included 2018-4058 11-19-2018 Included 2018-4059 11-19-2018 Included 2018-4060 11-19-2018 Included 2018-4061 12-13-2018 Included Supp. No. 3 2019-4068  1-24-2019 Included 2019-4069  1-24-2019 Included 2019-4070  1-24-2019 Included 2019-4071  2-14-2019 Included 2019-4073  2-14-2019 Omitted 2019-4075  2-25-2019 Included 2019-4076  2-25-2019 Included 2019-4077  3-14-2019 Included 2019-4078  3-14-2019 Included 2019-4081  3-28-2019 Included 2019-4082  3-28-2019 Included 2019-4086  3-28-2019 Included 2019-4087  4-25-2019 Included 2019-4088  4-25-2019 Included 2019-4089  4-25-2019 Included 2019-4093  5-23-2019 Included 2019-4094  5-23-2019 Included 2019-4095  5-23-2019 Included 2019-4096  5-23-2019 Included 2019-4097  5-23-2019 Included 2019-4100  6-13-2019 Included  
PART I - CITY CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Published in this part is the City Charter, being the 12 Edition, November 6, 2012. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I - INCORPORATION: FORM OF GOVERNMENT: TERRITORY 

Incorporation 
    Section 1. The inhabitants of the City of College Station, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by this Charter, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity, under the name of the "City of College Station." 
Form of Government 
    Section 2. The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the "council-manager government." Pursuant to its provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution and by this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as the "City Council," which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and employ the city manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the City. All powers of the City shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or, if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
Boundaries 
    Section 3. The bounds and limits of the City of College Station are hereby established and described as shown by the articles of incorporation, the several annexation ordinances and the official zoning map of said city. 
Creation of Precinct Boundaries 
    Section 4. The City Council shall divide the City of College Station into precincts for voting purposes only, and when practicable they shall conform to the county voting precincts. 
ARTICLE II - CORPORATE AND GENERAL POWERS 

Powers of the City 
    Section 5. The City shall have all the powers granted to Home Rule Cities by the Constitution and laws of this State, as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution such granted powers, and the powers are hereby adopted that are conferred upon cities by Article XI, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Texas (Home Rule Amendment). Among other powers, the City shall have the power to contract and be contracted with; to acquire property in fee simple within or without its corporate limits for any municipal purpose, or any lesser interest or estates, by purchase, gift, device, lease, or condemnation, and may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interests may require, except as prohibited by the Constitution or restricted by this Charter. The City may use a corporate seal; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency thereof, or any political subdivision of the State of Texas, or with the United States or any agency thereof, to accomplish any lawful purpose for the advancement of the interest, welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety and convenience of the City and its inhabitants; and may pass such ordinances and enact such regulations as may be expedient for the maintenance of good government order and peace of the City and the welfare, health, morals, comfort and safety of its inhabitants consistent with the provisions of this Charter. 
    The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive; and in addition to the powers enumerated or implied herein, the City shall have all powers not prohibited by the Constitution or laws of this State. 
Extension of City Limits Upon Petition 
    Section 6. The City Council may extend the City's boundaries by annexation petition in accordance with the provisions of the statutes of the State of Texas. 
Extension of City Limits by the City Council 
    Section 7. The City Council shall have the power to fix, by ordinance, the boundary limits of the City of College Station, and to provide for the extension of such boundary limits and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to the City, with or without the consent of the inhabitants of such area to be annexed, in accordance with applicable state annexation laws. The City Council shall have the power to detach, by ordinance, any territory, with or without the consent of the inhabitants of such area to be detached, in accordance with applicable state annexation laws. When any territory shall be so annexed, the same shall be a part of the City and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of all the citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City. When territory has been detached, the same shall no longer be a part of the City. 
Eminent Domain 
    Section 8. The City shall have the full right, power and authority to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the power conferred upon it by this Charter or by the constitution or laws of the State of Texas. The City may also exercise the power of eminent domain in any other manner now or hereafter authorized or permitted by the constitution and laws of this state, or in the manner and form that may be provided by ordinance of the governing body of the City. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the City to take the fee in the lands so condemned and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes. The City shall have and possess this power of condemnation of property within or without the corporate limits for any municipal or public purpose, even though not specifically enumerated herein or in this Charter. 
Establishment and Control of Streets 
    Section 9. The City shall have the power to lay out, establish, open, alter, widen, lower, extend, grade, abandon, discontinue, abolish, close, care for, pave, supervise, maintain and improve streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, squares, public places and bridges and regulate the use thereof, and require the removal from streets, sidewalks, alleys and other public property or places of all obstructions and encroachments of every nature or character upon any of said streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public property. 
    The City shall have exclusive domain, control and jurisdiction in and upon, and over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys, and highways of the City. The City's exclusive domain, control, and jurisdiction in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys and highways of the City shall also include, but not be limited to, the right to regulate, locate, relocate, remove, or prohibit the location of all utility pipes, lines or wires, or other property. 
Street Improvements 
    Section 10. The City may provide for the improvements of public streets, avenues, alleys and highways by paving, repaving, raising, draining, or other improvements, and may assess the cost of such development and improvements partly or entirely by assessments levied as a lien against the property abutting thereon and against the owners thereof. If improvements be ordered constructed in any part of any area used or occupied by the tracks or facilities of any railway or public utility, then the City shall have the power to assess the whole cost of improvements in such area and the added costs of improvements in such area and the added costs of improvements in areas adjacent thereto made necessary by such use or occupancy against such railway or utility, and shall have the power, by ordinance, to provide for the enforcement of such assessments. As an alternative and cumulative method of developing, improving and paving any and all public streets, sidewalks, waterways, alleys, highways and other public ways, the City shall have the power and authority to proceed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, as amended. 
Garbage Disposal 
    Section 11. The City Council shall have the right by ordinance to adopt and prescribe rules and regulations for the handling disposition of all garbage, trash and rubbish within the City of College Station, and shall further have the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged by the City for the removal of garbage, trash and rubbish, and to provide rules and regulations for the collection thereof. 
Municipal Court 
    Section 12. There shall be a court for the trial of misdemeanor offenses known as the Municipal Court of the City of College Station, with such powers, procedures and duties as are given and prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas for a Municipal Court. 
Sanitary Sewer System 
    Section 13. The City shall have the power to provide for a sanitary sewer system and to require property owners to connect their premises with such systems; to provide for fixing penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections; and to provide for fixing a lien against any property owner's premises who fails or refuses to make sanitary sewer connections and to charge the cost against said owner and make it a personal liability. The City shall further have the right to fix charges and compensation to be charged by the City for sewerage service, and to provide rules and regulations for the collection thereof. 
Public Utilities; Powers of the City 
    Section 14. In addition to its power to buy, own, construct, maintain and operate utilities and to manufacture and distribute electricity, gas or anything else that may be needed or used by the public, the City shall have such further powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. 
Signs and Bill Boards 
    Section 15. The City shall have the power to license, regulate, control or prohibit the erection of signs or billboards. 
Nuisances; Control and Policing 
    Section 16. The City shall have the power to define all nuisances and prohibit the same within the City and outside the City limits for a distance of five thousand (5000) feet; to have power to police all parks or grounds, speedways or boulevards owned by the City and lying outside the City; to prohibit the pollution of any stream, drain or tributaries thereof, which may constitute the source of water supply of the City and to provide for the policing of the same as well as to provide for the protection of any water sheds and the policing of same; to inspect dairies, slaughter pens and slaughter houses inside or outside the City limits, from which milk or meat is furnished to the inhabitants of the City. 
ARTICLE III - THE CITY COUNCIL 

Number, Selection, Term 
    Section 17. The City Council shall be composed of the Mayor and six (6) Councilmembers and be known as the "City Council of the City of College Station." 
(a)  The Mayor and other members of the City Council shall be elected from the City at large. 
(b)  The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the City Council and shall be recognized as the head of the City government for all ceremonial purposes and by the Governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular administrative duties. The Mayor shall be entitled to vote on all matters under consideration by the City Council. 
(c)  Each Councilmember, unless sooner removed under the provisions of this Charter, shall serve for a term of three (3) years, beginning with the first meeting of the Council following their election, and ending with the first meeting of the Council three (3) years later, or until their successor has been elected and duly qualified. The Mayor, unless sooner removed under the provisions of this Charter, shall serve for a term of three (3) years, beginning with the first meeting of the Council following their election and ending with the first meeting of the Council three (3) years later, or until their successor has been elected and duly qualified. 
(d)  No person shall be deemed elected to an office unless that person receives a majority of all the votes cast for such office. The Council shall, upon declaring the official results of the election, order a run-off election for each office to which no one was elected. In the run-off election, the two candidates who received, in the preceding election, the highest number of votes for each office to which no one was elected, shall be voted on again by the qualified voters, and the candidate who receives the majority of the votes cast for such office in the run-off election shall be elected to such office. 
(e)  Beginning in 1999, there shall be no limit to the total number of terms served by the Mayor or Councilmembers; however, no person shall be eligible to be elected to serve in the capacity of the Councilmembers for consecutive regular terms totaling more than six (6) years; nor shall any person be eligible to be elected to serve in the capacity of Mayor for consecutive regular terms totaling more than six (6) years. 
Qualifications 
    Section 18. The Mayor and Councilmembers shall be citizens of the United States and qualified voters of the State of Texas; shall have resided for at least one (1) year next preceding the election, at which they are candidates, within the corporate limits of the City of College Station; and shall not be disqualified by reason of any provision of any other section of this Charter. A member of the City Council ceasing to possess any of the qualifications specified in this section, or any other section of this Charter, or convicted of a felony while in office, or who is absent from three (3) consecutive regular Council meetings without consent of the Council, shall immediately forfeit the office of Mayor or Councilmember. 
Compensation of Members 
    Section 19. Members of the City Council shall serve without pay or compensation; provided, however, they shall be entitled to all necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties. 
Presiding Officer; Mayor 
    Section 20. The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the City Council and shall be recognized as head of the City government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular administrative duties. The Mayor shall be entitled to vote upon all matters considered by the City Council, but shall have no veto power. The City Council shall elect a Mayor Pro Tem from its membership who shall act as Mayor during the absence or disability of the Mayor. 
Vacancies 
    Section 21. A vacancy in the City Council shall be filled by a special election which shall be called in accordance with state law. If any such vacancy shall occur within ninety (90) days preceding a general election, then no special election shall be called; provided, however, that the unexpired term shall be filled at the next general election. No such election shall be held sooner than thirty (30) days from the date it is called. In the event the Mayor is unable to order the election for any reason, the remaining members of the City Council are authorized and directed to order the election and perform all other required actions incident to the election. In the event of vacancies in the offices of Mayor and all members of the City Council for any reason, the following persons, in the order prescribed, are authorized and directed to order the election and perform all other required actions incident to the election: 
1.  City Manager 
2.  City Secretary 
3.  City Attorney 
4.  Presiding Judge of the Municipal Court 
Powers 
    Section 22. All powers and authority, including the determination of all matters of policy which are expressly or by implication conferred upon or possessed by the City, shall be vested in and exercised by the Council; provided, however, that the Council shall have no authority to exercise those powers which are expressly conferred upon other City officers by this Charter. 
    Without limitation of the foregoing, and among the other powers that may be exercised by the City Council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty: 
(1)  To appoint and remove the City Manager. 
(2)  To establish administrative departments and establish the organization and functions of divisions. 
(3)  To adopt the budget of the City. 
(4)  To authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance. 
(5)  To inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the City and make investigations as to municipal affairs. 
(6)  To provide for a planning commission, a zoning commission and a zoning board of adjustment, and appoint the members of all such commissions and boards. The planning and zoning commissions may be combined. Such boards and commissions shall have all powers and duties now or hereafter conferred and created by this Charter, by City ordinance or by law. 
(7)  To adopt plats. 
(8)  To adopt and modify the official map of the City. 
(9)  To adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of neighborhoods and for the replanning, reconstruction or redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed. 
(10)  To adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of neighborhoods and for the replanning, reconstruction or redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster. 
(11)  To regulate, license and fix the charges or fares made by any person owning, operating or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for hire on the public streets and alleys of the City. 
(12)  To provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits; to prescribe the kind and character of buildings, structures or improvements to be erected therein; to provide for the erection of fireproof buildings within certain limits; and to provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures, buildings, dilapidated buildings or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard and the manner of their removal or destruction. 
(13)  To prevent the construction and use of housing accommodations below standards fixed by the City Council as proper for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the City. 
Appointment and Removal of City Manager 
    Section 23. The City Council shall appoint an officer of the City who shall have the title of City Manager and serve at the pleasure of the Council. The City Manager shall have the powers and perform the duties set forth in this Charter. No Councilmember shall be appointed to serve as City Manager during the term for which the Councilmember shall have been elected, nor within one year after the expiration of the Councilmember's term. 
    The salary of the City Manager shall be fixed by the City Council. If the City Manager is removed at any time after six (6) months following appointment, the City Manager may demand written charges and a public hearing thereon before the City Council prior to the date on which final removal shall take effect, but pending such hearing the City Council may suspend the City Manager from office. The action of the City Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final, it being the intention of this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the City Council. 
Council Not to Interfere In Appointments or Removals 
    Section 24. Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall direct the appointment or removal of any person from office by the City Manager or by any of the City Manager's subordinates; provided, however, that the appointment or dismissal of department heads shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. Except for the purpose of inquiry in accordance with Section 36 of this Charter, the City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager, and neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager, either publicly or privately. 
Rights of the City Manager and Other Officers in Council 
    Section 25. The City Manager, and such other officers of the City as the City Council may invite, shall be entitled to take part in all discussions of the City Council relating to their respective offices, departments or agencies. 
Administrative Departments 
    Section 26. There are hereby created the following administrative departments: Finance, Police, Fire and Public Works. The City Council may, upon the advice of the City Manager, consolidate into one department not more than two of the departments hereby established; and by ordinance may create, change and abolish offices, departments or agencies other than the offices, departments and agencies established by this Charter. 
City Secretary 
    Section 27. The City Council shall appoint an officer of the City who shall be the City Secretary, who may be removed from office by the Council. The City Secretary or Assistant City Secretary shall give notice of Council meetings, shall keep a journal of its proceedings, shall record in full in a book or books kept and indexed for that purpose all ordinances and resolutions, which are then authenticated by the signature of either the City Secretary or the Assistant City Secretary. The City Secretary shall perform such other duties provided in the Charter and assigned by the City Council. 
    The City Secretary shall have the power to appoint an assistant or assistants, if deemed necessary by the City Secretary, subject to the approval of and at such compensation as may be fixed by the City Council. Such assistant or assistants may be removed from office by the City Secretary. 
Municipal Court Judge 
    Section 28. The City Council shall appoint an officer of the City who shall be the Municipal Court Judge, who may be removed from office by the Council. The City Council may appoint alternate Assistant Municipal Court Judges, who may be removed from office by the Council, who shall serve in the absence of or in addition to the Municipal Court Judge. All costs and fines imposed by the Municipal Court, or by any court in cases appealed from judgments of the Municipal Court, shall be paid into the City Treasury for the use and benefit of the City. 
City Attorney 
    Section 29. The City Council shall appoint an officer of the City who shall be the City Attorney, who may be removed from office by the Council. The City Attorney shall be a competent and duly licensed attorney, who shall reside in the City of College Station. 
    The City Attorney shall represent the City in all litigation. The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor of and attorney and counsel for the City and all officers and departments thereof. 
    The City Attorney shall have power to appoint an assistant or assistants, if the City Attorney deems necessary, subject to the approval of and at such compensation as may be fixed by the City Council; and such assistant or assistants may be removed from office by the City Attorney. 
City Internal Auditor 
    Section 30. The City Council may appoint an officer of the City to be the City Internal Auditor, who may be removed from office by the Council. The City Internal Auditor shall carry out the audit functions and shall perform such other duties assigned by the City Council. The City Council may also enter into a contract for the duties of City Internal Auditor, to be carried out by an outside firm, if it so chooses. 
    The City Internal Auditor shall have the power to appoint an assistant or assistants, if they deem necessary, subject to the approval of and at such compensation as may be fixed by the City Council; and such assistant or assistants may be removed from office by the City Internal Auditor. 
Induction Into Office; Meetings 
    Section 31. The induction into office date shall be set by ordinance by the City Council, or as otherwise provided by law, following each regular municipal election held under this Charter, or any special election for the purpose of filling vacancies in the City Council. The City Council shall meet at the usual place for holding meetings and the newly elected members shall qualify and assume the duties of office. Thereafter, the City Council shall meet regularly at such times as may be prescribed in the rules, but not less frequently than once each month. Special meetings shall be called upon request of the Mayor or a majority of the members of the City Council. All meetings shall be subject to the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, V.T.C.A., GOVERNMENT Code, Ch. 551, Open Meetings, as amended. 
City Council to be Judge of Qualification of its Members 
    Section 32. The City Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members and for such purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses and require the production of records, but its decision in any such case shall be subject to review by the courts. 
Rules of Procedure; Journal 
    Section 33. The City Council shall determine its own rules and order of business. It shall keep an indexed journal of its proceedings and the journal shall be open to public inspection. 
Ordinances 
    Section 34. In addition to such acts of the City Council required by statute or by this Charter to be by ordinance, every act of the City Council establishing a fine or other penalty, or providing for the creation of public debt as that term is used in the Texas Constitution, shall be by ordinance. All other official acts may by resolution, ordinance, or order duly entered in the minutes. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be "BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF COLLEGE STATION." 
Procedure for Passage of Ordinances 
    Section 35. Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form and, upon passage, shall take effect at the time indicated therein; provided, however, that any ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of its provisions shall become effective not less than ten (10) days from the date of its passage. The City Secretary shall give notice of the passage of every ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of the provisions thereof, by causing the caption or title, including the penalty, of any such ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of the provisions thereof, to be published in the official newspaper of the City of College Station at least twice within ten (10) days after the passage of such ordinance. The City Secretary shall note on every ordinance, the caption of which is hereby required to be published, and on the record thereof, the fact that same has been published as required by the charter, and the date of such publication, which shall be prima facie evidence of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the correction, amendment, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City for publication in book or pamphlet form. Except as may be otherwise provided by this Charter, it shall not be necessary to the validity of any ordinance that it shall be read more than one time or considered at more than one session of the City Council. Every ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the Mayor and City Secretary and shall be systematically recorded and indexed in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the City Council, but it shall only be necessary to record the caption or title of ordinances in the minutes or journal of council meetings. The City Council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the City to be corrected, amended, revised, codified and printed in code form as often as it deems advisable, and such printed code, when adopted, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a newspaper. Such printed code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and places without further proof. 
Investigation by City Council 
    Section 36. The City Council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency or officer of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of books, papers and other evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine not to exceed ($100.00) dollars. 
Independent Annual Audit 
    Section 37. Not less than thirty (30) days prior to the end of each fiscal year, the City Council shall designate a qualified public accountant or accountants who, at of the end of the fiscal year, shall make an independent audit of accounts and other evidences of financial transactions of the City government and shall submit the report to the City Council. Such accountants shall have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the City government. They shall not maintain any account or record of the City business, but, within specifications approved by the City Council, shall post-audit the books and documents kept by the City and any separate or subordinate accounts kept by any other office, department or agency of the City government. 
Housing Authority 
    Section 38. The City Council may create a housing authority of such number and terms of members and may delegate to that authority such powers relating to the planning, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance or operation of housing projects and housing accommodations consistent with state law. 
Disabled Employees; Pensions and Insurance 
    Section 39. The City Council shall have authority to provide for rules and regulations for maintaining employees when injured and disabled while performing their duties, and it may provide for such plan of insurance as it deems proper. The City Council shall also have authority to establish and to do all other proper things necessary for the effective administration of a pension and retirement system for any or all groups of officers and employees on such basis as it may determine consistent with or authorized by state laws. Such system may be in cooperation with or participation in any district or statewide pension or retirement system which has been or which may be hereafter authorized or established by the legislature of the State of Texas. 
ARTICLE IV - THE CITY MANAGER 

Qualifications 
    Section 40. The City Manager shall be chosen by the City Council solely on the basis of the prospective City Manager's executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to the applicant's actual experience, knowledge, and accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of appointment the City Manager need not be a resident of the City or State, but during tenure as the City Manager, the new City Manager must establish residence within the City. 
Powers and Duties 
    Section 41. The City Manager shall be the chief executive officer and the head of the administrative branch of the city government and shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City. To that end the City Manager shall have power and shall be required to: 
(1)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the service, remove all officers and employees of the City except as otherwise provided by this Charter and except as the City Manager may authorize the head of a department to appoint and remove subordinates in such department. 
(2)  Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the City Council and be responsible for its administration after adoption. 
(3)  Prepare and submit to the City Council at the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year. 
(4)  Keep the City Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations as may seem to him desirable and proper. 
(5)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required by the City Council. 
Absence of City Manager 
    Section 42. To perform the City Manager's duties during a temporary leave of absence or disability, the Mayor may designate by letter filed with the City Secretary a qualified administrative officer of the City to serve for the City Manager. Concerning out of town business, illness, or vacation the City Manager may be delegated authority to designate an individual to serve in the absence of the City Manager. 
Director of Departments 
    Section 43. At the head of each administrative department there shall be a director who shall be an officer of the City and shall have supervision and control of the department subject to the City Manager. 
    Two or more departments may be headed by the same individual; the City Manager may head one or more departments, and directors of departments may also serve as chiefs of divisions. 
Departmental Divisions 
    Section 44. The work of each administrative department may be distributed among the divisions thereof subject to approval of the City Manager. 
ARTICLE V - THE BUDGET 

Fiscal Year 
    Section 45. The fiscal year of the City of College Station shall be determined by ordinance of the Council. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year. 
Preparation and Submission of Budget 
    Section 46. The City Manager, between thirty (30) and ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, shall submit to the City Council a proposed budget which shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year. 
Proposed Expenditures Compared With Other Years 
    Section 47. The City Manager shall, in the preparation of the budget, place in parallel columns opposite the various items of expenditures the actual amount of such items of expenditures for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year. 
Budget a Public Record 
    Section 48. The budget and all supporting schedules shall be filed with the City Secretary when submitted to the City Council and shall be a public record for inspection by anyone. The City Manager shall cause copies to be made for distribution to all interested persons. 
Notice of Public Hearing on Budget 
    Section 49. At the meeting at which the budget is submitted, the City Council shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the budget and shall cause to be published a notice of the hearing setting forth the time and place thereof at least five (5) days before the date of the hearing. 
Public Hearing on Budget 
    Section 50. At the time and place set for a public hearing on the budget, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the budget submitted, and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or against any item or the amount of any item therein contained. 
Proceedings on Budget After Public Hearing Amending or Supplementing Budget 
    Section 51. After the conclusion of such public hearing, the City Council may insert new items or may increase or decrease the items of the budget, except items in proposed expenditures fixed by law. Before inserting any additional item or increasing any item of appropriation which will increase the total budget by three (3%) percent or more, it must cause to be published a notice setting forth the nature of the proposed increases and fixing a place and time, not less than five (5) days after publication, at which the City Council will hold a public hearing thereon. 
Proceedings on Adoption of Budget 
    Section 52. After such further hearing, the City Council may insert the additional item or items, and make the increase or increases, to the amount in each case indicated by the published notice, or to a lesser amount; but where it shall increase the total proposed expenditures, it shall also provide for an increase in the total anticipated revenue to at least equal such total proposed expenditures. 
Vote Required for Adoption 
    Section 53. The budget shall be adopted by the favorable vote of a majority of the members of the entire City Council. 
Date of Final Adoption; Failure to Adopt 
    Section 54. The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the twenty-seventh day of the last month of the fiscal year. Should the City Council take no final action on or prior to such day, the budget as submitted by the City Manager shall be deemed to have been finally adopted. 
Effective Date of Budget; Certification; Copies Made Available 
    Section 55. Upon final adoption, the budget shall be filed with the City Secretary and such other officials as may be designated by state law. The final budget shall be printed, or otherwise reproduced, and a reasonable number of copies shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments and agencies, and for the use of interested persons and civic organizations. 
Budget Establishes Appropriations 
    Section 56. From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named. 
Budget Establishes Amount to be Raised by Property Tax 
    Section 57. From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the amount of the levy for the purposes of the City in the corresponding tax year. 
Contingent Appropriation 
    Section 58. Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a contingent appropriation in an amount not more than three (3) percent of the total budget expenditure, to be used in case of unforeseen items of expenditures. Such contingent appropriation shall be under the control of, and distributed by, the City Manager, after approval by the City Council. Expenditures from this appropriation shall be made only in case of established emergencies and a detailed account of such expenditures shall be recorded and reported. The proceeds of the contingent appropriation shall be disbursed only by transfer to other departmental appropriation, the spending of which shall be charged to the departments or activities for which the appropriations are made. 
Estimated Expenditures Shall Not Exceed Estimated Resources 
    Section 59. The total estimated expenditures of the general fund and debt fund shall not exceed the total estimated resources of each fund. 
    The City Council may by ordinance amend the budget during a fiscal year if one of the following conditions exists: 
1.  If during the fiscal year the City Manager certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the City Council, by ordinance, may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess. Before approval, the Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget amendment. A notice of the time and place of a public hearing on the supplemental appropriation shall be published in the official newspaper of the City of College Station. The notice shall be placed in the newspaper at least five (5) business days before the date of the hearing. 
2.  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health and property of the public peace, the City Council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues or a sufficient fund balance to meet such appropriations, the Council may by such emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of emergency notes, which may be renewed from time to time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any such notes made during a fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding that in which the emergency appropriation was made. 
3.  If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the City Manager that the revenues or fund balances available will be insufficient to meet the amounts appropriated, the City Manager shall report to the City Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken and recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The Council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or reduce any deficit and for that purpose it may by ordinance reduce one or more appropriations. 
Lapse of Appropriation 
    Section 60. All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or lawfully encumbered. 
ARTICLE VI - CITY BONDS AND TIME WARRANTS 

General Obligation Bonds 
    Section 61. The City of College Station shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the City and to issue general obligation bonds for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds of the City previously issued. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. 
Revenue Bonds 
    Section 62. The City of College Station shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending or repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities or any other self-liquidating municipal function not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the obligation created thereby, and to issue revenue refunding bonds to evidence the obligation created thereby; and to issue revenue refunding bonds to refund outstanding revenue bonds previously issued. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable solely from the properties, or interest therein, pledged, or the income there from, or both, and shall never be a debt of the City. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. 
Incontestability of Bonds 
    Section 63. All bonds of the City, having been issued and sold and having been delivered to the purchasers thereof, shall thereafter be incontestable; and all bonds issued to refund outstanding bonds shall, after such issuance, be incontestable. 
Time Warrants 
    Section 64. The City shall have the authority to issue time warrants, certificates of obligation or other forms of public debt allowed by state law and to issue refunding warrants, certificates, or bonds to refund outstanding warrants or certificates previously issued. All such time warrants, certificates of obligation, and bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. 
Investments 
    Section 65. Any surplus in any fund may be invested, upon approval of the City Council, in any lawful securities, accounts, certificates, or investments. Any such surplus may be used for the purchase and retirement of bonds, time warrants, or certificates not yet due. 
ARTICLE VII - FINANCE ADMINISTRATION 

Financial Department; Appointment 
    Section 66. The City Manager may appoint a chief financial officer. 
Fees Shall be Paid to City 
    Section 67. All fees received by any officer or employee of the City shall belong to the City and shall be handled pursuant to the City's rules, regulations and policies. 
Contracts for Improvements 
    Section 68. The City shall make expenditures to promote the best interests of the citizens of College Station. The City shall encourage free and unrestricted competition on all bids and purchases, ensuring the taxpayers the best possible return on and use of their tax dollars. It shall be the policy of the City to fully comply with and make all purchases or expenditures pursuant to the City's policies, rules, regulations, procedures, and state and federal law. 
Disbursement of Funds 
    Section 69. All checks and vouchers or warrants for the withdrawal of money from the City accounts shall be handled pursuant to the City's rules, regulations, policies, and state and federal laws. 
Borrowing in Anticipation of Property Taxes 
    Section 70. In any fiscal year, in anticipation of the collection of the property tax for such year, whether levied or to be levied in such year, the City Council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the City, each of which shall be designated "tax anticipation note for the year _____" (stating the budget year). Such notes shall mature and be payable not later than the end of the fiscal year in which the original notes have been issued. 
Borrowing in Anticipation of Other Revenues 
    Section 71. In any fiscal year, in anticipation of the collection or receipt of other revenues of the budget year, the City Council may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money by the issuance of negotiable notes of the City, each of which shall be designated "special revenue note for the year _____" (stating the budget year). Such notes may be renewed from time to time, but all such notes, together with the renewals, shall mature and be payable not later than the end of the fiscal year in which the original notes shall have been issued. 
ARTICLE VIII - TAX ADMINISTRATION 

Power to Tax 
    Section 72. The City Council shall have the power under the provisions of state law to levy, assess and collect an annual tax upon taxable property within the city to the maximum provided by the constitution and general laws of the State of Texas. 
Property Subject to Tax; Method of Assessment 
    Section 73. All property, real, personal, or mixed, lying and being within the corporate limits of the City of College Station on the first day of January in each year, not expressly exempted by law, shall be subject to annual taxation according to the procedures set forth in the constitution or general laws of the State of Texas. 
Taxes; When Due and Payable 
    Section 74. All taxes due to the City of College Station shall be payable to the City of College Station or such other person or entity as may be designated by the City Council, and may be paid at any time after they fall due. Taxes shall be due and shall become delinquent as provided in the TEXAS TAX CODE, as amended, which code further provides for delinquent taxes, interest, and procedures for the collection of taxes. 
Seizure and Sale of Personal Property 
    Section 75. The seizure and sale of personal property for taxes due shall be accomplished according to the provisions of the TEXAS TAX CODE, as amended. 
Tax Liens 
    Section 76. The tax levied by the City shall be a first and prior lien upon the property upon which the tax is due, which lien may be enforced and foreclosed according to the provisions of the TEXAS TAX CODE, as amended. 
ARTICLE IX - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 

Municipal Elections 
    Section 77. Regular municipal elections shall be held on a uniform election date set out in state law. Special elections shall be ordered in compliance with applicable state law. 
Regulation of Elections 
    Section 78. The City Council shall make all regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this Charter or the laws of the State of Texas, for the conduct of municipal elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections and for the recount of ballots in case of doubt or fraud. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the appointed election authorities, who shall also have power to make such regulations not inconsistent with this Charter, with any regulations made by the city council or the laws of the State of Texas. 
How to Get Name on Ballot 
    Section 79. Any qualified person who desires to become a candidate in a general election to a place on the City Council, shall file with the City Secretary an application for that person's name to appear on the ballot in accordance with the Texas Election Code. Such application shall clearly designate the place on the Council to which the candidate seeks election. The application must also contain the candidate's sworn statement of compliance with the qualifications for holding the office sought under the laws of Texas and the provisions of the Charter. 
Council Ballots 
    Section 80. The full names of all candidates for the city council as hereinbefore provided, except such as may have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballot without party designation. If two candidates with the same surnames, or with names so similar as to be likely to cause confusion, are nominated, the addresses of their places of residence shall be placed with their names on the ballot. The order of the names on the ballot shall be determined by lot. 
Laws Governing City Elections 
    Section 81. All City elections shall be governed by the constitution of the State of Texas, general laws of the state, this Charter, and ordinances of the City, in the order named. 
Canvassing Election 
    Section 82. Returns of elections, general and special, shall be made by the election officers to the City Council on any date permitted by the Texas Election Code, at which time the City Council shall canvass the returns and declare the results of the election. 
Oath of Office 
    Section 83. Every officer of the City shall, before entering upon the duties of their office, take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation, similar to that required by the Texas Constitution for state officers, before entering upon the duties of the office. 
    The oath or affirmation shall be in a form provided by the City Secretary, shall be given before a person authorized to administer oaths, and shall be filed and kept in the office of the City Secretary. 
ARTICLE X - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL 

Power of Initiative 
    Section 84. The electors shall have power to propose any ordinance, except land use ordinances including but not limited to zoning or rezoning property; or ordinances appropriating money, authorizing the issuance of bonds, or authorizing the levy of taxes, and to adopt or reject the same at the polls, such power being known as the initiative. Any initiative ordinance may be submitted to the City Council by a petition signed by qualified electors of the City equal in number to at least twenty-five (25) percent of the number of voters voting at the last regular municipal election. 
Power of Referendum 
    Section 85. The electors shall have power to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance passed by the City Council, or submitted by the City Council to a vote of the electors, such power being known as the referendum, except in the case of land use ordinances including but not limited to zoning or rezoning property; or ordinances appropriating money, authorizing the issuance of bonds, or making the annual tax levy. Ordinances submitted to the City Council by initiative petition and passed by the City Council without charge shall be subject to the referendum in the same manner as other ordinances. Within thirty (30) calendar days after the enactment by the City Council of any ordinance which is subject to a referendum, a petition signed by qualified electors of the city equal in number to at least twenty-five (25) percent of the number of voters voting at the last preceding regular municipal election may be filed with the City Secretary requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of the electors. 
Form of Petitions; Committee of Petitioners 
    Section 86. Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance. The signatures to initiative or referendum petitions need not all be appended to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a statement of the circulator thereof as provided by this section. Any initiative petition paper shall include each petitioner's signature in ink or indelible pencil and shall indicate after each petitioner's signature the petitioner's place of residence by street and number, or other description sufficient to identify the place. There shall appear on each petition the names and addresses of five electors, who, as a committee of the petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible for the circulation and filing of the petition. Attached to each separate petition paper there shall be an affidavit of the circulator thereof that the circulator, and only the circulator, personally circulated the foregoing paper, that it bears a stated number of signatures, that all signatures appended thereto were made in the circulator's presence, and that the circulator believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be. 
Filing; Examination and Certification of Petitions 
    Section 87. All petition papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be assembled and filed with the City Secretary as one instrument. Within ten (10) business days after the petition is filed, the City Secretary shall determine whether each paper of the petition has a proper statement of the circulator and whether the petition is signed by a sufficient number of qualified electors. The City Secretary shall declare any petition paper entirely invalid which does not have attached thereto an affidavit signed by the circulator thereof. If a petition paper is found to be signed by more persons than the number of signatures certified by the circulator, the last signatures in excess of the number certified shall be disregarded. If a petition paper is found to be signed by fewer persons than the number certified, the signatures shall be accepted unless void on other grounds. After the City Secretary has completed the examination of the petition, the City Secretary shall certify the result thereof to the city council at its next regular meeting. If the City Secretary certifies that the petition is insufficient, the City Secretary shall set forth in the certificate of insufficiency the particulars in which the petition is defective and shall at once notify the committee of the petitioners of the findings. 
Amendment of Petitions 
    Section 88. An initiative or referendum petition may be amended at any time within fifteen (15) business days after the notification of insufficiency has been sent by the City Secretary, by filing a supplementary petition upon additional papers signed and filed as provided in case of an original petition. The City Secretary shall, within five (5) business days after such an amendment is filed, make examination of the amended petition and, if the petition be still insufficient, the City Secretary shall file a certificate to that effect in the City Secretary's office and notify the committee of petitioners of the findings. No further action shall be had on such insufficient petition. The finding of the insufficiency of a petition shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. 
Effect of Certification of Referendum Petition 
    Section 89. When a referendum petition, or amended referendum petition, has been certified as sufficient by the City Secretary, the ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone into effect, until and unless approved by the electors, as hereinafter provided. 
Consideration by City Council 
    Section 90. Whenever the City Council receives a certified initiative or referendum petition from the City Secretary, it shall proceed at once to consider such petition. A proposed initiative ordinance shall be read and provision shall be made for a public hearing upon the proposed ordinance. The City Council shall take final action on the ordinance not later than sixty (60) calendar days after the date on which such ordinance was submitted by the City Secretary. A referred ordinance shall be reconsidered by the City Council and its final vote upon such reconsideration shall be upon the question. "Shall the ordinance specified in the referendum petition be repealed?" 
Submission to Electors 
    Section 91. If the City Council shall fail to pass an ordinance proposed by the initiative petition, or shall pass it in a form different from that set forth in the petition therefor; or if the City Council fails to repeal a referred ordinance, the proposed or referred ordinance shall be submitted to the electors at an election to be held on the next uniform election date authorized by state law for municipal elections. 
Form of Ballot for Initiated and Referred Ordinances 
    Section 92. Ordinances submitted to vote of the electors in accordance with the initiative and referendum provisions of this Charter shall be submitted by ballot title, which shall be prepared in all cases by the City Attorney. The ballot title may be different from the legal title of any such initiated or referred ordinance and shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance of such ordinance; and if a paper ballot, shall have to the left of the ballot title the following propositions, one above the other in the order indicated: "FOR" and "AGAINST" and shall otherwise comply with state law. Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election and may be submitted on the same ballot, but any paper ballot used for voting thereon shall be for that purpose only. If voting machines are used, the ballot title of any ordinance shall have to the left of the same two propositions, one above the other or one preceding the other in the order indicated, and the elector shall be given an opportunity to vote for either of the two propositions and thereby to vote for or against the ordinance. 
Results of Election 
    Section 93. If a majority of the electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon be an ordinance of the City. A referred ordinance which is not approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon shall thereupon be deemed repealed. If conflicting ordinances are approved by the electors at the same election, the one receiving the greatest number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
Repealing Ordinances; Publication 
    Section 94. Initiative and referendum ordinances adopted or approved by the electors shall be published, and may be amended or repealed by the City Council, as in the case of other ordinances. 
Recall; General 
    Section 95. Any member of the City Council may be removed from office by recall on grounds of incompetency, official misconduct or malfeasance in office. 
Recall Procedure 
    Section 96. Any elector of the City of College Station may make and file with the City Secretary an affidavit containing the name or names of the officer or officers whose removal is sought and setting out distinctly and specifically the ground or grounds upon which such removal is sought with such certainty as to give each officer sought to be removed notice of the matters and things with which the officer is charged. The City Secretary shall as soon as reasonable deliver to the elector making such affidavit copies of petition blanks demanding such removal. The City Secretary shall keep a sufficient number of such printed petition blanks on hand for distribution. Such blanks when issued by the City Secretary shall bear the signature of that officer and be addressed to the city council, and shall be numbered, dated and indicate the name of the person to whom issued. The petition blanks when issued shall also indicate the number of such blanks issued and the name of the officer whose removal is sought. The City Secretary shall enter in a record to be kept in the City Secretary's office the name of the elector to whom the petition blanks were issued and the number issued to said person. 
Recall Petitions 
    Section 97. The recall petition to be effective must be returned and filed with the City Secretary within thirty (30) calendar days after the filing of the affidavit required in Section 96 of this Article. Each separate petition paper must set out distinctly and specifically the ground or grounds upon which removal is sought and the matters and things with which the officer is charged. The petition must be signed by qualified electors of the City equal in number to at least forty (40) percent of the total number of votes cast for the office in question at the last regular municipal election at which the office in question was filled and must conform to the provisions of Section 86 of this Article. No petition papers shall be accepted as part of the petition unless they bear the signature of the City Secretary as required in Section 96 of this Article. 
Recall Election 
    Section 98. The City Secretary shall within fifteen (15) business days from the date of its filing, examine the recall petition to determine that the petition; sets out distinctly and specifically the ground or grounds upon which removal is sought and the matters and things with which the officer is charged, is signed by a sufficient number of electors, and is in compliance with the procedural requirements of this article of the charter, and if finding the petition sufficient the City Secretary shall submit it to the city council at the next regularly scheduled meeting with the City Secretary's certificate to that effect and notify the officer sought to be recalled of such action. If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign within seven (7) calendar days after such notice the city council shall thereupon order and fix a date for holding a recall election to be held at the next uniform election date authorized by state law for municipal elections. 
Ballots in Recall Election 
    Section 99. Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements. 
(1)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought the question shall be submitted "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of councilman by recall?" 
(2)  Immediately to the left of such question there shall be printed the two following responses, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"FOR" 
"AGAINST" 
Results of Recall Election 
    Section 100. If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against the recall of the officer named on the ballot, that officer shall continue in office for the remainder of that officer's unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be for the recall of the officer named on the ballot, that officer shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy shall be filled as in other vacancies. 
Limitations on Recalls 
    Section 101. No recall petition shall be filed against a Councilmember within six (6) months after the City Manager takes office, nor in respect to an officer subjected to a recall election and not removed thereby, until at least six (6) months after such election. 
District Judge May Order Election 
    Section 102. Should the City Council fail or refuse to order any of the elections as provided for in this article when all the requirements for such elections have been complied with by the petitioning electors, then it shall be the duty of the District Judge, upon proper application being made therefor, to order such elections and to enforce the carrying into effect of the provisions of this article of the charter. 
ARTICLE XI - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 

Control Over and Powers With Reference to City Property 
    Section 103. The ownership, right of control and use of streets, highways, alleys, parks, public places and all other real property of the City of College Station is hereby declared to be inalienable to the city, except by ordinances passed by vote of the majority of the governing body of the City, as hereinafter provided; and no franchise or easement involving the right to use same, either along, across, over or under the same, shall ever be valid, unless expressly granted and exercised in compliance with the terms hereof, and of the ordinances granting the same. No act or omission of the City, its governing body, officers or agents shall be construed to confer or extend by estoppel or indirection, any right, franchise or easement not expressly granted by ordinance. 
    The City of College Station shall have the power, subject to the terms and provisions hereof, by ordinance to confer upon any person or corporation, the franchise or right to use the property of the city, as defined in the preceding paragraph, for the purpose of furnishing to the public any general public service whereby a general service is to be furnished to the public for compensation or hire, to be paid to the franchise holder, whereby a right to use the streets, highways or other property of the City is necessary or proper; and generally to fix and regulate the rates, tolls and charges of all public utilities of every kind operating within the corporate limits of the City of College Station consistent with state law. 
Limitations 
    Section 104. No exclusive franchise or privilege shall ever be granted; nor a franchise, nor a privilege to commence at any time after six (6) months subsequent to the taking effect of the ordinance granting the same; and no franchise shall be directly or indirectly extended beyond the term originally fixed by the ordinance granting the same, except as provided by the terms of this Charter. 
Procedure 
    Section 105. The City of College Station shall have the power by ordinance to grant any franchise or right mentioned in the preceding sections hereof, which ordinance, however, shall not be passed finally until it shall have been read at two (2) separate regular meetings of the City Council. No ordinance granting a franchise shall pass any reading except by a vote of the majority of the City Council, and such ordinance shall not take effect until sixty (60) days after its adoption on its second and final reading; provided, however, that if at any time before such ordinance shall finally take effect a petition shall be presented to the City Council signed by not less than ten (10) percent of the registered voters of the City, then the City Council shall submit the question of the granting of such franchise to a vote of the qualified voters of the City at the next uniform election date prescribed by state law that allows sufficient time to comply with other requirements of law, provided that notice thereof shall be published in at least twenty (20) successive issues of the official newspaper of the City of College Station prior to the holding of such election. The ballot shall briefly describe the franchise to be voted on and the terms thereof and contain the words, "For", and "Against" to the left of the language and shall otherwise comply with state law. The vote shall be canvassed by the city council, and should it result that a majority of those voting thereon cast their votes "For" the granting of a franchise, then by order entered in its minutes, the city council shall so declare and such franchise shall at once take effect. But should a majority of the votes be cast "Against" granting a franchise, then the City Council by order entered in its minutes shall so declare and such franchise shall not take effect. In case a franchise is refused by the City Council, then the matter may be submitted to the qualified voters on petition, and an election held under the procedures as hereinbefore provided. A failure of the City Council to finally pass on an application within six (6) months after the filing of such application shall be construed as a refusal. The City Council in passing an ordinance granting a franchise may provide therein that it shall not take effect until the same shall have been submitted to and approved by a majority of the qualified voters voting therein at a general election. All expenses of publication as it relates to this section shall be borne by the petitioner, who shall make a deposit in advance to cover the estimated cost of publication, the amount of the deposit to be determined by the City Manager. 
Term and Conditions 
    Section 106. No determinate or fixed-term franchise shall ever be granted for a longer term than twenty-five (25) years; nor shall any right, privilege or franchise now in existence be extended beyond the period now fixed for its termination, directly or indirectly, or through any means whatsoever, and any ordinance in violation or evasion of this prohibition shall be absolutely void; provided, however, that any corporation, person or association of persons now holding any franchise under any charter, charters or ordinances of the City of College Station may, with the consent of the city council surrender such franchise or franchises, subject to the provisions of the City Charter then in force. No holder of a franchise heretofore or hereafter granted shall have a right (unless such right is granted in the franchise) to transfer or assign its properties and franchise to any other person, firm or corporation without the consent of the city council by ordinance, and such consent when given shall not operate as the granting of a franchise or as a new franchise. 
    The City Council shall have the power to compel all persons, firms or corporations operating any public utilities in the city, whether operating under existing franchises, or franchises that may be hereafter granted, to extend their service, lines, pipes, etc., if the person to be benefited by such extension will pay the cost thereof, or if it can be shown that the revenue resulting from such extension will, within a reasonable time after same is made, pay a reasonable return on the investment, after making the customary allowance for depreciation. 
    All public utility franchises in the City of College Station shall be held whether expressed in the ordinance or not, subject to the right of the city, each of the following being a condition: 
(1)  To repeal the same by ordinance at any time for failure to begin construction or operation within the time prescribed or otherwise to comply with the terms of the franchise, such power to be exercised only after due notice and hearing. 
(2)  To require an adequate extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. 
(3)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
(4)  To prescribe the form of accounts kept by such utility; provided, that if the utility shall keep its accounts in accordance with the uniform system of accounts for said utility prescribed by the National Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners, the Federal Power Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, the Railroad Commission of Texas, their successor or successors, this shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this paragraph. 
(5)  At any time to examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility and to require annual and other reports, including reports on local operations by each such public utility. 
(6)  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public. 
(7)  To fix and regulate the price and rates for the service to be performed under the franchise as may be permitted by state law. 
(8)  To require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas. 
Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be subject to the terms and conditions of this Charter, whether such terms and conditions are specifically mentioned in the franchise or not. 
Utility Rates and Charges 
    Section 107. Consistent with state law, the City Council shall have the power by ordinance to fix and regulate the price, rates, tolls and charges of all public utilities of every kind operating within the corporate limits of the City of College Station that are subject to this Article. 
Applicable to Streets and Highways 
    Section 108. The right to the use of the public streets, highways, alleys and thoroughfares of this city which necessitates the digging up, or displacement thereof, for the installation of equipment, appliances or appurtenances, either on, above or below the surface of same to make the intended use thereof practicable, shall be deemed and considered "a franchise," the granting of which shall be governed and controlled in the manner herein provided. 
    The use of such public streets, highways, alleys and thoroughfares of this city which does not require the digging up or similar interference with said streets, alleys or highways for the installation of equipment, appliances or appurtenances to make the intended use possible, shall be treated and considered as "a privilege," subject to the control and disposition of the city council; and such privilege over and upon the public streets, alleys, highways and thoroughfares of the city shall not be granted to any person or corporation except when public necessity and convenience may require such use, and then only by ordinance passed by the city council. 
    All franchises for the use and occupancy of public streets, highways, alleys and thoroughfares of this city shall, in event public necessity and convenience so require, be subject to cancellation by the city council; and the City reserves the right to require all public utilities holding franchises from the City of College Station to conform to street grades, and alter or lower their underground structures to meet changing conditions. 
Public Service Corporation to File Annual Reports 
    Section 109. It shall be the duty of the City Council to pass an ordinance requiring each public service corporation operating within the corporate limits of the city to file a sworn annual report of the receipts from the operation of such business for the current year showing how such receipts were expended, how much thereof for betterments or improvements, the rate of tolls or charges for services rendered to the public; and any other facts or information that the City Council may deem pertinent for its use in intelligently passing upon any questions that may arise between the City and the said public service corporations; all reports to be filed with the City Secretary and preserved for the use of the City Council. 
Option to Purchase 
    Section 110. Any public utility franchise may be terminated by ordinance after ten (10) years after the beginning of operation, whenever the City Council shall determine to acquire by condemnation or otherwise the property of such utility necessarily used in or conveniently useful for the operation of the city within the city limits. 
Consent of Property Owners 
    Section 111. The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or operation of any public utility, but nothing in this Charter or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any right of action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter provided by law. 
Extensions 
    Section 112. All extensions of public utilities within the City limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, and shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any original grant hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable as provided in this Charter. In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant. 
Other Conditions 
    Section 113. All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City of College Station and the grantee, and the contractual rights as contained in any such franchises shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except that the power of the City of College Station to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of any utility property is in all things reserved; and except the general power of the City heretofore existing and herein provided for to regulate the rates and services of a grantee, which shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every public utility franchise hereinafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this article, whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this Charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the City Council or the voters of the City in imposing terms or conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant. 
Franchise Records 
    Section 114. The City shall maintain a public record of public utility franchises. 
ARTICLE XII - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Publicity of Records 
    Section 115. Records and accounts of every office, department, or agency of the City shall be open for inspection and copying as provided by V.T.C.A., GOVERNMENT CODE, CH. 552, Public Information, as amended. 
Personal Interest 
    Section 116. Members of the City Council and officers and employees of the City shall comply with state law pertaining to conflicts of interest of local government officials, including TEXAS LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE, Chapter 171. 
No Officer or Employee to Accept Gifts 
    Section 117. No officer or employee of the City of College Station shall ever accept, directly or indirectly, any gift, favor, privilege or employment from any public utility corporation enjoying the grant of any franchise, privilege or easement from the city during the term of office of such officer, or during the employment of such employee, except as may be authorized by law or ordinance; provided, however, that policemen and firemen in uniform or wearing their official badges may accept such free services where the same is permitted by ordinance. Any officer or employee of the City who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by any fine that may be prescribed by ordinance for this offense, and shall forthwith be removed from office. 
Relatives of Officers Shall Not be Appointed or Employed 
    Section 118. No person related within the second degree of affinity, or within the third degree of consanguinity, to members of the City Council or the City Manager shall be appointed or employed to any office, position or service in the City. 
Calendar Day and Business Day 
    Section 119. "Business day" as used in this Charter means Monday through Friday, except for federal or State of Texas holidays. "Calendar day" as used in this Charter means a 24-hour period (midnight to midnight) as denoted on the calendar. Any reference in the Charter to "day" without specifying calendar day or business day shall mean calendar day unless otherwise expressly provided in this Charter. 
Notice of Injury or Damage 
    Section 120. The City shall never be liable for any personal injury, whether resulting in death or not, unless the person(s) injured, or someone in behalf of the injured or deceased person(s), or in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall file a notice in writing with the City Secretary within ninety (90) days after the same has occurred, stating specifically in such notice when, where and how the exact injury occurred, the full extent of the injury, the amount of damages claimed or asserted, and a list of persons, if known, who witnessed the injury. The City shall never be liable for any claim for damage or injury to personal property unless the person whose personal property has been injured or damaged, or someone in behalf of the person whose personal property has been injured or damaged, shall file a claim in writing with the City Secretary within ninety (90) days after said damage or injury occurred, stating specifically when, where and how the damage or injury was sustained. The person giving notice under this Section shall subscribe that person's name to the notice under oath that the statements and facts contained in said notice are true and correct. 
Power to Settle Claims 
    Section 121. The City Council shall have the power to compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against the City, including suits by the City to recover delinquent taxes. 
Service of Process Against the City 
    Section 122. Legal process against the City shall be served upon the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem. 
City Not Required to Give Security or Execute Bond 
    Section 123. It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City of College Station is a party, for any bond, undertaking or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of the city in any of the state courts; but in all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings, the same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required by law, and the City shall be just as liable as if security of bond had been duly executed. 
Liens Against City Property 
    Section 124. No lien of any kind shall ever exist against any property, real or personal, owned by the City except that same be authorized by law, and created pursuant to an ordinance providing for such lien. 
Provisions Relating to Assignment, Execution and Garnishment 
    Section 125. Property, real and/or personal, belonging to the City shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill. Funds belonging to the City, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment or sequestration; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the City nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ or garnishment on any account whatever. The city shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or contractors. 
Power to Remit Penalties 
    Section 126. The City Council shall have the right to remit in whole or in part any fine or penalty belonging to the City which may be imposed under any ordinance or resolution passed in pursuance of this Charter. 
Church and School Property Not Exempt From Special Assessments 
    Section 127. No property of any kind, church, school or otherwise, in the City of College Station shall be exempt from any of the special taxes and assessments authorized by this Charter for local improvements unless the exemption is required by state law. 
Sale or Lease of Property Other Than Public Utilities or Acquired by Tax Sale 
    Section 128. Any real property owned by the City may be sold by the City Council when in its judgment such sale will be in the best interest of the City, subject to the provisions of V.T.C.A., LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE, Chapter 272, Sale or Lease of Property by Municipalities, Counties, and Certain Other Local Governments, as amended, and such other laws as are applicable for Home Rule Cities pertaining to the necessity for public bids. The sale of land may be subject to referendum or initiative for a thirty-day period after the sale and shall not be effective until the expiration of said thirty-day period. If during such thirty-day period a referendum or initiative petition is presented to the City Secretary, which in all respects conforms to the referendum or initiative provisions of Article X of this Charter and the same is found sufficient, then the City Secretary shall certify the sufficiency of the same to the City Council and an election shall be called submitting the question of the sale of the property to the voters. This right of referendum or initiative shall not apply to public utilities or to property sold by the City at tax sales. 
Effect of This Charter on Existing Law 
    Section 129. All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force under the city government of the City of College Station and not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter shall remain in force under this Charter until altered, amended or repealed by the City Council after this Charter takes effect; and all rights of the City of College Station under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and effect to the City. When adopted, this Charter shall become the law of the City of College Station. 
Continuance of Contracts and Succession of Rights 
    Section 130. All contracts entered into by the City of College Station prior to the taking effect of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws or ordinances existing at the time this Charter takes effect may be carried to completion in accordance with the provisions of such existing laws or ordinances. 
    All suits, taxes, penalties, forfeitures and all other rights, claims and demands which have accrued under the laws heretofore in force governing the City of College Station, shall belong to and be vested in and shall be prosecuted by and for the use and benefit of the corporation hereby created, and shall not in anywise be diminished, affected or prejudiced by the adoption and taking effect of this Charter. 
Gender Neutrality 
    Section 131. The wording of this Charter should be regarded as and is intended to be gender neutral. 
Construction and Separability Clause 
    Section 132. This Charter shall be liberally construed to carry out its intents and purposes. If any section or part of any section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
Amending the Charter 
    Section 133. This Charter may be amended in accordance with the provisions of the statutes of the State of Texas. 
Submission of the Charter to Electors 
    Section 134. The Charter commission in preparing this Charter finds and decides that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so as to permit a vote of "yes" or "no" on the same, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function it is necessary that it should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons the Charter commission directs that the Charter be voted upon as a whole and that it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City of College Station at an election to be held for that purpose on January 8, 1952. If a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this Charter it shall become the charter of the City of College Station, and after the returns have been canvassed the same shall be declared adopted. 
    An official copy of the Charter shall be filed with the records of the City and the Mayor shall as soon as practicable certify to the Secretary of State an authenticated copy under the seal of the city, showing the approval by the qualified voters of such charter. 
    In not less than thirty (30) days prior to such election the City Council shall cause the City Secretary to mail a copy of this Charter to each qualified voter of the City of College Station as appears from the Tax Collector's roll for the year ending January 31 preceding said election. 
Rearrangement and Renumbering 
    Section 135. The City Council shall have the power, by ordinance, to renumber and rearrange all articles, sections, and paragraphs of this Charter or any amendments thereto; and upon the passage of any such ordinance, a copy thereof, certified by the City Secretary, shall be forwarded to the Secretary of State for filing. 
    We, the undersigned members of the Charter Commission of the City of College Station, do hereby certify that this publication constitutes a true copy of the proposed charter of the City of College Station, Texas. 
(Signed) Ernest Langford, Chairman Chairman (Signed) J.A. Orr, Secretary Secretary J.H. Sorrels A.P. Boyett H.E. Burgess J.W. Barger S.A. Lipscomb D.B. Cofer Ray Oden S.R. Wright J.C. Culpepper G.W. Black Truman H. Jones R.B. Halpin L.S. Richardson Charles LaMotte W.D. Fitch A.A. Price  
SUBSEQUENT REVISIONS OF ORIGINAL CHARTER 
ADOPTED JANUARY 8, 1952 
    Those serving on the Commission which made recommendations approved by the public at a special election held on April 2, 1963 included: 
J.A. Orr Bardin Nelson C.W. Landiss Marion Pugh D.A. Anderson John W. Hill J.H. Sorrels Charles LaMotte A.L. Rosprim Col. Frank H. Mathews A.P. Boyett William A. Smith  
    Members of the Commission which made recommendations for Charter changes approved by the public in a special election held on January 13, 1968 were: 
John S. Denison Edwin S. Holdredge Phillip B. Goode Phillip H. Steen, Jr. Bardin Nelson John W. Hill Codie D. Wells Carl W. Landiss Ewing E. Brown Wilbert Beck  
    Members of the Commission which made recommendations for Charter changes approved by the public in a special election held on April 4, 1972 were: 
O.M. Holt Dorsey McCrory John S. Denison Joe R. Sawyer James H. Dozier Robert F. White John B. Longley  
    Members of the Commission which made recommendations for Charter changes approved by the public in a special election held on April 3, 1976 were: 
Dr. W.E. Benton Steven Eberhard Earl Bennett J.B. (Dick) Hervey M.L. Cashion Mae Holleman Jerry Cooper Neely Lewis James Dozier W.W. Scott, Jr.  
    Members of the City Council which sat as the Charter Revision Commission to make recommendations for Charter changes approved by the public in a special election held on April 1, 1978 were: 
Mayor Lorence Bravenec Anne Hazen James Dozier Larry Ringer James Gardner Lane Stephenson Gary M. Halter  
    Members of the City Council which sat as the Charter Revision Commission to make recommendations for the Charter changes approved by the public in a special election held on August 13, 1983 were: 
Mayor Gary Halter Robert Runnels Vicky Reinke Patricia Boughton Alvin Prause Lynn McIlhaney Gary Anderson  
    Members which sat as the Charter Review Committee to make recommendations for the Charter changes approved by the public in a municipal election held on May 2, 1992 were: 
Chris Kling Robert Bednarz Terri Tongco J.B. (Dick) Hervey Lorence Bravenec Ann Jones Gene Benton  
    College Station City Councilmembers who made recommendations for the Charter change approved by the public in a municipal election held on May 2, 1998 were: 
    Lynn McIlhaney, Dick Birdwell, Larry Mariott, Steve Esmond, Swiki Anderson, David Hickson, Hubbard Kennady 
    College Station City Councilmembers who made recommendations for the Charter change approved by the public in a municipal election held on November 4, 2003 were: 
    Ron Silvia, Anne Hazen, James Massey, John Happ, Robert Wareing, Scott Mears, Dennis Maloney 
    College Station City Councilmembers who made recommendations for the Charter change to add new Section 30, Article III, The City Council: Creation of City Internal Auditor approved by the public in a municipal election held on May 13, 2006 were: 
    Ron Silvia, John Happ, Chris Scotti, Ben White, Susan Lancaster, Nancy Berry, Ron Gay 
    College Station City Councilmembers who made recommendations for the Charter change to Article XII General Provisions Section 115 Personal Interest approved by the public in a municipal election held on November 4, 2008. 
    Ben White, Lynn McIlhaney, James Massey, Dennis Maloney, David Ruesink, John Crompton, Larry Stewart 
    Members of the Commission which made recommendations for Charter changes approved by the public in a special election held on November 6, 2012 were: 
    Brian Bochner, Terry Childers, Chuck Ellison, Patrick Gendron, Paul Greer, Gary Halter, Tony Jones, Lynn McIlhaney, Buck Prewitt 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of College Station, Texas," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "College Station Code." The Code consists of subparts A and B. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10.01; altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Ordinance codification, Texas Local Government Code  53.001 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of State law. 
(2)  The provisions of Texas Penal Code titles 1 (Texas Penal Code chs. 1-3), 2 (Texas Penal Code chs. 6-9) and 3 (Texas Penal Code ch. 12) apply to all penal provisions of this Code to the extent required by law. 
(3)  When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. 
(4)  All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the City Council may be effectuated. 
(5)  Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
State Law reference- Common and technical usage of words, Texas Government Code  311.011; applicability of Penal Code, Texas Penal Code  1.03. 
    Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of College Station, Texas. 
    City. The term "City" means the City of College Station, Texas. 
    City Council, Council, governing body. The term "City Council," "Council" or "governing body" means the City Council of College Station, Texas. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of College Station, Texas," as designated in Section 1-1. The Code consists of subparts A and B. Subpart A is a codification of general ordinances of the City, while subpart B is a codification of ordinances pertaining to land development. 
(1)  The inclusion of an ordinance in subpart A that pertains to land development does not excuse noncompliance with such ordinance. 
(2)  The inclusion of an ordinance in subpart B that does not pertain to land development does not excuse noncompliance with such ordinance. 
    Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. If the last day of any period is to be computed by counting the months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends on the last day of that month. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.014. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate cases, the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County. The term "County" means Brazos County, Texas. 
    Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a City officer or City employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
    Designee, delegate, delegatee. The terms "designee," delegate" and "delegatee" are synonymous. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.012(c). 
    Includes, including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.005(13). 
    Joint authority. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority to a majority of the number of members, as fixed by statute or ordinance. 
    May. The term "may" creates discretionary authority or grants permission or a power. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.016(1). 
    May not. The term "may not" imposes a prohibition. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.016(5). 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Municipal Court. The term "Municipal Court" means the City's Municipal Court of Record. 
    Must. The term "must" imposes a duty. 
    Must not. The term "must not" imposes a prohibition. 
    Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.012(b). 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.005(1). 
    Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to City officers, City departments, City boards, City commissions and City employees. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. 
    Person. The term "person" means any corporation, organization, government, governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association and any other legal entity. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.005(2). 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
    Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes lands and structures. 
    Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.005(4). 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The term "shall" imposes a duty. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.016(2). 
    Shall not. The term "shall not" imposes a prohibition. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of the street between the curb or lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signed. The term "signed" includes any symbol executed or adopted by a person with present intention to authenticate a writing. 
    State. The term "State" means the State of Texas. 
    Swear. The term "swear" includes the term "affirm." 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.005(8). 
    Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
State Law reference- Construction of tenses, Texas Government Code  311.012(a). 
    Texas Administrative Code, State rules. References to the Texas Administrative Code (generally abbreviated "T.A.C.") or to State rules are to such provisions as now or hereafter amended. 
    Texas acts, statutes or codes . References to Texas acts, statutes or codes are to such statutes or codes as now or hereafter amended. 
    Week. The term "week" means a period of seven consecutive days. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.005(10). 
    Written. The term "written" includes any form of words, letters, symbols or figures. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.005(11). 
    Year. The term "year" means 12 consecutive months. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  311.005(12). 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-3; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parenthesis after a section in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Charter references, cross references, editor's notes, and State law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-2; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance originally repealed or impair the effect of any savings provision in it. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
(Added in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Repeal of a repealing statute, Texas Government Code  311.030. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the College Station Code is hereby amended to read as follows:...." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to this Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the College Station Code is hereby created to read as follows:...." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-4; altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Publication of ordinances, Texas Local Government Code  52.013. 
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the City. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in this Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in this Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to this Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "Sections _____ through _____ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of this Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in this Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in this Code. 
(Added in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Knowingly, intentionally, willfully or otherwise doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Knowingly, intentionally, willfully or otherwise failing to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Knowingly, intentionally, willfully or otherwise failing to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a City officer or City employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00. The $25.00 minimum fine does not apply to parking violations; 
(2)  If the violation governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, other than the dumping of refuse, a fine not less than $25.00 and not more than $2,000.00; and 
(3)  If the violation governs the dumping of refuse, a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $4,000.00. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection (c) of this section: 
(1)  The $25.00 minimum fine does not apply to parking violations. 
(2)  If a culpable mental state for the commission of a violation of this Code is not required or been dispensed with by the prosecuting attorney, the fine shall not exceed $500.00. If it is not required that the violation of this Code be a knowing, intentional or willful violation, then no culpable mental state is required. 
(e)  The penalty imposed for a violation of this Code shall not exceed or be less than the penalty prescribed by State law for the same or a similar offense. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  With respect to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(g)  If a corporation commits a violation of this Code, the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent, or employee of such corporation shall be also severally liable for the penalties herein provided. 
(h)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(i)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasi-judicial enforcement. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-5; altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, Texas Local Government Code  54.001; civil actions for enforcement of certain ordinances, Texas Local Government Code  54.012; quasi-judicial enforcement of certain ordinances, Texas Local Government Code  54.031 et seq.; penalty when no culpable mental state required, Texas Penal Code  6.02; authority to define and prohibit any nuisance within the limits of the city and within 5,000 feet outside the city limits, Texas Local Government Code  217.042. 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Code or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid or unconstitutional, the invalidity or unconstitutionality does not affect other provisions or application of this Code that can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Code are severable. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-6; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation adopted by the City relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as reinstatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Added in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any City ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
(Added in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance not codified in this Code: 
(1)  Amending the Charter. 
(2)  Annexing property into the City or describing the corporate limits. 
(3)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the City. 
(4)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(5)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(6)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(7)  Providing for salaries of employees or other employee benefits or job descriptions for employee positions. 
(8)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(9)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(10)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(11)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(12)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(13)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(14)  Levying or imposing or otherwise related to taxes. 
(15)  Adopting, establishing or amending the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A), being Chapter 12 of the 2011 republication of the City Code. 
(16)  Rezoning property or otherwise pertaining to zoning. 
(17)  That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(18)  That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(19)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  The ordinances designated in Subsection (a) of this section continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
(Added in 2017 recodification) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Official newspaper. 
    The Bryan-College Station Eagle, a newspaper of general circulation throughout the City, published in Bryan, Texas, is hereby designated as the official newspaper of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-12; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 2-2. - City inspection policy. 
    It is the policy of the City that immediately upon arriving at the premises to be inspected, the authorized City official will ordinarily identify himself or herself to an employee at the premises showing an identification card if the employee is not acquainted with the authorized City official or if the authorized City official is not dressed in the apparent uniform of the City showing his or her affiliation with the City. If there is no employee at the scene, the authorized City official may enter any area that is open to the public at the time without identifying himself or herself. The authorized City official making a lawful investigation requiring a delay in identification need not identify himself or herself immediately, providing that no person shall be required to admit any such unidentified person to any premises. If the authorized City official is not permitted to enter any place or any part of any premises for inspection, the authorized City official shall not use force but shall leave the premises and seek a search warrant or other appropriate court order to make entry possible. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(I); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 2-3-2-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-23-2-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-48. - Indemnification of elected and appointed officials and City employees. 
(a)  The City shall indemnify and hold harmless all elected and appointed officers, including volunteers appointed by the City and employees of the City, from any and all claims, demands, causes of action, judgments or costs associated therewith, that may be brought or rendered against them in the performance of their duties as defined by the expressed, written, or oral policy of the City Council, or by direct order of the City Manager interpreting the directive of the City Council. 
(b)  Upon determination by the City Council that the official's or employee's conduct was not illegal, unlawful, willfully or intentionally malicious, negligent or otherwise in violation of the policy of the City Council, the City Council shall designate legal counsel for the purpose of providing representation for said persons under the terms and provisions of this section. 
(c)  In the event that any person defended hereunder seeks the advice of and employment of outside legal counsel, the right to benefits hereunder shall be subject to approval of the City Council. Approval by the City Council of the use of outside counsel shall be subject to the reasonableness of the expenses incurred, the appropriateness and adequacy of any defense offered, as well as all other factors relating to the handling of any such claim or cause of action. 
(d)  The City Council shall have no obligation for payment of any damages or expenses incurred by reason of illegal, unlawful, willful, or intentional acts of a malicious nature, negligent acts, or actions otherwise in violation of the policy of the City Council. Nor shall the City have any obligation by operation of law to indemnify or hold harmless any individual from any award of punitive damages. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-11) 
Secs. 2-49-2-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC RECORDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Public records generally, Texas Government Code chs. 552, 441, Texas Local Government Code ch. 201. 

Sec. 2-70. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Active records means those records in current use which must be retained in offices because frequent reference is necessary in the conduct of day to day operations. 
    Archives means those noncurrent records that are worthy of permanent preservation and special administration because of the importance of the information they contain for continuing administrative, legal, or fiscal purposes, or for historical or other research. 
    Inactive records means those records which are seldom referred to, but which must be retained, temporarily or permanently, because of legal, fiscal, administrative, or archival value. 
    Municipal records means all records, whether of public or private origin, housed and administered by the City. 
    Nonrecords means all material not usually included within the definition of records, such as unofficial copies of documents that are kept only for convenience or reference, stocks of publications and processed documents, and library or museum material intended solely for reference or exhibition. 
    Original public records means that portion of all documents, writings, letters, memoranda, or other written, printed, typed, copied, or developed materials which contains public information, pursuant to Texas Government Code ch. 441, subch. J (Texas Government Code  441.151 et seq.) or ch. 552 or Texas Local Government Code ch. 201. 
    Public information means all information collected, assembled, or maintained by the City pursuant to law or ordinance or in connection with the transaction of official business, with exceptions as defined in Texas Government Code ch. 552, subch. C (Texas Government Code  552.101 et seq.). 
    Record means any document, paper, letter, book, map, photograph, sound or video recording, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic medium, or other information recording medium, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the State, created or received by a local government or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law, including an ordinance, or in the transaction of public business. The term "record" does not include: 
(1)  Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of reference or research by officers or employees of the local government; 
(2)  Notes, journals, diaries, and similar documents created by an officer or employee of the local government for the officer's or employee's personal convenience; 
(3)  Blank forms; 
(4)  Stocks of publications; 
(5)  Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purposes of reference or display; or 
(6)  Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are entitled under Texas Government Code ch. 552, or other State law. 
    Records disposition means the removal of records from City offices or from an inactive records storage center and, for records that have passed their minimum legal retention periods and no longer have value to the City, their destruction, or for archival records, their transfer to a designated agency for permanent archival retention. 
    Records retention and disposition schedule means a document which describes recurring records or records series of a department on a continuing basis, indicating for each the length of time they are to be maintained in the office area or storage center, and when and if such records or records series may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of. 
    Records series means records accumulated over a period of time and arranged in an organized file or set of files which can be described, handled, and disposed of as a unit. A records series may consist of records of a single type or format, or of records kept together because they relate to a particular subject or result from one activity. Example: Accounts payable, ordinances, or time cards. 
    Vital records means those records which contain information that is essential for the continuation or reconstruction of the organization in the event of a disaster. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-27(E); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 2-71. - Records Management Officer. 
(a)  Designation. The City Secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as Records Management Officer for the City. As provided by State law, each successive holder of the office shall file such holder's name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(b)  Duties. In addition to other duties assigned in this section, the Records Management Officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the Records Management Program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each City office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the City; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the City; 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all City departments by preparation of a manual of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the Records Management Program and the City's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(9)  Disseminate to the City Council and department heads information concerning State laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(10)  Instruct Records Liaison Officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the Records Management Program; 
(11)  Direct Records Liaison Officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by State law and this section; 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of City records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program and the requirements of State law; 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(14)  Report annually to the City Council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the City, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under Subsection (13) of this section. 
(15)  Bring to the attention of the City Council noncompliance by City personnel with the policies and procedures of the Records Management Program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-27(F)) 
Sec. 2-72. - Ownership of City records. 
    All records received, created, or compiled by officials or employees of the City in the performance of their duties shall remain the property of the City. No City official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property rights to such records even though the official or employee may have developed or compiled them. Municipal records may not be sold, given away, destroyed or otherwise alienated from the City's custody unless approved by the City Council. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-27(C)) 
Sec. 2-73. - Development and implementation of records retention and disposition schedules. 
    The records retention schedules issued by the Texas State Library, which schedules were adopted by Ord. No. 2436 are hereby adopted. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-27(D); altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Local government records retention schedules, Texas Government Code  441.158 et seq. 
Sec. 2-74. - Microfilming of records. 
    The City Secretary may provide for the duplication of City records by a micro-photograph or microfilm process which accurately and permanently copies, reproduces, or originates public records on film by following the procedures stated in this section. 
(1)  Types of records that may be microfilmed. All books, papers, maps, photographs or other documentary materials regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or received by any agency of the City in pursuance of any law, or in connection with the transaction of the public business, and prepared, preserved or appropriated as evidence of the organization, functions, policies, decisions, investigations, procedures, operations or other activities of the municipal government, or because of the informational value of data contained therein, may be microfilmed by order of the City Secretary. 
(2)  Standards set. All microfilm will be of a quality to meet the standards required by the United States of America Standards Institute for archival quality, density, resolution and definition, except that microfilm intended only for short-term use, as determined by the City Secretary or designee. 
(3)  Responsibilities of originating department. 
a.  Requests and certification. All requests for the microfilming of records will come from the department and division heads or the person in charge of an office. Each such person shall check and certify that each microfilm record is a true and correct duplication of the original record maintained in the files of their department or office. 
b.  Records and index. An accurate record of all microfilm shall be maintained by the originating department, including an appropriate index whereby any document, paper, book, map or photograph may be retrieved as quickly as possible. Whenever such microfilm shall be properly indexed and placed in accessible files, it shall for all purposes become an official record of the City. 
(4)  Disposition of original public records. 
a.  Original public records which are microfilmed in compliance with this section may be destroyed at the direction of the City Secretary with the advice and consent of the City Attorney, unless otherwise required by Federal law or State law. Any original public record, the subject matter of which is in litigation, may not be destroyed until such litigation is final. 
b.  Before any original public records are destroyed or disposed of, notice shall first be given to the State Librarian or State Archivist, and if such records are, in his or her opinion, needed for the State Library, the records shall be transferred thereto. 
(5)  Public access. The public shall have free access, upon request, to information in micro-photographs or microfilms to which they are entitled under law. Individuals requesting copies of microfilms will be charged for the cost of making the copies and, if it is necessary to search or compile information from the records, an additional charge will be made. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-27(A)) 
State Law reference- Microfilming and storing of public records, Texas Government Code  448.168. 
Sec. 2-75. - Records not microfilmed. 
(a)  Original municipal public records which are not microfilmed in compliance with this section or which are determined worthless by the City Council may be destroyed as directed by the Council, provided that notice of proposed destruction or disposition of those original municipal public records shall first be given to the State Librarian or State Archivist, and if such records are, in his or her opinion, needed for the State Library, the records shall be transferred thereto. 
(b)  Any original municipal public records, the subject of which is in litigation, may not be destroyed until such litigation is final. 
(c)  Municipal records other than those records defined in this section as original public records may be disposed of upon approval of the City Secretary, acting with the advice and consent of the City Attorney. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-27(B)) 
Secs. 2-76-2-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-94. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year for accounting and budgeting purposes of the City shall begin on October 1 of each calendar year and shall terminate on September 30 of the next succeeding calendar year. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-8) 
Sec. 2-95. - Creation of an Audit Committee. 
    A standing committee to be known as the Audit Committee is hereby created. 
(1)  Purpose. To ensure independence of the audit function, an Audit Committee is hereby established for the purpose of assisting the City Council in fulfilling their governance and oversight responsibility. 
(2)  Membership and term. Membership and term of the Audit Committee shall be as follows: 
a.  The Audit Committee shall consist of three voting members from the City Council and up to two City citizen members who serve in a non-voting, advisory capacity. The Mayor shall be an ex officio member and Chair, with full voting rights. The City Council shall appoint two additional City Council Members to serve on the Audit Committee with full voting rights. If deemed necessary by the City Council, the City Council may also appoint up to two City citizens with a background in accounting, finance or auditing to sit on the Committee in a non-voting, advisory capacity. 
b.  Of the two other committee members with voting rights, not including the Mayor, one Council Member shall be appointed for a term expiring on January 31, 2018; the other Council Member shall be appointed for a term expiring on January 31, 2019. Thereafter, voting members shall be appointed for two-year terms or until their successors are appointed. Vacancies shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired terms of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
c.  If appointed, the term lengths for citizens appointed to serve in the non-voting, advisory capacity on the Committee shall follow the staggered term lengths of the voting members of the Committee. 
d.  Two voting members shall constitute a quorum for transaction of business. Any recommendation or decision which does not receive a majority of positive votes shall be deemed a negative report. The Audit Committee shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be public record. 
(3)  Meetings, duties, and responsibilities. The Audit Committee shall meet as needed to perform its duties, but shall not meet less than once quarterly. The duties and responsibilities of the Audit Committee shall include those as listed below. The Audit Committee shall also carry out other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned by the City Council. 
a.  Reviewing the City Internal Auditor's audit plan annually; 
b.  Performing regular evaluations of the City audit function and making recommendations to the City Council; 
c.  Providing suggestions and comments for the annual audit plan; 
d.  Monitoring follow-up on reported findings to ensure corrective action is taken by management; and 
e.  Making recommendations to the City Council for the selection of the firm conducting the annual financial statement audits. 
(4)  Audit function, scope, and oversight. The City Council directs the Audit Committee to oversee the City Internal Auditor's financial and performance audits of all departments, offices, boards, activities, outside agencies and programs of the City. Such audits shall be conducted in accordance with recognized government auditing standards. The goals of such audits are to independently and objectively determine whether: 
a.  Activities and programs being implemented have been authorized by government Charter or Code, State law or applicable Federal law or regulations, and are being conducted and funds expended in compliance with applicable laws; 
b.  The department, office, or outside agency is acquiring, managing, protecting, and using its resources, including public funds, personnel, property, equipment, and space, economically, efficiently, equitably, and effectively and in a manner consistent with the objectives intended by the authorizing entity or enabling legislation; 
c.  The entity, programs, activities, functions, or policies are effective, including the identification of any causes of inefficiencies or uneconomical practices; 
d.  The desired result or benefits are being achieved; 
e.  Financial and other reports are being provided that disclose fairly, accurately, and fully all information required by law, to ascertain the nature and scope of programs and activities, and to establish a proper basis for evaluating the programs and activities, including the collection of, accounting for, and depositing of revenues and other resources; 
f.  Management has established adequate operating and administrative procedures and practices, systems or accounting internal control systems and internal management controls; 
g.  Indications of fraud, abuse or illegal acts are valid and need further investigation; and 
h.  Any additional audit-related goals as assigned by the City Council. 
(5)  Audit schedule. The Audit Committee shall review and comment on the annual City Internal Auditor's one-year audit schedule. The schedule shall include the proposed plan, and the rationale for the selections, for auditing departments, offices, boards, activities, subcontractors and outside agencies for the period. This schedule may be amended after review with the Audit Committee and City Council. 
(6)  Contract auditors, consultants, and experts. Subject to City Council approval, the Audit Committee may direct the City Internal Auditor to obtain the services of certified public accountants, qualified management consultants, or other professional experts necessary to perform audit work, other than the City's annual audit. An audit that is performed by contract must be conducted by persons who have no financial interests in the affairs of the City of or its officers. As directed by the Audit Committee, the City Internal Auditor will coordinate and monitor auditing performed by certified public accounting firms or other organizations employed under contract by the City to assist with audit related activities. Contracting for the external audit will follow the City's normal contracting processes except for the participation and oversight by the Audit Committee and City Internal Auditor. 
(7)  Annual report. The Audit Committee may require the City Internal Auditor to prepare and submit an annual report to the City Council indicating audits completed, major findings, corrective actions taken by administrative managers, and significant issues which have not been fully addressed by management. 
(Ord. No. 2017-3862, exh. A, 2-23-2017) 
Secs. 2-96-2-116. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FEES, RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 2-117. - Established by resolution. 
    All fees, rates and charges provided for in this Code shall be as established by resolution. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  14-1; altered in 2017 recodification; Res. No. 08-10-17-2q, 8-10-2017; Res. No. 09-27-18-2e , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Editor's note- The Fee Resolution can be accessed publicly here: http://cstx.gov/index.aspx?page=4026 . 
Sec. 2-118. - Service fees for credit card payments. 
(a)  Authorization for service fee. In the collection of fee, fines, court costs, and other charges the City may: 
(1)  Accept payment by credit card for a fee, fine, court cost, or other charge; and 
(2)  Collect a fee for processing the payment by credit card. 
(b)  Service fee established. The fee for a payment by a card for a fee, fine, court cost, or other charge shall be as established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  14-7; altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Processing or handling fee for use of credit cards, Texas Local Government Code  132.003. 
Sec. 2-119. - Police Department services. 
    Fees for the following services shall be as established in Section 2-117: 
(1)  Police Department records checks and verifications, which checks shall be provided to citizens upon request. Governmental agencies making such requests shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Requests for accident reports prepared by the Police Department. 
(3)  Request for records and reports prepared by or in the custody of the Police Department other than accident reports. 
(4)  Police Department escort services for other than emergency services. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  14-2; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 2-120. - Fire Department services. 
    Fees for the following services shall be as established in Section 2-117: 
(1)  Requests for incident reports prepared by the Fire Department. 
(2)  Mileage charges for Fire Department services outside the City limits will be in accordance with the IRS Standard Mileage Rates and may change from time to time. 
(3)  Fire Department inspections of day care centers. 
(4)  Fire Department inspections of foster homes. 
(5)  Fire Department inspections of nursing home facilities. 
(6)  Fire Department inspections of health care facilities. 
(7)  Automatic hood tests performed by the Fire Department. 
(8)  Fire Department inspections of automatic fire alarm systems. 
(9)  Fire Department testing of underground fire lines. 
(10)  Fuel tank testing performed by the Fire Department. 
(11)  Fuel line leak testing performed by the Fire Department. 
(12)  Fire sprinkler system testing performed by the Fire Department. 
(13)  Fire Department inspections of a hospital's initial opening. 
(14)  Fire Department burn permit fee and costs - ten day commercial burn permit and ten day residential burn permit. 
(15)  Fire Department additional charge for afterhours inspections per inspector per hour (after hours is anytime other than Monday-Friday 8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m.). 
(16)  The provision of emergency medical services basic life support (BLS) with transportation from a location within the corporate limits of College Station to a location within Brazos County. 
(17)  The provision of emergency medical services basic life support (BLS) with transportation from a location outside the corporate limits. 
(18)  The provision of emergency medical services basic life support (BLS) with transportation to a location outside of Brazos County. 
(19)  The provision of emergency medical services advanced life support (ALS1) with transportation from a location within the corporate limits of College Station to a location within Brazos County. 
(20)  The provision of emergency medical services advanced life support (ALS1) with transportation from a location outside the corporate limits. 
(21)  The provision of emergency medical services advanced life support (ALS1) with transportation to a location outside of Brazos County. 
(22)  The provision of emergency medical services advanced life support, level 2 (ALS2) with transportation from a location within the corporate limits of College Station to a location within Brazos County. 
(23)  The provision of emergency medical services advanced life support, level 2 (ALS2) with transportation from a location outside the corporate limits. 
(24)  The provision of emergency medical services advanced life support, level 2 (ALS2) with transportation to a location outside of Brazos County. 
(25)  The provision of emergency medical services without transportation to a location outside the corporate limits of College Station. 
(26)  Administrative fees and reimbursement fees for supplies and medications. 
(27)  Emergency and rescue services. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  14-3; Ord. No. 2018-4016 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-14-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4046 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 2-121. - Public Works Department services. 
    Fees for the following services rendered by the Public Works Department shall be as established in Section 2-117: 
(1)  Collection of animal carcasses from the offices of veterinarians. 
(2)  Street sweep made either at the request of generator or necessitated as a result of washing of dirt, littering, or depositing of any organic or inorganic material by a generator, and outside of the customary street sweep program. 
(3)  Permit and inspection fees allowing the cutting of streets, alleyways and sidewalks. 
(4)  Repair of streets damaged in the installation of underground facilities. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  14-4) 
Sec. 2-122. - Planning and Development Services Department. 
    Fees for the following services rendered by the Planning and Development Services Department shall be as provided in Section 2-117: 
(1)  Building permit fees for structures constructed in the City. 
a.  Commercial and residential initial construction and remodel and addition. 
b.  Re-inspection fee. 
c.  For each separate structure, the commercial building permit fees shall be charged based upon the valuation of structure and includes site improvements; residential building permits shall be charged based upon the heated square footage and includes site improvements. 
(2)  Electrical permit fees. 
a.  Repair and alteration electrical permit. 
b.  Residential electrical permit. 
c.  Commercial electrical permit. 
d.  Re-inspection fee. 
(3)  Mechanical permit fees. 
a.  Residential and multifamily mechanical permit. 
b.  Commercial mechanical permit. 
c.  Re-inspection fee. 
d.  Residential mechanical change out permit. 
(4)  Plumbing permit fees. 
a.  Basic plumbing permit. 
b.  Plumbing fixtures. 
c.  Gas permit. 
1.  Basic fee. 
2.  Gas piping and outlets. 
d.  Re-inspection fee. 
(5)  Lawn sprinkler permit fees. 
a.  Lawn sprinkler permit. 
b.  Vacuum breaker fee. 
c.  Re-inspection fee. 
(6)  Miscellaneous permit fees. 
a.  Demolition permit. 
b.  Moving permit. 
c.  Vent hood permit. 
d.  Walk-in cooler permit. 
e.  Location permit. 
f.  Commercial solar panel permit. 
g.  Residential and solar panel permit. 
h.  Commercial roof permit. 
i.  Multifamily roof permit. 
j.  Residential roof permit. 
(7)  License registration fee. 
(8)  Oil and gas development application fees. 
a.  Application fee. 
b.  Annual permit renewal fee. 
c.  Abandonment fee. 
d.  Consultant fee. 
e.  Contract inspector fee. 
f.  Road maintenance agreement fee. 
g.  Seismic survey permit fee. 
(9)  Municipal utility district fees. 
a.  Fee to process petition to create district. 
b.  Fee to process petition to acquire or annex land. 
c.  Infrastructure plan review and inspection fee. 
(10)  Additional charge for afterhours inspections per inspector per hour (after hours is anytime other than Monday-Friday 8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m.). 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  14-5, 14-6; Ord. No. 2018-4046 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 9-27-2018; Ord. No. 2019-4077 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-14-2019; Ord. No. 2019-4100 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-13-2019) 
Secs. 2-123-2-142. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-143-2-167. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-168. - Created. 
    A standing committee to be known as the College Station Historic Preservation Committee is hereby created. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-23(intro. )) 
Sec. 2-169. - Purpose. 
    Although the City does not have a long history, it is important that it be collected and preserved. By acting in a timely manner, the City will be able to capture information before it otherwise would become irretrievable. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-23(A)) 
Sec. 2-170. - Membership. 
(a)  The Committee shall consist of nine members, and where practical may include representation from the Brazos County Historical Society, Texas A&M University, and the City Council. 
(b)  The term of office is three years, provided, however, that: (a) two of the members whose terms expire January 2020 shall be appointed to a two year term; and (b) three of the members whose terms expire January 2022 shall be appointed to a two year term. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three years. If a position becomes vacant before the expiration of the position's term, the new appointee shall serve for the balance of the term of the appointee's predecessor. 
(c)  The City Council shall appoint all members to fill vacancies. The City Council shall appoint a Chair during the annual appointment process. If a vacancy shall occur in the Chair position, the City Council shall appoint a replacement to serve as Chair. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-23(B), (C); Ord. No. 2018-4030 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-26-2018; Ord. No. 2019-4089 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 2-171. - Meetings. 
    The College Station Historic Preservation Committee shall provide for regular and special meetings as necessary to carry on its business, and is authorized to establish its own rules, regulations, and bylaws subject to ratification by the City Council. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-23(E)) 
Sec. 2-172. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The duties of this committee shall be to aid in the collection and preservation of the history of the City and its environs, and to provide for education of citizens on the history of this City. The Committee shall also carry out other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned by the City Council. The Committee shall semi-annually submit a report to the City Council. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-23(D)) 
Secs. 2-173-2-197. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COLLEGE STATION CONFERENCE CENTER ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-198. - Purpose. 
    The College Station Conference Center is an establishment owned, operated, and maintained by the City for use and enjoyment by the visitors to this City, and also by the residents of this community. It is therefore to the advantage of the City that a citizens' committee serve to advise the City Council in matters relating to said Conference Center and its related Teen Center. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-28(A)) 
Sec. 2-199. - Membership. 
(a)  The Conference Center Advisory Committee shall consist of seven members, to be appointed by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. Committee members shall serve no more than two full consecutive terms. 
(b)  The term of office shall be for two years and the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall appoint members on a staggered basis with four terms expiring in odd-numbered years and three terms expiring in even numbered years. 
(c)  A member of the Committee shall be appointed annually by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board to serve as Committee Chairman for a term of one year. A Vice-Chairman shall be selected by members of the Committee. 
(d)  A vacancy occurring on the Committee prior to expiration of the term of office for that position shall be filled by appointment by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. A member so appointed shall be designated to serve the remainder of the term of his/her predecessor. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-28(B), (C)) 
Sec. 2-200. - Meetings. 
    The Conference Center Advisory Committee shall provide for regular and special meetings as necessary to carry on its business, and is authorized to establish its own rules, regulations, and bylaws subject to ratification by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-28(E)) 
Sec. 2-201. - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The duties of this Conference Center Advisory Committee shall be to advise and recommend to the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board on matters relevant to the operation, use, and promotion of the College Station Conference Center and the Teen Center. The Committee shall also carry out other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. The Committee shall semi-annually submit a report to the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-28(D)) 
Secs. 2-202-2-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-226. - Creation; membership. 
(a)  The College Station Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, hereinafter referred to as the "Board," shall be composed of nine members. The duties of said Board shall be to advise and recommend to the City Council on all matters to the establishment, maintenance, and operation of City parks and recreation programs for the City and to carry out other duties as may be assigned by the City Council. 
(b)  The term of office is three years, provided, however, that: (a) three of the members whose terms expire in January 2020 shall be appointed to serve a two year term; and (b) the three members whose terms expire January 2022 shall be appointed to a two year term. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three years. The Council shall appoint one member to serve as Chair. One member will serve as Vice-Chair on an annual basis, as selected by the Board at the July meeting. 
(c)  Members appointed to fill vacancies on said Board shall be for the remainder of the term of his or her predecessor. 
(d)  Any Board member appointed by the City Council shall forfeit that membership if absent for more than three meetings in a 12-month period that are considered unexcused by definition, or 25 percent of the meetings, whichever is greater, in one appointment year, unless the absenteeism is for: 
(1)  Vacation; 
(2)  Illness; 
(3)  Family emergency; 
(4)  Jury duty; 
(5)  Business out of town. 
Absenteeism may also be excused by the Board or by the City Council. If a member goes beyond this absenteeism limit, the City Council shall be advised to declare the position vacant and appoint a new member to fill the vacancy. Unexcused absences include failure to notify the Chair or Board Secretary of a valid reason or good cause for absence prior to a scheduled meeting. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-2(A)-(C); Ord. No. 2018-4030 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 7-26-2018; Ord. No. 2019-4089 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 2-227. - Appointment of officers. 
    The Council shall appoint one member of the Board to serve as Chair. One member will serve as Vice-Chair on an annual basis, as selected by the Board at the July meeting. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-2(L)) 
Sec. 2-228. - Rules and meetings. 
    Said Board is authorized to establish its own rules, regulations, and bylaws. The Board shall provide for regular and special meetings necessary to carry on its business. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-2(D)) 
Sec. 2-229. - Limitations. 
    The Board shall not be authorized to incur on behalf of the City any expense incident to the operation of said Parks and Recreation Department programs, unless expressly authorized to do so by the City Council. The Board shall not knowingly conduct business that has been assigned by ordinance to any other governing or advisory board of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-2(E)) 
Sec. 2-230. - Duties of Parks and Recreation Department Director. 
    The Director shall act as the Chief Executive Officer of the Board, but shall not be a member. The Director shall attend all regular meetings and participate in discussions, but shall not be entitled to vote. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-2(O)) 
Sec. 2-231. - Secretary. 
    The Parks and Recreation Department Staff Assistant shall act as the Secretary to the Board, but shall not be a member. The Staff Assistant shall prepare agendas, post the appropriate notices, notify Board members of all regular meetings at least 72 hours prior to the meeting, transcribe minutes from regular and special meetings in which a quorum of the Board is present, and maintain the minutes and records of the Board in compliance with all State and local laws. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-2(P)) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local regulation of alcohol beverages, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code  1.06, 109.31 et seq. 

Sec. 4-1. - Penalty. 
    A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-13(E)) 
Sec. 4-2. - Possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages in Northgate Central Business District. 
(a)  Regulations related to alcohol. 
(1)  Public safety. On October 21, 2004, the City Council adopted and declared that open containers and public consumption in the Northgate Central Business District was a risk to the health and safety of the citizens of the City. 
(2)  TABC order. On December 20, 2004, the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission granted an order giving the City the authority to approve an ordinance regulating open containers and public consumption of alcoholic beverages in the Northgate Central Business District. 
(3)  Permit for consumption. On April 26, 2012, the City Council passed the ordinance in Article IX of Chapter 8, Northgate Outdoor Dining and Entertainment, for a business of the Northgate Central Business District to obtain a permit for its customers to publicly consume alcoholic beverages in a specifically defined and permitted public space. 
(4)  District defined. The Northgate Central Business District is hereby defined as the area set out on the map attached the ordinance from which this section is derived that was approved by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission Order of December 20, 2004. 
(b)  Public consumption and possession. In the Northgate Central Business District, it shall be unlawful to possess an open container or publicly consume an alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  Permit for events. A special event providing for alcohol sales and consumption or any area that is an exception to this section shall have a valid permit or license to sell or serve alcoholic beverages issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. 
(d)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Non-City property. This section shall not be applicable to buildings not owned or controlled by the City, residential structures, or licensed premises located in the Northgate Central Business District or the possession of open containers or consumption of alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles. 
(2)  Permitted areas. This section shall not apply to: 
a.  Special event permits granted pursuant to Article VI of Chapter 8, Carnivals, Circuses, Menageries, Sideshows, Concessions and Special Events; or 
b.  Permitted areas granted pursuant to Article IX of Chapter 8, Northgate Outdoor Dining and Entertainment. 
(e)  Alcohol containers presumed to contain alcohol. If a person possesses or has in possession an open container specifically made for the purpose of containing an alcoholic beverage or is labeled as containing an alcoholic beverage, it shall be presumed that any content therein is an alcoholic beverage. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-13(B)) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit public consumption, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code  109.35. 
Sec. 4-3. - Sale of alcoholic beverages near churches, schools and hospitals. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Church means a building used principally for religious worship and in which persons assemble and congregate to worship at least once each week and which is owned by such congregation or persons or leased by such congregation for a period of more than one year. 
    Public hospital means a hospital to which the public at large is admitted for medical treatment. 
    Public school means a school which has one or more of the grades kindergarten through 12th grade, and which is owned and conducted by the State or a political subdivision or agency thereof. 
(b)  Sales of alcoholic beverages prohibited. No person shall sell or engage in the business of selling an alcoholic beverage where the place of business of such person is within 300 feet of any church, public school or public hospital. 
(c)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to a place of business which is legally authorized to sell alcoholic beverages prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived; however, should such a place of business discontinue the sale of alcoholic beverages, then the provisions of this section shall apply thereafter. 
(d)  City Secretary to certify application. Any person intending to sell alcoholic beverages within the City limits, shall make application to the City Secretary, who shall designate on the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission application whether or not the same is lawful by the ordinances of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-13(D); altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Authority to prohibit sales near school, church or hospital, Tex. Alco. Bev. Code  109.33. 
Sec. 4-4. - Extended sale hours. 
    The City Council hereby adopts the extended hours of sale for mixed beverages and beer and wine on any day shall be 2:00 a.m., as provided by Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code ch. 105, Hours of Sale and Consumption. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-13(A)) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Health and safety of animals, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 821 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any member of the group of living beings of the subphylum Vertebrata, including, but not limited to, birds, fish, mammals and reptiles, but specifically excluding human beings. The term "animal" shall include both domesticated and wild, male and female, warm and cold blooded. 
    Animal Control Authority means the person or entity designated by the City to enforce this chapter. 
    Animal shelter means a facility designated or recognized by the City for the purpose of impounding and caring for animals. 
    At large means to be free of physical restraint beyond the boundaries of the premises of the owner. 
    Collar means a collar or harness constructed of nylon, leather, or similar material specifically designed to be used for a dog, cat or pot-bellied pig. 
    Domestic livestock means domestic animals generally used or raised on a farm for profit, work, or pleasure, including, but not limited to, horses, mules, asses, cattle, swine, sheep and goats. The term "domestic livestock" excludes pot-bellied pigs and poultry. 
    Exotic animal means any non-domesticated animal and any hybrid thereof, other than exotic livestock, which is native to a foreign country or of foreign origin or character, is not native to the United States, or was introduced from abroad. 
    Exotic livestock shall have the meaning as set forth in Texas Agriculture Code  142.001 which typically will include grass-eating or plant-eating single-hoofed or cloven-hoofed ungulates; including animals from the horse, swine, cattle, deer, and antelope families, and any hybrid thereof, non-domesticated and that are non-indigenous, i.e., native to a foreign country or of foreign origin or character, is not native to the United States, or was introduced from abroad. 
    Fowl or poultry means chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons, quail, pheasant, and peacocks or similarly feathered domesticated members of the Aves class but excluding exotic birds, falcons and hawks. 
    Guard dog means a dog maintained within secured designated premises for the purposes of protecting life or property. 
    Hybrid means a cross of two different animal species. 
    Licensing Authority means the City or any designated entity charged with administering the issuance and revocation of permits and licenses within the City. 
    Owner means any person who has a right of property or temporary or permanent custody of an animal, or who controls, cares for or permits an animal to remain on or about any premises for more than 72 hours or who otherwise chooses to become responsible for an animal, except that those caring for feral cats that are part of a properly permitted managed feral cat colony shall not be considered owners for purposes of this chapter. 
    Pot-bellied pig means any of the domesticated forms of the species Suidae Sus scrofa (miniature pigs under 100 pounds) originating in Southeastern Asia, and having a straight tail, potbelly, swayback, and black, white, or black and white coat. 
    Secured enclosure means a fence or structure of at least six feet in height, forming or causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and suitable to confine a dangerous animal in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner. Such enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. The enclosure shall be posted with signs on all sides with conspicuous letters warning of the presence of a dangerous animal and shall include a symbol of a dangerous animal understandable by young children. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-1; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 6-2. - Fees and charges. 
    All fees and charges referenced in this chapter shall be as established in Section 2-117. 
(Added in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 6-3. - Responsibility of owners, etc. 
    Nothing in this chapter generally shall relieve the registered owner or registered person responsible for such animal of liability for violations and any accrued charges or citations. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-5(7)) 
Sec. 6-4. - Rabies Control Authority. 
    The City Council shall designate an officer or contract with a public or private entity to carry out the activities required or authorized under Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 826 and regulations relating thereto in acting as the City's local Rabies Control Authority. This includes following the proper procedures for quarantine, testing and vaccination protocols as may be required or authorized. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-24) 
Sec. 6-5. - Reports of rabies. 
    It is unlawful for a person to fail to notify the local Rabies Control Authority when the person reasonably suspects an animal is rabid or capable of transmitting rabies as set forth in Texas Health and Safety Code  826.041. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-25) 
Sec. 6-6. - Removal from humane live traps. 
    It is unlawful to remove an animal from or inflict damage upon a humane live trap set by the Animal Control Authority. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-2) 
Sec. 6-7. - Prohibited animals. 
(a)  Any animal not normally born and raised in captivity is prohibited, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Class Reptilia. Family Helodermatidae (venomous lizards) and Family Hydrophiidae (venomous marine snakes); Family Viperidae (rattlesnakes, pit vipers and true vipers); Family Elapidae (coral snakes, cobras, and mambas); Family Columbridae-Dispholidus Typus (boomslang); Bioga Dendrophilia (mangrove snake) and Kirklandii (twig snake only); and Order Crocodilia (such as crocodiles and alligators). 
(2)  Class Mammalia. Order Carnivores. 
a.  Family Felidea (such as lions, tigers, bobcats, jaguars, leopards, cougars and savanah cats-hybrid of serval), except commonly domesticated cats; 
b.  Family Canidae (such as wolves, dingos, coyotes, foxes and jackals), and any hybrid of an animal listed in this section except commonly domesticated dogs; 
c.  Family Mustelida (such as weasels, skunks, martins, minks, badgers and otters) except ferrets; 
d.  Family Procyonidae (such as raccoons and coati); 
e.  Family Ursidae (such as bears); 
f.  Marsupialia (such as kangaroos, opossums, koala bears, wallabies, bandicoots, and wombats); 
g.  Chiroperta (bats); 
h.  Edentata (such as sloths, anteaters, and armadillo); 
i.  Probosidea (elephants); 
j.  Primata (such as monkeys, chimpanzees, orangutans, baboons, and gorillas); 
k.  Rodentia (such as beavers and porcupines). 
(3)  Class Amphibi. Poisonous frogs; does not include non-venomous reptiles or non-venomous snakes. 
(b)  This section does not include livestock, fowl or normal household pets, such as, but not limited to, dogs, cats, cockatiels, ferrets, hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, rabbits, fish or small, non-venomous reptiles, or non-venomous snakes. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-3) 
Sec. 6-8. - Problem animals. 
    It is unlawful to be an owner or manager of an animal which engages in behavior constituting problem animal behavior. Each of the following is a problem behavior of animals: 
(1)  Waste removal. An animal which soils, defiles or defecates on private property other than the owner's or on public areas, unless such waste is immediately removed and disposed of; 
(2)  Excessive noise. An animal which creates a disturbance by excessive barking, howling, crowing, screeching or other noise which would offend a person of ordinary sensibilities under the same or similar circumstances; 
(3)  Chasing, biting, and scratching. An animal which chases, bites, scratches, molests, attacks or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on public property or on the private property of others; 
(4)  Contagion for disease. An animal that carries or poses an unreasonable threat of carrying or transmitting a disease to other animals or to people; 
(5)  Staked animal. An animal which is staked or tied upon any open or unfenced lot or land within the City so that the animal so tied or staked could get on, across or within eight feet of any public street, park or other public land, including within eight feet of any public sidewalk, right-of-way, or public building; 
(6)  Horses/mules on right-of-way. Riding a horse or mule or any other animal on a public sidewalk or within the public street right-of-way except on the paved shoulder or curb lane of the street right-of-way, unless a permit is required from the City pursuant to other applicable law; 
(7)  Estrus. Allowing any female animal while in heat to attract other animals and not being confined in a building or enclosure in such a manner that she shall not be in contact with another of its species. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the intentional breeding of animals within an enclosed area with the consent of the animal owner and on the premises of the owner in accordance with the requirements as may be set forth in this chapter; or 
(8)  Odor or fly attraction. Harboring, owning, maintaining or permitting an animal on a property so as to offend a person of ordinary sensibilities living nearby or on near or adjacent property because of an offensive odor or unreasonable attraction of flies and other insects. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-4) 
Sec. 6-9. - Transporting animals in open bed trucks or trailers. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to transport in an open bed pickup or an open flatbed truck or to tow in an open flatbed trailer on a public street or highway while a dog or other animal occupies the bed of the truck or trailer unless the animal is secured in a kennel or other secure vented enclosure, restrained by a harness manufactured for the purpose of restraining animals, or restrained using a chain, rope, or other device cross-tied to prevent the animal from falling or jumping from the motor vehicle or from strangling on a single leash. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-8) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, Texas Penal Code  42.09 et seq. 
Sec. 6-10. - Animal in hot vehicle or trailer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to confine an animal in a parked or standing vehicle or enclosed trailer in such a way as to endanger the animal's health, safety, or welfare. It is presumed that an animal's health, safety, or welfare is endangered when the animal is confined in a parked or standing vehicle or enclosed trailer for a period of five or more minutes when the ambient outside air temperature measures at or above 85 degrees Fahrenheit or below 35 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(b)  The Animal Control Officer, City Police Officer or City Firefighter may take reasonable measures under the circumstances to remove an animal from a vehicle or trailer, if said City official reasonably believes that an emergency exists to preserve the animal's health, safety or welfare. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-9) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, Texas Penal Code  42.09 et seq. 
Sec. 6-11. - Tethering of animals. 
(a)  In addition to any State laws regarding restraining an animal by a chain, rope, tether, leash, cable, or other device to a stationary object or trolley system, including those set forth in Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 821, the following requirements apply: 
(1)  Only one animal may be restrained to each cable run; 
(2)  There must be a swivel on at least one end of the restraint device to minimize tangling; and 
(3)  When a restraint system is used to keep an animal from running at large, the tether system must be of appropriate configuration to confine the animal to the subject property. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for a person to confine an animal for a substantial portion of the day in an outdoor enclosure that provides less than 48 square feet of space for each animal that it contains that is at least six months old. It is presumed that an animal is being confined for a substantial portion of the day if a Police Officer, Animal Control Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, or the person charged with enforcing this chapter witnesses the animal in said enclosure at least twice on the same day at two separate times that are at least five hours apart. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-10) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, Texas Penal Code  42.09 et seq. 
Sec. 6-12. - Sale of animals. 
    Except as may be allowed pursuant to other applicable law, the outdoor sale of animals is prohibited. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-11) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, Texas Penal Code  42.09 et seq. 
Sec. 6-13. - Trapping of animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to use steel jaw or leg-hold traps except in the case of mouse and rat control. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-12) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, Texas Penal Code  42.09 et seq. 
Secs. 6-14-6-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 6-45. - Animal shelter. 
    The City maintains or ensures the availability of an animal shelter to impound animals, which shelter shall be open to the public during normal business hours. The animal shelter shall be considered the designated caretaker of a stray, impounded or surrendered animal immediately upon intake at the shelter. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-5(1)) 
Sec. 6-46. - Liability of animal owner or owner's agent. 
    Disposal or redemption of an animal by any method specified herein does not relieve the animal owner or owner's agent of liability for violations and/or accrued charges. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-7) 
Sec. 6-47. - Animals subject to impoundment. 
    Any animal found at large, found to be in violation of this chapter or which poses an immediate danger to the general public may be impounded by the Animal Control Authority and taken to the animal shelter. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-5(2)) 
Sec. 6-48. - Notification. 
    Upon impounding an animal, the Animal Control Authority shall make a reasonable effort to notify the registered owner and inform that person of the conditions whereby custody of the animal may be regained. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-5(3)) 
Sec. 6-49. - Redemption. 
(a)  Any animal impounded may be redeemed by the registered owner thereof within three days in which the shelter is open to the public during normal business hours upon payment of all applicable fees and signing of any citations which are to be issued. Payment of outstanding fees is not considered to be in lieu of a fine, penalty, or license fee. 
(b)  Any animal confined for rabies quarantine, evidence, or other purposes, once such purposes no longer exist, may be redeemed by the owner thereof upon payment of any fees and signing of any citations, as applicable. 
(c)  No animal may be redeemed until such animal is properly licensed and vaccinated when required. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-6) 
Sec. 6-50. - Unclaimed animals. 
    Animals not claimed by the registered owners within a period of three days in which the animal shelter is open to the public during normal business hours shall be subject to disposal by adoption, transfer or humane euthanasia. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City may deviate from this timeframe consistent with this chapter when dealing with a sick, injured, diseased, dangerous, and/or feral animal and when acting pursuant to the mutual agreement of the City and owner of an impounded animal, in a manner consistent with this chapter. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-5(4)) 
Sec. 6-51. - Sick animals impounded. 
    If at any time during impoundment, the Animal Control Authority determines an animal is in a state of disease, malnutrition, pain, suffering, or the like, the Animal Control Authority may choose to euthanize such animal or have such animal assessed by a licensed veterinarian. When having the animal assessed by a licensed veterinarian, the Animal Control Authority may make a determination as to the disposition of the animal after consideration of the cost of medical treatment, whether the owner of the animal can be located, whether the owner is willing or able to pay for such treatment, and whether euthanasia is recommended to prevent further suffering. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-5(5)) 
Sec. 6-52. - Impounded registered animals. 
    If an animal which has been delivered to the City is currently registered and has an identification tag, a microchip or other identification the City shall notify the owner or person responsible for the animal by posting written notice at the address of the registered location of the animal, by telephone, by email, by regular mail or by whatever reasonable method determined appropriate by the Animal Control Authority that such animal has been impounded. Notice shall be deemed sufficient if it is given pursuant to the information provided to the City for such registration or as indicated on the identifying tag, microchip or other identifying marker. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-5(6)) 
Secs. 6-53-6-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 6-78. - Rabies vaccination and license. 
(a)  Licensing. Except for those dogs and cats excepted from being licensed as set forth in this section, no person shall be an owner, keeper, or harborer of any dog or cat over four months of age within the City unless such animal is vaccinated and licensed as set forth herein. 
(b)  Requirements. The following requirements apply to licensing dogs and cats: 
(1)  The animal is over four months of age; 
(2)  The animal is vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 826; 
(3)  The following information is provided: 
a.  Name and address of pet owner; 
b.  Description of the pet; 
c.  Date of vaccination; 
d.  License number; 
e.  Permanent identification, if applicable (i.e., microchip, tattoo); 
f.  Other appropriate information; and 
g.  Brazos County Tag. 
(4)  Application for a license must be made to the Licensing Authority within 30 days after obtaining a dog or cat over four months of age; 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided, the licensing period will be for one year. Each applicant shall pay the appropriate fee annually and shall supply all information reasonably requested on forms supplied by the City; 
(6)  Licenses issued shall be of durable material and must be attached to the collar of the animal and must be worn at all times. A microchip may act as a secondary form of identification for duly licensed animals; 
(7)  Licenses are not transferable to other animals; and 
(8)  A license shall be issued after payment of the required fee. Persons who fail to obtain a license as required within the time period specified in this section may be subjected to a delinquent fee. License fees shall be waived for registered service dogs or government-owned dogs used by law enforcement. 
(c)  Exceptions. The following are excepted from the licensing provisions of this section: 
(1)  Licensed research facilities or animal shelters; 
(2)  An animal within the City for no longer than 60 days. New residents must apply for a license within 30 days of establishing residency within the City; 
(3)  A feral cat living in a managed feral cat colony as may be allowed pursuant to the provisions of this article and where registration of the managed colony is substituted; or 
(4)  An animal being housed in this jurisdiction temporarily following a natural or manmade disaster occurring in the animal's permanent home. This exemption is in effect for up to six months, at which time the animal becomes a permanent resident of the City and becomes subject to the licensing provisions of this section. 
(d)  Licensing by veterinarians. When so designated and when practicable, licensed veterinarians may be authorized to license a dog or cat in accordance with the terms and conditions of this section. In such instances, the veterinarians so authorized shall be responsible for determining eligibility for licensing, collection of the required information and fee, and dispensing of the license itself. In such instances, the veterinarian shall maintain records relating to such licensing and shall remit same along with the collected fees to the Licensing Authority on a regular basis. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-21) 
Sec. 6-79. - Maximum number. 
(a)  More than four dogs and cats prohibited. It is unlawful to harbor more than four dogs and cats over the age of six months in a dwelling unit unless permitted as set forth in this section and provided such use is in accordance with the City's applicable land use regulations. In this section, the term "dwelling unit" has the meaning given it in the City's Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
(b)  Permit. In addition to meeting all other requirements of this chapter, a person who wants to harbor more dogs and cats than allowed above must make application and be granted a multiple pet permit annually as set forth herein. 
(1)  Application. The application for a multiple pet permit must be made on a form prescribed by the City and shall include the following information: 
a.  The name, telephone number, and physical address of the applicant; 
b.  The total number of animals sought to be included under the permit and the species, breed, gender, and age of each animal; 
c.  The current, valid Brazos County Tag number for each animal listed in the application; 
d.  A statement affirming that the applicant is familiar with the provisions of this chapter and a promise to maintain all animals in accordance with applicable legal requirements; and 
e.  Any other information the City reasonably determines is necessary to issue a permit. 
(2)  Fee. The City may require payment of a fee when submitting an application hereunder. 
(3)  Consideration of permit. A permit shall be granted upon meeting the following criteria: 
a.  Submittal of a complete, accurate application, including payment of a fee, if any, and submittal of all required documentation; 
b.  Applicant has not been convicted of one or more violations of this chapter or of any law relating to the care and humane treatment of animals nor has failed to appear in court in response to such a charge within the past 12 months from date of application; 
c.  Applicant has not had a permit under this section previously revoked within the past 12 months from date of application; and 
d.  The address to which the permit relates is not the same as one for which a permit has been revoked within the past 12 months. 
(4)  Revocation of permit. A permit may be revoked in the event one or more of the following occur: 
a.  The application is incomplete, false or inaccurate; 
b.  The permit holder is convicted, receives deferred adjudication, or pleads guilty or no contest with respect to one or more sections of this chapter or any law relating the care and humane treatment of animals or fails to appear in court to respond to such a charge; or 
c.  The Animal Control Authority determines that specific circumstances exist indicating that it is in the best interests of the health and safety of the public to revoke the permit. 
(5)  Revocation process. The process for revoking a permit granted under this section is as follows: 
a.  The Animal Control Authority shall send written notice by certified mail to the current mailing address provided by the permit holder in its application identifying the reason for revocation; and 
b.  The permit holder shall have 30 days to appeal such determination in writing to the Municipal Court Judge. A hearing shall be held before the Judge. If the Judge determines that the permit holder meets the criteria for revocation such Judge shall order the revocation of the permit. The decision by the Municipal Court Judge shall be in writing and shall be final. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-22) 
Sec. 6-80. - At large. 
(a)  Except as set forth herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to allow any dog or cat to be at large within the City. 
(b)  Colonies of feral cats may be allowed if in accordance with a registered trap, neuter and release program approved by the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-23) 
Sec. 6-81. - Guard dogs. 
    The following requirements apply for guard dogs located in the City: 
(1)  Posting sign. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a guard dog unattended in any place in or out of a building unless a clearly visible warning sign is placed advising others of same before entering the place to which the dog has access. 
(2)  Unattended guard dog. No guard dog shall be left unattended in any place except inside a building or other structure that will not allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. 
(3)  Required fencing. No guard dog shall be let out of doors unless it is in a fenced yard with a fence adequate to prevent the dog from leaving the premises. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-26) 
Sec. 6-82. - Unlawful release of dog or cat. 
    It shall be unlawful to release a dog or cat that is lawfully tethered, leashed or stabled within a lot, pen or similar type of enclosure or confinement without the consent of the owner of such animal. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-27) 
Secs. 6-83-6-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dangerous dogs, Texas Health and Safety Code  822.041 et seq.; local regulation of dangerous dogs, Texas Health and Safety Code  822.047. 

Sec. 6-108. - General. 
    The determination and processing of dangerous dogs in the City shall commence with an investigation conducted by the Animal Control Authority in accordance with Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 822. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-31) 
Sec. 6-109. - Alternative process. 
    Alternatively, the City herein elects to make available an alternative determination and processing of a dangerous dog pursuant to Texas Health and Safety Code  822.0422 commencing with making a report of an incident meeting the definition of dangerous dog to a City Municipal Court and following the procedure set forth therein. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-32) 
Sec. 6-110. - Violation declared. 
(a)  It is a violation of this article if an owner or other person harbors, keeps, or maintains a dangerous dog in the City unless the owner complies with the requirements of this article and State statutes regulating dangerous dogs. 
(b)  It is a violation of this article if an owner or other person harbors, keeps, maintains in the City, or brings to the City, a dog that has been declared dangerous outside of the City under one or more of the following: 
(1)  Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 822; 
(2)  A local law or ordinance adopted in accordance with Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 822; or 
(3)  A statute or ordinance that is substantially similar to Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 822 and that was adopted by a political subdivision outside of the State. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-33) 
Sec. 6-111. - Dangerous dog incident. 
    A dangerous dog incident means an incident in which the dog: 
(1)  Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog is being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or 
(2)  Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own, and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-34) 
Sec. 6-112. - Dangerous dog investigation. 
    The Animal Control Authority or designee may investigate all reports of dangerous dog incidents. The Animal Control Authority may accept sworn statements from all victims and witnesses to the attack. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-35) 
Sec. 6-113. - Reporting of incident. 
    Dangerous dog incidents may be reported in the following ways: 
(1)  A person may report an incident described in Section 6-111 to the Animal Control Authority. 
(2)  The Animal Control Authority shall provide a sworn report describing the dangerous dog incident to the City Attorney's Office. 
(3)  The City Attorney's Office shall evaluate the case and determine whether to initiate a dangerous dog proceeding with the Municipal Court ("Court"). If such a proceeding is initiated, the Court shall order the Animal Control Authority or designee to seize the dog and the Court shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The Animal Control Authority shall seize the dog and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the Court determines one of the following: 
a.  That the dog is not a dangerous dog; 
b.  That the dog is a dangerous dog and the Court or Animal Control Authority finds the owner has complied with the ownership of a dangerous dog pursuant to Section 6-116; or 
c.  That the dog should be humanely destroyed or is deceased. 
(4)  The Animal Control Authority shall furnish written notice to the owner of the dog identified in the report to inform the owner that a dangerous dog report has been filed with the Court. Notice shall be by hand delivery to the owner of the dog. If the owner cannot be located, notice shall be delivered to any adult at the dog owner's last known physical address or to any adult at the residence where the dog is believed to be kept, if at a location different than the owner's physical address. The notice shall also include a statement that the owner will be notified by the court of the date and time for a hearing if this time has not yet been set by the court. 
(5)  If the court determines the dog to be a dangerous dog, the owner shall pay all costs and/or fees assessed by the Municipality related to the seizure and impoundment of the dog, including, but not limited to, boarding fees, microchip procedure, City license and rabies vaccination, and the cost of euthanasia of the dog if ordered by the Court. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-36) 
Sec. 6-114. - Failure to surrender dog. 
    It shall be a separate violation of this Code for any person to refuse or fail to surrender a dog subject to this article, or harbor, hide or secret, transport or secure the transport of a dog subject to this article, for the purpose of preventing its impoundment. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-38) 
Sec. 6-115. - Judicial determination that dog is a dangerous dog. 
(a)  The Court, after determining that the dog is a dangerous dog, shall order the Animal Control Authority to continue to impound the dangerous dog in secure and humane conditions until such time as: 
(1)  The Court orders disposition of the dog and the dog is returned to the owner; 
(2)  The Court orders disposition of the dog and the dog is thereby humanely destroyed; or 
(3)  The dog is deceased. 
(b)  The Court shall order the Animal Control Authority to humanely destroy the dog if the Court determines after notice and hearing that the owner has not complied with the dangerous dog requirements in Section 6-116. The Court shall order the authority to return the dog to the owner if the owner has fully complied with Section 6-116 either after a hearing or without a hearing based on the recommendation of the Animal Control Authority that the owner has complied with Section 6-116. 
(c)  The owner may appeal the decision of the Court by following the appropriate procedures for appeal of a decision of Municipal Court. 
(1)  During the appeal period, the dog shall remain in the custody, care and control of the Animal Control Authority. 
(2)  If the appeal is ultimately unsuccessful, the owner of the dog shall be responsible for the dog's impoundment fees during the period the case was being appealed. 
(d)  Animal Control may, at their option, request the owner of a dangerous dog to show proof, on a quarterly basis, of compliance with this article. If Animal Control determines that the owner of a dangerous dog has failed to comply with any requirement listed in Section 6-116 (Requirements for Owner of a Dangerous Dog), the Animal Control Authority shall issue notice of noncompliance to the owner of the dangerous dog and said owner shall deliver the dog immediately to the Animal Control Authority. 
(e)  If the Animal Control Authority is not in receipt of the dog within 48 hours after delivery of the notice, then the Court shall order the Animal Control Authority or designee to seize the dog and the Court shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The Animal Control Authority shall seize the dog and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions. After the expiration of three days, if the owner of the dangerous dog has not sufficiently presented proof to the Animal Control Authority of compliance with Section 6-116, the Animal Control Authority shall refer the case to the Municipal Court for notice and hearing. 
(f)  Upon proof to the court of the dangerous dog owner's noncompliance, the Court shall enter a final order for the humane destruction of the dog by the Animal Control Authority or its authorized agent or a licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-39) 
Sec. 6-116. - Requirements for owner of a dangerous dog. 
    The owner of a dangerous dog shall pay all costs and/or fees assessed by the Municipality related to the seizure and impoundment of the dog, including, but not limited to, boarding fees, microchip procedure, City license and rabies vaccination, and the cost of euthanasia of the dog if ordered by the Court. Not later than the 30th day after a person learns that the person is the owner of a dangerous dog, the person shall: 
(1)  Registration. Register the dangerous dog with the Animal Control Authority and pay an annual registration fee in the amount established in Section 2-117; 
(2)  Liability insurance. Obtain and maintain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person and provide proof of the required liability insurance coverage or financial responsibility to the Animal Control Authority; 
(3)  Microchip implant. Implant and maintain a microchip on the dangerous dog. The dog's microchip shall be registered with a national registry. The cost of the national registry service shall be at the owner's expense; 
(4)  Required leash and collar. Restrain the dangerous dog on a leash and collar issued or approved by the City to ensure, among other things, the visibility of the dangerous dog when out in public, the security of the leash, the length of the leash, and the overall safety of the general public. Collars shall be worn by dangerous dogs at all times and collars shall remain visible at distances of at least 50 feet in normal day light so that the dog can be readily identified as dangerous; 
(5)  Physical control. Be in physical control of the dangerous dog when restrained on a leash and the person in physical control of the leash must be at least 17 years of age; 
(6)  Required muzzle. Secure the dangerous dog with a muzzle in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog nor interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal when the dangerous dog is taken off the property of the owner for any reason; 
(7)  Secure enclosure. Restrain the dangerous dog at all times in a secure enclosure, as defined in Section 6-1 (Definitions; Secured Enclosure), when the dangerous dog is not restrained on a leash. The enclosure shall be posted with signs on all sides in four-inch letters warning of the presence of a dangerous dog and shall include a symbol of dangerous dogs understandable by young children; 
(8)  Spay or neuter. Surgically spay or neuter the dangerous dog and show proof of such to the Animal Control Authority; 
(9)  Rabies vaccinations and licenses. Maintain current rabies vaccinations and proper licenses on the dangerous dog; 
(10)  Change of address. Notify the Animal Control Authority within 14 days of a change of ownership or change of address of the dangerous dog; 
(11)  Notifications to third parties. Notify any boarding facility, caretaker, veterinary clinic or animal trainer that the dog is dangerous prior to going to such location or person and shall notify the Animal Control Authority of the same; 
(12)  Notification to Animal Control. Notify the Animal Control Authority when the dangerous dog is no longer owned by the registrant or is deceased. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-40) 
Secs. 6-117-6-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LIVESTOCK, BIRDS, EXOTIC ANIMALS AND WILD ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-146. - Keeping of domestic livestock. 
    Keeping of domestic livestock is allowed in accordance with the zoning land use regulations of the City set forth for an R Rural Zone, WE Wellborn Estate Zone, and an E Estate Zone as same may from time to time be amended and by meeting the regulations in this article. When allowed pursuant to the zoning land use regulations of the City, the following additional requirements apply for domestic livestock: 
(1)  Not allowed to be at large. Domestic livestock shall be kept within structures or enclosures or lawfully tethered and not permitted to run at large. 
(2)  Avoid creation of health hazard. An owner of domestic livestock shall be responsible for the proper pickup and disposal of all animal feces. Feces must be removed often enough so that there is no odor or fly attraction which would disturb a person of normal sensibilities or otherwise constitute a health hazard. 
(3)  Distance requirements. The structure or enclosure within which the livestock may be confined shall be not less than 100 feet from any structure used for human occupancy, except the dwelling occupied by the owner of the domestic livestock. A deviation from this distance may be considered upon the owner making proper application before the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
(4)  Contact information. The owner of the livestock shall post their contact information at all entrances to the livestock enclosure, including their name, address, and telephone numbers. 
(5)  Proof of vaccinations. The owner of the domestic livestock shall make available to the Animal Control Authority proof of current vaccinations as may be required pursuant to applicable law, including Brucellosis for all cattle 18 months of age and over except steers and spayed heifers per 4 T.A.C. ch. 35, and a negative test for Equine Infectious Anemia for horses, mules, and donkeys as required under 4 T.A.C. ch. 49, for horses at an event or gathering, horses in stables or breeding farms, or any horse that has had a change of ownership. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-51; Ord. No. 2016-3793, exh. A(2-51), 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 6-147. - Fowl. 
(a)  Keeping allowed without permit. Keeping of fowl is allowed in accordance with the zoning land use regulations of the City set forth for an R Rural Zone, WE Wellborn Estate Zone, and an E Estate Zone as same may from time to time be amended and by meeting the regulations in this article. 
(b)  Keeping allowed with permit. Keeping of fowl is allowed in all single-family residential zones consistent with the land use regulations therein for such zone as same may from time to time be amended, and upon issuance of a permit and by meeting other applicable regulations as set forth herein. 
(c)  Permit requirements. The following is required to be issued a permit for keeping of fowl in a single-family residential zone: 
(1)  An application must be completely and accurately filled out and submitted to the City identifying the location, contact information for the owner of the property and the owner of the fowl, type and number of fowl, type of enclosure, distance from adjacent residences other than applicant's, and other pertinent information; and 
(2)  Payment of a fee as may be imposed by the City Council. 
(d)  Keeping fowl in enclosures. It shall be the duty of the owner of fowl to keep same enclosed in such manner that the fowl cannot go upon public streets, highways, alleys, rights-of-way or parkways of the City, or upon the private property of others. Any enclosure that houses fowl must be at least 100 feet from any dwelling other than the dwelling occupied by the owner of the fowl. A deviation from this distance may be considered upon the owner making proper application before the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
(e)  Roosters prohibited. It is unlawful to own, keep, harbor, or to maintain or to possess a rooster within the City limits. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-52; Ord. No. 2016-3793, exh. A(2-52), 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 6-148. - Birds. 
    It shall be the duty of the person owning, or having management or control of, any birds, including, but not limited to, fowl, pheasants, quail, peacocks, doves, parrots, tropical birds, falcons, hawks and similarly feathered animals, to keep same enclosed upon the person's premises in such manner that such birds cannot go upon the public streets, highways, alleys, rights-of-way, parks or parkways of the City, or upon the private property of others unless first obtaining written permission from the property owner. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-53) 
Sec. 6-149. - Hogs and pigs prohibited. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and keep any hog or pig within the City except as may be allowed pursuant to the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A) and except for pot-bellied pigs as set forth below. 
(b)  Pot-bellied pigs. Pot-bellied pigs are permitted to be in the City in accordance with the provisions set forth herein. 
(1)  No more than two pot-bellied pigs may be kept on any one parcel or tract of land in a residentially zoned district and in accordance with applicable land use regulations; 
(2)  Pot-bellied pigs are permitted in only residentially or agriculturally zoned districts; 
(3)  The premises where any such pigs are kept shall be kept clean and free of all offensive odors, flies, rodents or other pests. Droppings shall be placed in the suitable container and disposed of on a regular basis; 
(4)  No such pigs may be bred within a residentially zoned district; 
(5)  All male pot-bellied pigs in the City in a residentially zoned district must be neutered; 
(6)  All pot-bellied pigs must have their tusks either surgically removed or trimmed so as to be blunted at all times; 
(7)  All pot-bellied pigs must be vaccinated against communicable diseases and in accordance with general guidelines from the American Veterinary Medical Association; 
(8)  All such pigs must be licensed by the City upon making proper application as set forth herein and upon the payment of an annual license fee as may be set by the City Council. In order to obtain a license, the owner of the pig must present the following: 
a.  Proof that the pig, if male, is neutered if located in a residentially zoned district and that the tusks are either trimmed as required above or have been surgically removed; 
b.  The address and property description where the pig will be kept; 
c.  The name and contact information of the owner; 
d.  The approximate weight, height, gender, general health and age of the animal; and 
e.  Immunization records as required; 
(9)  All such pigs shall display the City license affixed to a collar at all times. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-54) 
Sec. 6-150. - Rabbits. 
(a)  Keeping allowed without permit. Keeping of rabbits is allowed in accordance with the zoning land use regulations of the City set forth for an R Rural Zone, WE Wellborn Estate Zone, and an E Estate Zone as same may from time to time be amended and by meeting the regulations in this article. 
(b)  Keeping allowed with permit. Keeping of rabbits is allowed in all single-family residential zones consistent with applicable land use regulations, and upon issuance of a permit and by meeting other regulations as set forth herein. 
(c)  Permit requirements. The following is required to be issued a permit for keeping of rabbits in a single-family residential zone: 
(1)  An application must be completely and accurately filled out and submitted to the City identifying the location, contact information for the owner of the property and the owner of the rabbits, type and number of rabbits, type of enclosure, distance from adjacent residences other than applicant's, and other pertinent information; 
(2)  Payment of a fee as may be established in Section 2-117. 
(d)  Additional requirements. A person with a lawfully issued permit may keep, harbor, own, or maintain on such person's premises up to ten rabbits except more may be allowed if the person is lawfully involved in an Agricultural Youth Project under the supervision of a County Extension Agent, interest group leader or agriculture teacher employed by the independent school district and the rabbits are kept no longer than 180 days. 
(e)  Keeping rabbits in enclosures. It shall be the duty of the owner of rabbits to keep same enclosed upon the owner's premises in such manner that the rabbits cannot go upon public streets, highways, alleys, rights-of-way or parkways of the City, or upon the private property of others. Any enclosure that houses rabbits must be at least 100 feet from any dwelling other than the dwelling occupied by the owner of the rabbits unless the person is lawfully involved in an Agricultural Youth Project under the supervision of a County Extension Agent, interest group leader or agriculture teacher employed by the independent school district in which case there shall be no distance requirement. In other instances, a deviation from the distance requirement may be considered upon the owner making proper application before the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-55; Ord. No. 2016-3793, exh. A(2-55), 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 6-151. - Ferrets. 
(a)  General. It is unlawful to harbor more than two ferrets over the age of six months in a dwelling unit. Such ferrets must be permitted as set forth in this section and be in accordance with the City's applicable land use regulations. In this section, the term "dwelling unit" has the meaning given it in the City's Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
(b)  Vaccination requirements. Ferrets must be currently vaccinated against rabies at all times. 
(c)  Permit requirements. The following is required to be issued a permit for ferrets: 
(1)  An application must be completely and accurately filled out and submitted to the City identifying the location, contact information of the owner and occupant of the dwelling unit, type and number of ferrets at such dwelling unit, type of enclosure, proof of vaccination, and other pertinent information; and 
(2)  Payment of a fee as may be established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-56; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 6-152. - Ostriches, emus, and rheas prohibited. 
    Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain and keep any ostrich, emu or rhea within the City limits. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-57) 
Sec. 6-153. - Keeping of certain animals prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, offer for sale, barter, trade, keep, own, maintain, use or have in a person's possession or on premises under such person's control any of the following: 
(1)  Any dangerous animal except as provided in Section 6-116, pursuant to a final determination that the animal is dangerous; or 
(2)  Any prohibited animal as defined under Section 6-7, unless that person is a person exempted by Texas Health and Safety Code  822.102. 
(b)  A prohibited animal is exempt from this section if: 
(1)  The animal belongs to a bona fide zoological park, circus, educational institution, museum, licensed laboratory, publicly owned nature center, or animals kept by bona fide members of an educational or scientific association or society approved by the Animal Control Authority, or persons holding permits from an agency of the State or the United States for the care and keeping of animals for rehabilitation purposes. If a person holds a permit from the Texas State Department of Parks and Wildlife to operate a wildcare center in the City, the permit holder must also comply with the City Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A), as amended, and must keep any and all animals or reptiles in cages of sufficient size, construction and strength to restrain the animal or reptile at all times; or 
(2)  The animal is an assistance or service animal as defined herein, that has been registered with the City and has provided to the Animal Control Authority: 
a.  Records of vaccination appropriate for the species of animal; 
b.  Documentation from a veterinarian that the animal is healthy; 
c.  Proof of proper restraint for the animal; and 
d.  Proof that the animal has been or is being trained to perform tasks of an assistance or service animal. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-58) 
Sec. 6-154. - Harboring exotic animals, including exotic livestock. 
    Unless expressly prohibited elsewhere in this chapter, exotic animals, including exotic livestock, shall be allowed in accordance with applicable laws, including zoning regulations, provided they are vaccinated against communicable diseases and in accordance with general guidelines from the American Veterinary Medical Association. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  2-59) 
Chapter 8 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Vending machines. 
(a)  All vending machines placed anywhere in the City shall have the following information printed on the exterior thereof, in easily visible type or other permanent lettering: 
(1)  The name of the person responsible for maintenance of the machine and for making refunds to individuals who lose money in the machines; 
(2)  A current operating telephone number where the person identified in Subsection (1) of this section can be reached during regular business hours; 
(3)  The current street or mailing address of the person identified in Subsection (1) of this section. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-2) 
Sec. 8-2. - Garage sales. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garage sale, back yard sale, yard sale, or porch sale means a sale or an offer for sale of miscellaneous items to the general public, upon residential property not otherwise being used for commercial purposes. 
    Occupant means either the owner-occupant of the premises whereon such sale is to be conducted, or the tenant of the owner, provided such tenant is actually residing upon such premises, and dependent members of the immediate family of such owner, occupant, or tenant. 
(b)  Garage sale regulations. 
(1)  No sign, directional or otherwise, shall be erected within the City limits, except on the property of the individual conducting the garage sale. 
(2)  No person other than the occupant shall conduct a garage sale. No occupant shall conduct a garage sale if such a sale has been conducted by the occupant upon the same property or premises within the period of six months immediately preceding the date of the commencement of the proposed sale. One exception is a new occupant of a residence who may conduct such a sale, with any subsequent sale to be at a six-month interval. 
(3)  No person shall sell or offer for sale at a garage sale merchandise other than used and discarded items of personal property. 
(4)  No garage sale shall be conducted for a period in excess of 72 consecutive hours. 
(5)  The garage sale shall be conducted in such a manner by the occupant so as not to create a disturbance or become a nuisance in the neighborhood. 
(c)  Penalty for violations. A violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-5) 
Secs. 8-3-8-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RETAIL BUSINESS SECURITY 

Sec. 8-23. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Convenience goods means basic food and drink items, household products and goods and pharmaceutical items. 
    Employee means any person who is employed in consideration of direct or indirect monetary wages, commissions, or profits, any contract employee and any other person engaged in store operation. 
    Height strip means markings to aid in estimating the height of suspects. 
    Manager means the person designated by the owner to be responsible for the daily store operation. 
    Owner means the person, individual, group, corporation, partnership, joint venture or other group enterprise licensed to do business, hold title or lease property for the operation of the store. 
    Police Department means the College Station Police Department. 
    Security camera surveillance means a system of cameras designed to capture and store video data in a store for security purposes. 
    Store means a convenience store or gas station selling convenience goods and a liquor store containing less than 10,000 square feet of retail sales space. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-24(A)) 
Sec. 8-24. - Violation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, owner or manager to violate the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any person, owner, employee, manager or supervisor not in compliance with or in violation of this article shall punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-24(J)) 
Sec. 8-25. - Registration of stores. 
(a)  General. All stores must register with the Police Department. No fee will be charged for the registration. 
(b)  Inspection. Stores will be inspected by the Police Department to ensure compliance. 
(c)  Application. The store owner shall register by providing the Police Department the following information on an application form approved by the City: 
(1)  The name, telephone number, facsimile number and email address. 
(2)  Business or residence address of the owner. 
(3)  If the owner is a corporation, whether foreign or domestic, the name of the registered agent of the owner and the telephone number and facsimile number, email address and business or residence address of the registered agent, which address information shall include the street name and number, office or suite number if a business address, and the city, state, and zip code. 
(4)  The nature and extent of the owner's interest in the property. 
(5)  The name, telephone number, facsimile number, email and business or residence address, including street name and number, city, state and zip code, of the current manager and, if the manager is other than an individual, the name, title, telephone number, facsimile number and business or residence address, including street name and number, city, state and zip code, of the individual to be contacted for any purpose under this article relating to the convenience store. 
(6)  The use of a public or private post office box or other non-physical similar address shall not be sufficient for the purposes of complying with this Subsection (c). 
(d)  Change in ownership. Any store ownership change, including, but not limited to, the sale of the store or any ownership interest therein, shall require the purchaser or transferee to update the registration information and to file the updated information with the Police Department within 30 days of the effective date of the ownership change. The same requirement shall apply to any change relating to the owner's registered agent and manager. A prior owner shall advise the Police Department that such person no longer holds any ownership interest in the property. 
(e)  New stores. The owner of a newly constructed, remodeled or established store shall comply with this section within 30 days of receiving their Certificate of Occupancy. 
(f)  Application acceptance. After a store owner complies with the provisions of this section, the Police Department will provide the store: 
(1)  A registration compliance decal or sign to be displayed conspicuously at a public entrance door to the store. 
(2)  A registration statement to be displayed conspicuously at a public entrance door to the store. 
(g)  Compliance. Compliance with the requirements of this section shall be deemed to meet the requirements of Texas Local Government Code  250.003 and 250.004. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-24(B)) 
Sec. 8-26. - Store owner and manager requirements. 
(a)  Store owners shall: 
(1)  Have and maintain in an operable condition security camera surveillance monitoring, recording and storage equipment in the store. 
(2)  Maintain and back up all security camera surveillance data for 21 days. 
(3)  Understand operation and retrieve data from the security camera surveillance system. 
(4)  Post readable signage in a conspicuous place at all public points of entry and exit indicating security camera surveillance is used at the store. 
(5)  Provide any law enforcement agency investigating a crime a copy of the security camera surveillance data and full access to the security camera surveillance system immediately or as soon as practical upon law enforcement's request. 
(6)  Properly train managers how to use and retrieve data from the security camera surveillance system. 
(7)  Install and maintain a height strip and all signage required by this article. 
(b)  Store managers shall: 
(1)  Understand how to use and retrieve data from the security camera surveillance system. 
(2)  Assist the store owner and their superiors to ensure security camera surveillance monitoring, recording and storage equipment is in operation and functional at all times, even during times the store is closed. 
(3)  Report nonfunctioning security camera surveillance monitoring, recording or storage equipment immediately to their superior and the owner. 
(4)  Provide any law enforcement agency investigating a crime a copy of the security camera surveillance data and full access to the security camera surveillance system immediately or as soon as practical upon law enforcement's request. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-24(C)) 
Sec. 8-27. - Security camera surveillance locations. 
(a)  Points of entry and exit. Cameras shall be located at all public entrances and exits to capture clear frames of individual's faces. 
(b)  Point of sale locations. Cameras shall be located at all point of sale locations to capture the cash register, money drawer and credit transaction area to capture clear frames of individual's faces on both sides of the counter, register or money drawer. 
(c)  Fuel pump area. Cameras shall be located in a position to capture fuel pump areas. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-24(D)) 
Sec. 8-28. - Security camera surveillance equipment requirements. 
(a)  Security surveillance cameras must: 
(1)  Record in a digital color format and in high-resolution. 
(2)  Display the correct date and time of the recording. 
(3)  Capture clear images in darkness or low lighting. 
(b)  Data captured on the security camera surveillance system hard drive, server or cloud storage system must be in a retrievable format and must be able to be retrieved on an external device and must retain the highest resolution for a stored file. 
(c)  The data provided must contain the appropriate software, viewer or codec necessary for playing the video on a system other than the parent security camera surveillance system and computers. 
(d)  Security camera surveillance system and computer hard drive, server, or cloud storage system must have enough storage space to store 21 days of recorded data and must be capable of a system back up. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-24(E)) 
Sec. 8-29. - Safe. 
(a)  A store owner shall have a safe on the premises to keep the amount of cash available to employees to a minimum. 
(b)  A store owner shall have a cash accountability policy mandating the maximum amounts of cash that can be kept in cash registers. 
(c)  A store owner shall have posted at all public exits and entrances conspicuous signs stating employees cannot open the safe and employees have minimal cash on hand. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-24(F)) 
Sec. 8-30. - Security signs and height strips. 
(a)  Security signs. A store owner shall have posted at all public exits and entrances, front, sides and rear of the store "No Loitering" and "No Trespassing" signs in lettering two inches or larger. 
(b)  Height strips. A store owner shall have height strips posted at all public exits. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-24(G)) 
Sec. 8-31. - Alarm system. 
(a)  A store owner shall have a silent panic or holdup alarm system on premises. This system shall, at a minimum, include a panic button located within reach of the cash register and out of view of the customer. The panic button will generate an alarm signal indicating a holdup or other life-threatening emergency requiring an emergency response. 
(b)  A store owner shall have posted at all public exits and entrances signs indicating a security alarm system is in use by the store. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-24(H)) 
Sec. 8-32. - Trespass affidavit. 
    A store owner shall execute a trespass affidavit as promulgated by the Police Department in order to enforce all applicable trespass laws on the owners at the store. A true and correct copy of the trespass affidavit shall be posted at the convenience store at all times in a conspicuous place accessible at all times to the public. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-24(I)) 
Secs. 8-33-8-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CREDIT ACCESS BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Credit services organizations, Texas Finance Code ch. 393. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-53. - Short title. 
    This article may be known and cited as the "Credit Access Businesses Regulation." 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(A)) 
Sec. 8-54. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certificate of registration means a certificate of registration issued by the director under this article to the owner or operator of a credit access business. 
    Consumer means an individual who is solicited to purchase or who purchases the services of a credit access business. 
    Consumer's language of preference means the language the consumer understands best. 
    Credit access business has the meaning given that term in Texas Finance Code  393.601. 
    Deferred presentment transaction has the meaning given that term in Texas Finance Code  393.601. 
    Director means the director of the department designated by the City Council, City Manager, or City Council or City Manager's designee, to enforce and administer this article. 
    Extension of consumer credit has the meaning given that term in Texas Finance Code  393.001. 
    Motor vehicle title loan has the meaning given that term in Texas Finance Code  393.601. 
    Registrant means a person issued a certificate of registration for a credit access business under this article and includes all owners and operators of the credit access business identified in the registration application filed under this article. 
    State license means a license to operate a credit access business issued by the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under Texas Finance Code ch. 393, subch. G (Texas Finance Code  393.601 et seq.). 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(C); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-55. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required of the person by this article, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense for each and every violation relating to an extension of consumer credit, and for each day during which a violation is committed, permitted, or continued. 
(b)  An offense under this article is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(c)  A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article and need not be proved. 
(d)  The penalties provided for in Subsection (b) of this section are in addition to any other remedies that the City may have under City ordinances and State law. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(D)) 
State Law reference- Penalty for ordinance violations, Texas Local Government Code  54.001; penalty when no culpable mental state required, Texas Penal Code  6.02. 
Sec. 8-56. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the welfare of the citizens of the City by monitoring credit access businesses in an effort to reduce abusive and predatory lending practices. To this end, this article establishes a registration program for credit access businesses, imposes restrictions on extensions of consumer credit made by credit access businesses, and imposes recordkeeping requirements on credit access businesses. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(B)) 
Sec. 8-57. - Defenses. 
    It is a defense to prosecution under this article that at the time of the alleged offense the person was not required to be licensed by the State as a credit access business under Texas Finance Code ch. 393, subch. G (Texas Finance Code  393.601 et seq.). 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(E)) 
Sec. 8-58. - Maintenance of records. 
(a)  A credit access business shall maintain a complete set of records of all extensions of consumer credit arranged or obtained by the credit access business, which mush include the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the consumer; 
(2)  The principal amount of cash actually advanced; 
(3)  The length of the extension of consumer credit, including the number of installments and renewals; 
(4)  The fees charged by the credit access business to arrange or obtain an extension of consumer credit; and 
(5)  The documentation used to establish a consumer's income under Section 8-59(c). 
(b)  A credit access business shall maintain a copy of each written agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of a consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer). 
(c)  A credit access business shall maintain copies of all quarterly reports filed with the Texas Consumer Credit Commissioner under Texas Finance Code  393.627. 
(d)  The records required to be maintained by a credit access business under this section must be retained for at least three years and made available for inspection by the City upon request during the usual and customary business hours of the credit access business. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(K)) 
Sec. 8-59. - Restriction on extension of consumer credit. 
(a)  The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a deferred presentment transaction may not exceed 20 percent of the consumer's gross monthly income. 
(b)  The cash advanced under an extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining in the form of a motor vehicle title loan may not exceed the lesser of: 
(1)  Three percent of the consumer's gross annual income; or 
(2)  70 percent of the retail value of the motor vehicle. 
(c)  A credit access business shall use a paycheck or other documentation establishing income to determine a consumer's income. 
(d)  An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for repayment in installments may not be payable in more than four installments. Proceeds from each installment must be used to repay at least 25 percent of the principal amount of the extension of consumer credit. An extension of consumer credit that provides for repayment in installments may not be refinanced or renewed. 
(e)  An extension of consumer credit that a credit access business obtains for a consumer or assists a consumer in obtaining and that provides for a single lump sum repayment may not be refinanced or renewed more than three times. Proceeds from each refinancing or renewal must be used to repay at least 25 percent of the principal amount of the original extension of consumer credit. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, an extension of consumer credit that is made to a consumer within seven days after a previous extension of consumer credit has been paid by the consumer will constitute a refinancing or renewal. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(L)) 
Sec. 8-60. - Requirement of consumer understanding of agreement. 
(a)  Every agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer) must be written in the consumer's language of preference. Every credit access business location must maintain on its premises, to be available for use by consumers, agreements in the English and Spanish languages. 
(b)  For every consumer who cannot read, every agreement between the credit access business and a consumer evidencing an extension of consumer credit (including, but not limited to, any refinancing or renewal granted to the consumer) must be read to the consumer in its entirety in the consumer's language of preference, prior to the consumer's signature. 
(c)  For every consumer who cannot read, every disclosure and notice required by law must be read to the consumers in its entirety in the consumer's language of preference, prior to the consumer's signature. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(M)) 
Sec. 8-61. - Referral to consumer credit counseling. 
    A credit access business shall provide a form, to be prescribed by the Director, to each consumer seeking assistance in obtaining an extension of consumer credit which references nonprofit agencies that provide financial education and training programs and agencies with cash assistance programs. The form will also contain information regarding extensions of consumer credit, and must include the information required by Section 8-58(a) specific to the loan agreement with the consumer. If the Director has prescribed a form in the consumer's language of preference, the form must be provided in the consumer's language of preference. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(N)) 
Secs. 8-62-8-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 8-81. - Required. 
    A person commits an offense if the person acts, operates, or conducts businesses as a credit access business without a valid certificate of registration. A certificate of registration is required for each physically separate credit access business. A fee established in Section 2-117 is established for each physically separate credit access business within the City limits. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(F); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-82. - Application. 
(a)  To obtain a certificate of registration for a credit access business, a person must submit an application on a form provided for that purpose to the Director. The application must contain the following: 
(1)  The name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  The business or trade name, street address, mailing address, facsimile number, and telephone number of the credit access business. 
(3)  The names, street addresses, mailing addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of the credit access business, and the nature and extent of each person's interest in the credit access business. 
(4)  A copy of a current, valid State license held by the credit access business pursuant to Texas Finance Code ch. 393, subch. G (Texas Finance Code  393.601 et seq.). 
(5)  A copy of a current, valid Certificate of Occupancy showing that the credit access business is in compliance with this Code. 
(6)  A nonrefundable application fee for the amount established. 
(b)  An applicant or registrant shall notify the Director within 45 days after any material change in the information contained in the application for a certificate of registration, including, but not limited to, any change of address and any change in the status of the State license held by the applicant or registrant. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(G)) 
Sec. 8-83. - Issuance and display of certificate of registration; presentment upon request. 
(a)  The director shall issue to the applicant a certificate of registration upon receiving a completed application under Section 8-82. 
(b)  A certificate of registration issued under this division must be conspicuously displayed to the public in the credit access business. The certificate of registration must be presented upon request to the Director or any Peace Officer for examination. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(H)) 
Sec. 8-84. - Expiration and renewal of certificate of registration. 
(a)  A certificate of registration expires on the earliest of: 
(1)  One year after the date of issuance; or 
(2)  The date of revocation, suspension, surrender, expiration without renewal, or other termination of the registrant's State license. 
(b)  A certificate of registration may be renewed by making application in accordance with Section 8-82. A registrant shall apply for renewal at least 30 days before the expiration of the registration. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(I)) 
Sec. 8-85. - Non-transferability. 
    A certificate of registration for a credit access business is not transferable. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-17(J)) 
Secs. 8-86-8-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GRAVEDIGGERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-114. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Close or closing means the covering of the interred remains and restoration of the surface in such a manner as to reduce subsequent settlement of the overlaying soil; all as performed under the provisions of this article. 
    Open or opening means the excavation of the earth's surface for the purpose of interring casketed or cremated human remains, including outer containers, in such a manner as to provide stable earthen walls for the period that a grave shall remain open; all as performed under the provisions of this article. 
    Person means any individual, partnership or corporation engaged or engaging in the activity regulated hereunder. 
    Related services means and includes the provision of functions traditionally related or incidental to cemeteries, such as the furnishing and/or setting up of cemetery equipment for graveside services such as tents, chairs, etc. This does not apply to the setting of monuments. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-16(A)) 
Sec. 8-115. - General regulations. 
(a)  A licensee shall have available sufficient personnel, supplies and machinery to accomplish grave opening services within a reasonable period of time. A reasonable period of time for the opening and closing of a grave shall be presumed to be six hours. No licensee shall proceed to open or close a grave without prior location of the site by the City Manager or designee. 
(b)  A licensee shall be responsible for the opening and closing of any grave when requested, whether or not the cemetery lot is accessible to machinery. This provision contemplates that a licensee may have to open some graves by hand if weather or location of a cemetery lot so requires. A licensee is responsible for maintaining an open grave until interment and closing is complete, including removal of water or support of the sides of a grave opening. A licensee shall replace any monuments removed for any reason in their original location and condition. 
(c)  A licensee shall exercise reasonable care to avoid damage to roads, landscaping, monuments, mausoleums, or other infrastructure as a result of the licensee's operations. 
(d)  A licensee shall clean up, regrade and level all sites before leaving the site of a grave after closing. Excess dirt removal will be the responsibility of a licensee, who shall cooperate with the City Manager or designee in determining the location of disposal. Disposal of excess dirt shall be accomplished immediately after closure of a grave, unless weather conditions prevent same. The City Manager or designee may direct the disposition of excess dirt outside the cemetery. 
(e)  A licensee shall ensure that all graves are dug to a depth sufficient to ensure compliance with any State law, regulation, or local requirements. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-16(E)) 
Secs. 8-116-8-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 8-144. - Required. 
    No person shall open or close a grave or provide related services within the City Cemetery until and unless such person is licensed hereunder. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-16(B)) 
Sec. 8-145. - Application. 
    A person who seeks a license hereunder shall apply to the City Secretary on a form furnished for such purpose. Upon meeting the qualifications and requirements of this division, such person shall be issued a license by the City Secretary. Each new applicant shall pay an application fee established in Section 2-117. Each licensee must pay a yearly renewal fee established in Section 2-117. All yearly fees and proof of insurance are due by March 15. A license shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of issuance or until the set renewal date of March 15. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-16(C); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-146. - Requirements and qualifications. 
    The following requirements must be met by each applicant: 
(1)  A licensee must have a regular business office. 
(2)  A licensee must provide telephone availability 24 hours a day for emergencies. Each licensee must be available upon three hours' notice during daylight hours to open and close graves. 
(3)  Each applicant must be generally familiar with the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the activity regulated hereunder. The City Secretary may require an applicant to take an examination for licensure or renewal. 
(4)  Each applicant shall have the capability to open and close graves as defined herein. Prior experience shall establish capability provided that two references may be required showing satisfactory performance history. An inexperienced applicant may be required to demonstrate capability, including the opening and closing of one to three graves prior to licensure. 
(5)  Each licensee shall have equipment suitable for the activity to be performed. A complete listing of vehicles and equipment, including identifying numbers, shall be furnished with the application and shall be approved or rejected by the City Manager or designee. Said listing shall be updated within ten days of the disposition or acquisition of any vehicle or equipment. Any issues relating to the suitability of equipment shall be resolved by a good faith determination by the City Manager or designee. 
(6)  Each applicant shall supply proof (with a current certificate of insurance) of comprehensive general liability insurance and commercial automobile liability insurance showing a minimum combined single limit of $500,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injuries and property damage. The certificate of insurance shall also reflect upon its face the obligation of the insurance company to notify the City Secretary 30 days prior to cancellation of such coverage. Insurance company shall also mail to the City Secretary a copy of the yearly insurance renewal. Any termination of coverage shall ipso facto terminate any license granted hereunder. Insurance shall be renewed yearly on March 15. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-16(D)) 
Sec. 8-147. - Denial or revocation of license. 
(a)  A license may be denied for the following reasons: 
(1)  The information required in the application process is incomplete or incorrect; 
(2)  The applicant does not meet the requirements, qualifications or regulations for obtaining the license pursuant to this article; 
(3)  The applicant is found to have unpaid civil judgments against him or her which relate to the duties and responsibilities of the licensed occupation; or 
(4)  The applicant has been convicted of a crime that relates to the duties and responsibilities of the licensed occupation. 
(b)  A license may be revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to comply with the requirements, qualifications or regulations for obtaining a license pursuant to this article; 
(2)  If civil judgments are placed or found of record against the licensee that relate to the duties and responsibilities of the licensed occupation; or 
(3)  Upon conviction of a crime that relates to the duties and responsibilities of the licensed occupation. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-16(F)) 
Sec. 8-148. - Administrative appeal. 
(a)  Scope. This section shall apply to all appeals from any denial or revocation of a license applied for or granted pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Appeal to City Manager. Any decision made by the City Manager's designee pertaining to the denial or revocation of a license under this article may be appealed by the aggrieved to the City Manager. Such appeal may be taken by filing a written note, notice or letter with the City Manager, briefly describing the decision to be appealed. The aggrieved person must file the note, notice or letter within ten days of the date of being notified of the decision that is the subject of the appeal. The City Manager shall provide an opportunity for a conference, and shall decide the appeal in a prompt manner. The City Manager's decision may uphold the decision denying or revoking the license or reverse the decision and order the license issued or reinstated. The City Manager's decision shall be final, subject to the right to contest the matter in an appropriate court action. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-16(G)) 
Secs. 8-149-8-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOME SOLICITATION AND ITINERANT VENDORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-180. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this article, or who fails to perform an act required of the person by this section, commits an offense. A person commits a separate offense for: 
(1)  Each day or portion of a day during which a violation is committed, permitted, or continued; 
(2)  Each item placed, deposited, or distributed on residential premises in violation of this article; and 
(3)  Each residential premises to which a home solicitation is conducted in violation of this article. 
(b)  The penalties provided for in Section 1-7 are in addition to any other enforcement remedies and penalties which the City may have under City ordinances and State law. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(P)) 
Sec. 8-181. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  The City Council finds that the City has received numerous and continuous complaints from citizens about persons going onto residential premises (including premises that contain conspicuous signs prohibiting solicitations) to solicit, sell, or take orders for goods and services and to distribute commercial printed matter; and: 
(1)  Those citizens have expressed concerns that such solicitations result in criminal activity (including burglary and fraud) and disturb the privacy of their homes; 
(2)  The City Council believes that establishing a registration program for those home solicitors will protect the citizens against criminal activity, including, but not limited to, burglary and fraud, minimize the unwelcome disturbance of citizens and the disruption of their privacy and otherwise preserve the public health, safety, and welfare; 
(3)  The City Council believes it is in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare to prohibit persons convicted of certain crimes from being home solicitors in the City; 
(4)  The City Council has considered the following criteria: 
a.  The nature and seriousness of the crimes; 
b.  The relationship of the crimes to the purposes for requiring a certificate of registration to engage in the occupation; 
c.  The extent to which a certificate of registration might offer an opportunity to engage in further criminal activity of the same type as that in which the person previously has been involved; and 
d.  The relationship of the crimes to the ability, capacity, or fitness required to perform the duties and discharge the responsibilities of the registered occupation; and has determined that the crimes listed in Section 8-211(a)(2) are serious crimes which directly relate to the duties and responsibilities of a home solicitor, whose job is to solicit, sell, and take orders for goods and services, and to distribute commercial printed matter, on residential premises in the City; 
(5)  The City Council has determined that the very nature of the occupation of a home solicitor brings such a person into constant contact with the public, which gives the person repeated opportunities to participate in crimes of violence or dishonesty, or crimes against the public health, safety, or morals, should the person be so inclined, and, thus, it is the opinion of the City Council that the crimes listed in Section 8-211(a)(2) render a person unable, incompetent, and unfit to perform the duties and responsibilities of a home solicitor in a manner that would promote the public safety and trust; and 
(6)  The City Council has determined that no person who has been convicted of a crime as listed in Section 8-211(a)(2) is presently fit to engage in home solicitation in the City until the respective time periods designated in that section have expired, and thus should be disqualified from being issued a certificate of registration as a home solicitor until the expiration of those time periods. 
(b)  The City Council finds that the regulations of this article do no prevent door-to-door activity and that ample alternative channels of communication exist outside of the time limitations, including solicitation via telephone, electronic communication, public solicitation outside of the privacy of citizens' doorsteps, and solicitation via direct mail, television, radio, and internet. 
(c)  The purpose of this article is to further the City's legitimate and compelling interest in securing City citizens' general health, safety and welfare by: 
(1)  Prohibiting door-to-door home solicitation during times when such activity is most intrusive and disruptive to citizens' privacy and the security of their homes; 
(2)  Regulating the manner in which door-to-door solicitation activity may occur so as to protect citizens in the privacy of their own homes from aggressive and intimidating practices; and 
(3)  Requiring home solicitors to register with the City and obtain and conspicuously wear City-issued identification badges while soliciting, so as to minimize deceptive practices, fraud and aid law enforcement in crime detection. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(A)) 
Sec. 8-182. - Delivery of notices. 
    Any written notice that the City is required to give any applicant or registrant under this article is deemed to be delivered: 
(1)  On the date the notice is hand delivered to the applicant or registrant; or 
(2)  Three days after the date the notice is placed in the United States mail with proper postage and properly addressed to the applicant or registrant at the address provided for the applicant or registrant in the most recent registration application. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(N)) 
Sec. 8-183. - Presumption of distribution of commercial printed matter. 
    Whenever commercial printed matter is placed, deposited, or distributed, or caused to be placed, deposited, or distributed, in violation of this article, it is presumed that the person named on the commercial printed matter is the person who committed the violation, either personally or through an agent. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(O)) 
Sec. 8-184. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person 14 years of age or older to solicit an occupant of residential premises, unrequested: 
(1)  Without first registering and obtaining an identification badge issued by the City in accordance with this article; 
(2)  Except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; 
(3)  If the residence conspicuously displays at or near the primary entrance to the residence, a readily legible sign, bearing any of the words: 
"NO TRESPASSING," "NO PEDDLERS," "NO ADVERTISEMENTS," "NO SOLICITATION," "NO HANDBILLS." 
(4)  At a location other than the primary entrance to the residence. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the registrant to allow any other person to use or wear their own City-issued identification badge. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any registrant or registrant's agent to represent that the City's issuance of a certificate of registration or identification badge constitutes the City's endorsement or approval of the purposes of any particular solicitation. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(B); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-185. - Time and manner for conducting home solicitations. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person conducts or attempts to conduct (either personally or through an agent), a home solicitation at a residential premises: 
(1)  Before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. of any day, Monday through Sunday; or 
(2)  At any time on any Federally observed holiday. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a) of this section that the visit to the residential premises resulted from the owner or occupant's request or appointment. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(I); altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2018-4043 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Secs. 8-186-8-208. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOME SOLICITOR REGISTRATION 

Sec. 8-209. - Required; defenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if that person: 
(1)  Personally, by an agent, or as the agent of another, engages in a home solicitation without a valid certificate of registration or home solicitor identification badge issued to the person under this division; 
(2)  Engages in a home solicitation by using an agent who does not hold a valid certificate of registration or home solicitor identification badge issued under this division; or 
(3)  Engages in a home solicitation by acting as an agent of another person who does not hold a valid certificate of registration or home solicitor identification badge issued under this division. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under Subsection (a)(1) of this section that: 
(1)  The person was soliciting for a noncommercial purpose, including, but not limited to, a charitable, educational, civic, patriotic, philanthropic, political, or religious purpose; 
(2)  The person was on the residential premises by express invitation of the owner, occupant, or other person in control of the premises; 
(3)  The person was a wholesale agent or factory representative who sells or exhibits for sale goods, wares, or merchandise and was conducting business with a person engaged in the business of buying, selling, and dealing in the same type of goods, wares, or merchandise; 
(4)  The person was soliciting newspaper sales, or delivering newspapers pursuant to a request by or contract with the owner, occupant, or other person in control of a residential premises; 
(5)  The solicitation, sale, or taking of orders for goods or services took place upon residential premises owned, leased, or controlled by the person or by the person's employer; 
(6)  The person was a governmental entity, or an officer, employee, or agent of a governmental entity, placing a notice or other information on the premises in the performance of official duties; or 
(7)  The person was the United States Postal Service or a private courier service registered with the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, or an employee or agent of those services, delivering an item of mail, a notice, or a package to the premises. 
(c)  Before taking any enforcement action under this section, the City Manager or designee, any Police Officer, or any City Code Enforcement Officer shall ask the apparent offender's reason for being on the residential premises or for depositing any item on the premises. The City Manager or designee, the Police Officer or the City Code Enforcement Officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section without a reasonable belief that an offense has occurred. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(D); Ord. No. 2018-4043 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 8-210. - Application; fee; expiration; non-transferability; material changes. 
(a)  To obtain a certificate of registration to conduct home solicitations, a person must file a written application with the City Manager or designee on the City-issued form. The application must include the following information regardless if the applicant is an individual or company: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, and telephone number and if an individual his or her date of birth, even if the individual is acting as an agent or submitting the application for the applicant. 
(2)  If the applicant is a company the title of each of its officers and date and place of incorporation or location of the business establishment. 
(3)  The name, address, date of birth and telephone number of each person conducting home solicitation in the City for the applicant. 
(4)  A photograph of the applicant and of each person soliciting taken within the preceding 12 months, which clearly depicts the applicant's facial features. 
(5)  The applicant's and each person soliciting date of birth and proof of driver's license including the driver's license number and the issuing state or if the person does not have a driver's license, proof of a government issued personal identification card with the government number, the person's photograph and date of birth. 
(6)  The names of other cities or jurisdictions in which the applicant and each person soliciting has worked as a home solicitor in the past 12 months and if the person was an agent of different companies in the other cities or jurisdictions, the names of those companies. 
(7)  The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services to be advertised, offered for sale, or delivered as part of the home solicitation. 
(8)  Whether the applicant and each person soliciting, upon obtaining an order for goods or services, will demand, accept, or receive payment or a deposit of money in advance of final delivery of the goods or services. 
(9)  The dates, times, and locations for which the applicant and each person soliciting proposes to conduct home solicitations in the City. 
(10)  An outline of the method to be used in conducting the home solicitations. 
(11)  Whether the applicant and each person soliciting has been convicted of any crime listed in Section 8-211 within the time period listed in Section 8-211 and the applicant's and each person soliciting signed consent authorizing the City to obtain a criminal history report on the applicant and each solicitor. 
(12)  Proof that the applicant and each person soliciting possesses all licenses or permits required by this Code or by State or Federal law for the operation of the proposed business. 
(13)  If the applicant is an agent of an individual or company, sufficient written proof of the applicant's authority to represent and act on behalf of the individual or company. 
(14)  If a company, proof of applicant's compliance with State or Federal law for the operation of the proposed business, to include Texas Labor Code ch. 51, as amended. 
(15)  Any other information the City Manager or designee determines necessary to the enforcement and administration of this article. 
(b)  Any application filed under this section must be accompanied by a nonrefundable registration or renewal fee and identification badge fees for each home solicitor established in Section 2-117. 
(c)  Upon expiration, the registrant may apply for a registration renewal in the same manner prescribed by this division for a new registration. 
(d)  Neither a certificate of registration nor an identification badge is transferable from one person to another, but: 
(1)  Both may be used by the registrant to act as an agent for different individuals or companies during the registration term if the City Manager or designee is notified in accordance with this section; and 
(2)  A registrant under subsection (a)(1) of this section may request additional copies of the certificate of registration at the time of issuance so that each agent may comply with the display requirements of this section. 
(e)  A registrant shall notify the City Manager or designee within five days after any material change in the information on the application during the registration term. A material change includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  When a registrant becomes an agent for another individual or company; 
(2)  When a registrant terminates an individual's authority to serve as the registrant's agent; 
(3)  A change in the nature, character, and quality of the goods or services; or 
(4)  A change in the dates, times, and locations proposed for conducting home solicitations in the City. 
(f)  A certificate of registration expires 30 days after the issue date. The registration may be renewed for a successive 30-day period, if the application is made within the previous 30-day registration period. Before expiration, the registrant may apply for a registration renewal in the same manner prescribed by this section for a new registration, submit a renewal fee and identification badge fees. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(E); Ord. No. 2018-4043 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 8-211. - Issuance, denial, and display of registration; identification badge. 
(a)  The City Manager or designee shall issue a certificate of registration to the applicant within three business days after receipt of the application unless any of the following applies: 
(1)  The applicant has failed to provide material information requested or made a false statement of a material fact on the application form or in a hearing concerning the application or registration. 
(2)  The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving: 
a.  Criminal homicide as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 19; 
b.  Kidnapping as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 20; 
c.  A sexual offense as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 21; 
d.  An assaultive offense as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 22; 
e.  Robbery as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 29; 
f.  Burglary as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 30; 
g.  Theft as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 31, as amended, but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in a home solicitation business; 
h.  Fraud as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 32, but only if the offense was committed against a person with whom the applicant came in contact while engaged in a home solicitation business; 
i.  The transfer, carrying, or possession of a weapon in violation of Texas Penal Code ch. 46 or of any comparable State or Federal law, but only if the violation is punishable as a felony under the applicable law; or 
j.  Criminal attempt to commit any offenses listed in Subsections (a)(2)a through i of this section for which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the applicant was convicted of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if, within any 24-month period, the applicant has two or more convictions of any misdemeanor offense or combination of misdemeanor offenses. 
(3)  The offense descriptions in Subsection (a)(2) of this section are meant to be descriptive only and not as exclusive to convictions under the Texas Penal Code. They include convictions for comparable offenses as provided under other State or Federal law. 
(4)  The applicant has failed to provide proof of a license or permit required by this Code or another City ordinance or by State law for the operation of the proposed business. 
(5)  The applicant or an agent, individually or cumulatively, has been convicted of any violation of this article, within the 24 months immediately preceding the application. 
(6)  The required registration fee has not been paid. 
(7)  The applicant has failed to comply with or the proposed business will violate any applicable ordinance or regulation of the City or applicable State or Federal law. 
(b)  If the City Manager or designee determines that a certificate of registration should be denied the applicant, the City Manager or designee shall notify the applicant in writing that the application is denied and include in the notice the reason for denial and a statement informing the applicant of the right of appeal. 
(c)  Upon issuing a certificate of registration, the City Manager or designee shall issue the registrant and each person soliciting an identification badge. At all times the registrant and each person soliciting is conducting home solicitations in the City, the registrant shall prominently display the identification badge on the registrant's clothing and maintain the certificate of registration on the registrant's person. The registrant shall allow the certificate of registration and the identification badge to be examined upon request by the City Manager or designee, any Police Officer, any City Code Enforcement Officer, or the owner or occupant of the residential premises on which a home solicitation is being conducted. 
(d)  If a City-issued home solicitor's identification badge is lost, mutilated, or destroyed, the City Manager or designee shall issue the registrant or each person soliciting a duplicate identification badge upon payment of a duplicate badge fee established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(F); Ord. No. 2018-4043 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 8-212. - Suspension. 
(a)  The City Manager or designee may suspend a certificate of registration for a definite period of time not to exceed 30 days if the City Manager or designee determines that: 
(1)  A violation of this Code or any other law concerning the sale or distribution of goods or services, or the distribution of commercial printed matter, by the registrant or the registrant's agent has occurred; or 
(2)  The registrant or a representative authorized to supervise the registrant's agents has failed to establish policy and take action to discourage, prevent, or correct violations of this article by agents. 
(b)  The City Manager or designee shall send to the registrant by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written statement setting forth the reasons for the suspension and notifying the registrant of the right to appeal. A timely request for appeal by the registrant stays the effect of the suspension unless the City Manager or designee determines that an emergency exists. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, an emergency exists if the City Manager or designee determines that a violation has occurred and constitutes an imminent and serious threat to the public health or safety. In case of an emergency, the City Manager or designee may order the registrant or the registrant's representative to correct the violation immediately or cease home solicitations to the extent the City Manager or designee determines is necessary to abate the threat until the violation is corrected. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(H); altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2018-4043 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-4043 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 27, 2018, amended  8-212 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Revocation" to "Suspension," as set out herein. 
Sec. 8-213. - Revocation. 
(a)  The City Manager or designee shall revoke a certificate of registration if the City Manager or designee determines that: 
(1)  The registrant or an agent of the registrant, individually or cumulatively, has been convicted in any court of two violations of this Code or any other law concerning the sale or distribution of goods or services, or the distribution of commercial printed matter, within a 12 month period. The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect; 
(2)  The registrant has given false or misleading information of a material nature or has withheld material information on the application or in any hearing concerning the application or registration; 
(3)  The registrant or an agent of the registrant has intentionally or knowingly or otherwise impeded a lawful inspection by the City Manager or designee, his or her authorized representative, or any representative of another department who has the authority to inspect the registrant and the registrant's business procedure; or 
(4)  A cause for suspension under Section 8-212 (a) or (b) occurs and the certificate of registration has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The City Manager or designee shall send to the registrant by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written statement setting forth the reasons for the revocation and notifying the registrant of the right to appeal. 
(c)  If the City Manager or designee revokes a certificate of registration, the fee already paid for the registration will be forfeited. A person whose certificate of registration has been revoked under this section may not apply for or be issued a new registration for a period of one year after the date the revocation took effect, except that, if the City Manager or designee determines that the basis for the revocation has been corrected, the person may apply for and be issued a new certificate of registration if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation took effect. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(G); Ord. No. 2018-4043 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-4043 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 27, 2018, amended  8-213 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Suspension" to "Revocation," as set out herein. 
Secs. 8-214-8-234. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ITINERANT VENDOR PERMIT 

Sec. 8-235. - Required; application. 
(a)  Every itinerant vendor must have a non-transferable permit issued by the City Planning and Development Services Department. 
(b)  An applicant shall apply for an I-Vendor permit on a City-issued form that shall be submitted with the following information: 
(1)  Name of the applicant; 
(2)  Legal name of the business entity, if any, state of incorporation, filing of partnership or articles of association; 
(3)  Sales tax number with a copy of sales tax permit or 501(c)(3) documentation; 
(4)  Local phone number; 
(5)  Permanent business location, address and phone number; 
(6)  Signed permission from the private property owner or owner's representative to utilize the property as proposed; 
(7)  Graphic showing the location of activity on the proposed property with information as requested on the application; 
(8)  Applicant's date of birth; 
(9)  Driver's license number and issuing state; 
(10)  If the action is to be a solicitation of funds, then a description of that purpose will be set out in the application; 
(11)  A statement under oath (acceptable photo identification required) listing each individual applicant's convictions in any state, the United States or U.S. possession within the last five years; 
(12)  For food sales, proof of compliance with the County Health Department's regulations shall be provided; 
(13)  A list of the kind, amount, and character of goods or services to be sold or distributed; 
(14)  A bond in the sum of not less than $1,000.00, executed by the itinerant vendor, with two or more good and sufficient sureties satisfactory to the Finance Director, which bond shall be payable to the City to cover the cost for cleaning debris caused by such temporary use, including the cost of any required City services, and potential damage or injury to property. The bond shall be valid for a period of no less than 30 days after the applicant terminates the temporary use. The City may use the bond for cleanup and repair of either City property or debris removal from the private property necessitated or caused by the applicant's permitted use. 
(c)  A signed statement that a business recognizes any individual operating under its permit as an employee and not as an independent contractor and accepts the responsibilities imposed by State law for the acts of its employees. 
(d)  An application for an I-Vendor permit shall be accompanied by a fee established in Section 2-117. 
(e)  A permit may be denied when: 
(1)  The required information is incomplete, incorrect or shows that a person is not otherwise entitled to conduct business as proposed. 
(2)  A location plan or diagram does not meet the following requirements: 
a.  The itinerant vendor must locate the activity in an existing parking lot. 
b.  If there is an open and operating business at the location during the time of co-utilization, then the itinerant vendor cannot utilize more than five percent of the available parking space, or 16 spaces, whichever is smaller. 
(3)  The location of the activity in the parking lot shall not cause a traffic hazard. 
(4)  An applicant has been convicted of a crime which directly relates to the duties and responsibilities of the licensed occupation which shall be determined by the nature and seriousness of the crime, the relationship of the crime to the purpose of the permit and the extent that the permit would allow someone to engage in further criminal activity. 
(f)  An itinerant vendor's signage must comply with City ordinances. 
(g)  Every permit shall be displayed where it can be read by the general public at the temporary business location. 
(h)  A permit may be revoked upon conviction of any offense committed in the City while engaged in the permitted business, or if a final conviction occurs or is found to have existed at the time of application. 
(i)  A permit may be suspended if applicant or the business has been charged with a crime, as set forth above, upon a Magistrate's determination of probable cause in connection with such charges. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(J); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-236. - Exemptions to itinerant vendor permits. 
(a)  Christmas tree sales are exempted from the itinerant vendor permit location requirement of five percent or 16 spaces and are exempted from the time requirement of three consecutive days or 21 cumulative days. Christmas tree sales may be made during the Christmas holiday season, November 15 through December 24. 
(b)  A charitable organization holding a bazaar, fete, rummage sale, car wash or other special event for the purpose of raising funds no more than two times per year is exempt from this article. 
(c)  Itinerant vendors selling unrefined farm products shall be required to pay an application fee but shall not be required to provide a bond. 
(d)  Mobile medical uses, including, but not limited to, IV therapy units, blood donation, and mobile mammography buses, emergency medical services ("EMS") response and transport, and non-emergency medical transfers and transport are excluded from this exemption and are regulated by a City-granted franchise. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(M); Ord. No. 2017-3857, exh. M, 1-26-2017) 
Sec. 8-237. - Term, limitations and representations. 
(a)  Duration. 
(1)  Itinerant vendors' permits shall be valid for one year, provided that sales may not be conducted for longer than 36 days per year. 
(2)  No use may be continued beyond the period of the permit, absent compliance with all provisions of the City's Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A), as amended. 
(3)  If sales are conducted out of a tent, the tent may only be set up two days prior to any sales period and it must be taken down two days after any sales period. 
(4)  One day is defined as 24 hours. 
(b)  Zoning and location restrictions. 
(1)  No itinerant vendor may locate in an area unless the zoning classification of the area permits the type of business or service to be performed or provided. 
(2)  No itinerant vendor may locate in the street or City right-of-way. 
(3)  Temporary parking space rentals shall not exceed three consecutive days or 21 cumulative days per year unless in compliance with all provisions of the City Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A), as amended. For the use of premises for temporary parking space rentals pursuant to the permit, the permanent business shall be closed or have excess parking as provided by the City Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A), as amended. 
(c)  Representation of endorsement prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to represent that the issuance of either a permit or a certificate of registration by the City constitutes an endorsement or approval of the purposes of a solicitation sale by the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-1(K); Ord. No. 2017-3857, exh. A, 1-26-2017) 
Secs. 8-238-8-267. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, MENAGERIES, SIDESHOWS, CONCESSIONS, AND SPECIAL EVENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-268. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    15-day operation means the greater of 15 calendar days or 150 hours of operation in a calendar year. 
    Applicant means a person who has filed a written application for a permit. 
    Carnival means and includes amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, booths for the conduct of games of skill, food dispensing facilities, and side shows. A carnival shall not include gambling devices, games of chance, lotteries, or other activities in violation of State law. 
    Circus means and includes a public entertainment consisting of, but not limited to, performances by people and animals. 
    Event means and includes any carnival, circus, menagerie, sideshow, concession, or special event. 
    Menagerie means and includes a collection of live animals on exhibition. 
    Nonprofit association means an association in which no part of the income of which is distributable to its members, directors or officers. 
    Northgate Central Business District means the Northgate area identified and referenced in Resolution Number 10-21-2004-13.04. 
    Sideshows and concessions means and includes circuses, menageries, carnivals, and other amusement enterprises, which are open to the public and for which a fee is charged for admission. 
    Special event. 
(1)  The term "special event" means a for-profit or nonprofit event to which the public is invited, held on public or private property, at which over 250 individuals attend, and held outside the confines of a building or permanent structure. 
(2)  The term "special event" includes, but is not limited to, any meeting, entertainment, performance, show, exhibition, or amusement. 
(3)  The term also includes events in the Northgate Central Business District, regardless of attendance, providing for the sale and/or consumption of alcohol. 
(4)  The term also includes events held within the confines of Wolf Pen Creek Park, Amphitheater and Festival Site or other outdoor City facilities, where there are more than 5,000 attendees or where alcohol is permitted. 
(5)  The term does not include: 
a.  Events held in residential structures, 
b.  Events held in licensed premises, 
c.  Gatherings for athletic events that are held in facilities designed for athletic events, or 
d.  Other than as set out above, events held within the confines of the Wolf Pen Creek Park, Amphitheater and Festival Site or other outdoor City facilities. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(B); altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2017-3895 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2017) 
Sec. 8-269. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(Q)) 
Sec. 8-270. - Exemptions. 
    City-sponsored events are exempt from the provisions of this article if: 
(1)  The event is held on City property; and 
(2)  A policy or procedure establishes protocols for security, public safety, sanitation, crowd control and traffic control. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(E); Ord. No. 2017-3895 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2017) 
Sec. 8-271. - Northgate Central Business District. 
(a)  An event in the Northgate Central Business District providing for alcohol sales or consumption shall have a valid permit or license to sell or serve alcoholic beverages issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. 
(b)  An event in the Northgate Central Business District involving the sale or consumption of alcohol shall not be operated under a permit authorized herein for more than three consecutive days. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(D)) 
Secs. 8-272-8-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 8-291. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct within the City any carnivals, circuses, menageries, sideshows, concessions, or special events without first securing a permit. Permits required by this section shall be posted on-site in a conspicuous location for the duration of the event. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(A)) 
Sec. 8-292. - Application. 
    A permit application shall be submitted to the City Manager or designee at least 30 calendar days in advance of the proposed opening date or time of said event. The City Manager or designee may accept an application less than 30 days prior to the event provided all permit requirements have been met. Said application shall be in writing and shall include the following information (if applicable):;ol1; (1)\The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and of any other persons responsible for the conduct of the special event. 
(2)  The name of the firm or corporation. 
(3)  The location of the principal place of business of such firm or corporation. 
(4)  A description of the event. 
(5)  Whether the event will be in a tent, building, aerodrome, or open area. 
(6)  The location of the event. 
(7)  The projected number of people to attend each performance or event. 
(8)  The proposed opening date. 
(9)  The hours and days of the week it will be open to the public. 
(10)  The provisions to be made for parking. 
(11)  The provisions to be made for vehicular ingress and egress. 
(12)  The parking facility and surface composition. 
(13)  The nature and location of temporary signs. 
(14)  The zoning of the land on which the event will be held. 
(15)  The details (such as vendor information, perimeter fencing location, etc.) related to the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages at the event. 
(16)  A current building plan drawn to scale which shall include: 
a.  Type of construction of any structure. 
b.  Seating arrangement. 
c.  Aisles. 
d.  Structural details and calculations of seats and supports. 
e.  Location of all electrical wiring. 
f.  Location of all exits. 
g.  Location of all equipment within any flammable structure and specifications of such equipment. 
(17)  A site plan, adequately dimensioned or drawn to scale, which shall include: 
a.  Location of any adjacent structures and obstructions which might hinder free ingress and egress of persons from exits. 
b.  Locations of hydrants. Fire hydrants must be within 500 feet of any combustible structures on-site. 
c.  Location of fire lanes, limited in use for ingress and egress of fire trucks showing width of 20 feet, height of 14 feet. 
d.  Location of parking facilities. 
e.  Electric transmission and distribution lines on-site. 
(18)  The length of time any structure is intended to be used for the purpose applied for. 
(19)  The length of time the event is to be carried out. 
(20)  The formula of the solution which is used or has been used to flameproof any structure. 
(21)  The date on which flameproof solution was applied to any structure. 
(22)  The number and location of sanitary facilities for persons using the premises on which the event is to be carried out. 
(23)  Provisions for site cleanup and grading if necessary. 
(24)  The applicant shall provide and place printed signs on which the words "No Smoking" shall appear in letters at least four inches high in conspicuous places. 
(25)  A traffic control plan, if applicable. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(F); altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2017-3895 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2017) 
Sec. 8-293. - Approval of application. 
(a)  Fire inspections. The City Manager or designee, in reviewing an application for a permit, before such structure or event is open to the public, shall make an inspection to determine if the applicant has made provision for: 
(1)  Adequate aisles, seats, platforms, and poles. 
(2)  Sufficient exits well marked and properly lighted. 
(3)  Lighted and unobstructed passageways to areas leading away from the structure. 
(4)  Removal, before the structure is to be used as a place of public assembly, of any pole, rope, or other obstruction in any aisle or exit. 
(5)  Sufficient first aid fire appliances to be distributed throughout the structure with operating personnel familiar with the operation of such equipment available and assigned during the use of such structure as a place of assembly. 
(6)  Sufficient "No Smoking" signs visible at all times. 
(7)  An employee at all entrances to require the extinguishing of all cigarettes, cigars, or other smoking materials. 
(8)  Announcement at frequent intervals to persons in assembly that smoking within the structure is prohibited. 
(9)  Proper safeguarding of any use of open flames or its use prohibited. 
(10)  The clearing of straw, dry grass, sawdust, or other combustible trash from the structure before it is opened to the public and arrangement made to keep the areas where debris may be expected to accumulate well serviced, especially under open seats. 
(11)  Proper facilities for calling the City Fire Department. 
(12)  Such special fire equipment of the City to attend to such structure made during its use as a public assembly as is necessary for proper fire protection. 
(13)  The tent and canvas parts of the structure, and all combustible, decorative materials, including curtains, acoustic materials, streamers, cloth, cotton batting, straw, vines, leaves, and trees, to be rendered flameproof. 
(14)  If the City Manager or designee determines that the attendance of any fire apparatus or equipment is necessary at or in the vicinity of such structure for fire protection pursuant to the International Fire Code, as adopted by City Council, the City Manager or designee shall notify the applicant before approval of the application. 
(15)  The attendance of such fire personnel as the City Manager or designee may deem necessary for the control of persons in the assembly, to prevent overcrowding, obstruction of aisles and exits, and such other control as may be necessary to render the occupation of such structure by the public safe. 
(16)  Internal fire lanes which meet the 20-foot wide, 14-foot high access requirement. 
(b)  Building inspection. The City Manager or designee shall: 
(1)  Ascertain if any defect exists in the wiring and provide for immediate correction of any defects which may be found. 
(2)  Ascertain that seats, platforms, and other structural components are adequate to withstand proposed usage. 
(3)  Make an inspection to determine if provision has been made for satisfactory sanitary facilities on or near the premises on which the event is being carried out. 
(4)  Make inspection and determine if adequate trash containers are located on the premises. 
(c)  Traffic and safety inspection. 
(1)  The City Manager or designee shall make an inspection of such structure or event location before the event is open to the public. 
(2)  An applicant for an event permit shall provide certified Peace Officers as approved by the City Manager or designee for security, crowd control, and traffic control at the event in accordance with the following schedule: 
Number of Participants and
Spectators at Event Minimum Number of Peace
Officers Required 0 to 250 0 251 to 1,500 2 1,501 to 3,000 4 3,001 to 5,000 6 Over 5,000 6, plus 1 Peace Officer for every 1,000 participants and spectators over 5,000 at the event  
(3)  The City Manager or designee may increase or decrease the number of certified Peace Officers from those required in the table above, if: 
a.  Any alcoholic beverage is sold, served, or otherwise made available at the event; 
b.  Special needs for an increase or decrease in security, crowd control, or traffic control are created by: 
1.  The topography of the site or size of the event; 
2.  Weather conditions during the event; or 
3.  The time of day during which the event is conducted; 
c.  The event requires street closures or rerouting of vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or 
d.  The history of the particular event indicates that a greater or lesser number of Peace Officers are required to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(4)  If the City determines that an event may alter normal traffic patterns, the City may require the applicant to submit a traffic plan for the City's approval. 
(5)  When the presence of licensed Peace Officers is necessary, every applicant shall pay for the services of such personnel. The fee for Peace Officers shall be according to the City's off-duty pay schedule. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(H); altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2017-3895 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2017) 
Sec. 8-294. - Denial; appellate review. 
    The City Manager or designee may deny a permit if the applicant has not met all the requirements established in this division. The applicant may, within five days of the denial, appeal the decision to the City Manager. The City Manager or designee shall hold a hearing within ten days thereafter and in accordance with applicable law. After the close of the hearing, the City Manager or designee shall make a determination concerning approval, denial, or modification of the permit within five days. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(P); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-295. - Amended application. 
    All events shall take place in accordance with the approved application documents. Any changes made in the application shall be submitted for approval as an amended permit application. Failure to submit an amended application may result in denial/revocation of such permit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(J)) 
Sec. 8-296. - Fees. 
(a)  Application. The applicant shall pay a nonrefundable application fee established in Section 2-117 upon submission of an application to the City. The application fee may be waived for a nonprofit association holding an event. The application fee shall not be waived for any event involving alcohol sales and/or consumption. 
(b)  Re-inspection fee. If the event is not operated on consecutive calendar days, the City shall re-inspect the premises as provided herein. A re-inspection fee established in Section 2-117 shall be paid by the applicant to the City to cover the cost of each re-inspection. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(K); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-297. - Fifteen-day operation. 
(a)  No event shall be operated under a permit authorized herein for more than the greater of 15 calendar days or 150 hours during a calendar year, with the exception of businesses permitted through Article IX of this chapter. 
(b)  Operation of such an event for more than the referenced length of time shall be considered a permanent business for which site plan approval is required under the City Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). If the event is not operated on consecutive calendar days, an inspection as provided under Section 8-293 shall be required each time before the event resumes. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(C)) 
Sec. 8-298. - Conditions of permit. 
    In addition to other requirements set forth herein, the applicant shall furnish suitable evidence of intention and ability to comply with the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant shall be wholly responsible for maintaining order and for keeping the site clean, free of trash, papers, and other debris. 
(2)  Trash containers in adequate numbers shall be placed in convenient locations for the use of the public. 
(3)  Sanitary facilities for persons using the premises. 
(4)  Provisions for removal of other waste materials, including animal waste materials. 
(5)  Provisions for meeting all other application requirements. 
(6)  Provisions for site cleaning and grading after use of the premises. 
(7)  The premises shall have adequate ingress and egress. 
(8)  Use of premises shall not violate the provisions of the National Electric Code as adopted by this Code. 
(9)  Compliance with any and all other applicable rules and regulations, including food vendor permits, temporary parking approval, park permit, etc. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(G)) 
Sec. 8-299. - Insurance. 
    No permit shall be issued for conducting an event under this section until the applicant has filed with the City a certificate or certificates of insurance on the most current State of Texas Department of Insurance-approved form, as evidence of a Commercial General Liability Insurance to cover claims for damages to property or injuries to persons, arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in connection with the event. The insurance policy shall be issued by a licensed carrier authorized to do business in Texas or the carrier's authorized agent. The certificate must show the policy will be in full force and effect for the duration of the event and any activities preparing for the event. Limits of liability of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for property damage or injury or death to any one person, and not less than $2,000,000.00 aggregate for property damage or injury or death in any one accident. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(L); altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2017-3895 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2017) 
Sec. 8-300. - Permit bond. 
    The applicant shall submit a permit bond prior to the issuance of a permit. The bond shall be in the amount of $10,000.00 to cover the entire cost estimated for cleaning up of debris caused by such event, to cover required City services, and to cover potential damage or injury to property. The bond shall be valid for a period of no less than 30 days after the event is terminated by the applicant hereunder. The bond may be used by the City for cleanup and repair of City property or the property of any resident deemed by the City to have been damaged by the applicant or applicant's employees as a result of the event. In the event the bond is executed to cover costs incurred by the City, the amount of the bond, less deductions for costs incurred or for the replacement, cleanup, or repair of the property of third parties, shall be refunded. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(M)) 
Sec. 8-301. - Contract. 
    The applicant, in tendering an application and receiving a permit, agrees and contracts with the City not to exclude at any time any authorized City official on duty for the purpose of inspecting, maintaining, and assuring the health, safety, and welfare of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(N); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-302. - Revocation. 
(a)  A permit issued pursuant to this division may be revoked if: 
(1)  The applicant fails to comply with or the event is in violation of any provision of the permit, City ordinances, or any other applicable law; 
(2)  The application contains a false statement of material fact; or 
(3)  The authorized City official determines that the event poses a serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  The applicant or any other person responsible for the event will be notified of such revocation and shall immediately terminate the event. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-4(O); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 8-303-8-322. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SECONDHAND DEALERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Metal recycling entities, Texas Occupations Code ch. 1956; pawnbrokers, Texas Finance Code ch. 371. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2019-4087 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted April 25, 2019 amended Ch. 8, Art. VII,  8-323-8-328 and  8-360, 8-361, in effect repealing and reenacting said article as set out herein. Former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 2011 (Repub),  4-15(A), (D)-(H), altered in 2017 recodification. 

Sec. 8-323. - Definitions. 
    The following words or phrases, whenever used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Crafted precious metal dealer means any person who engages in the business of purchasing and selling crafted precious metal as defined in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code  1956.051 et seq., as amended. 
    Electronic inventory tracking system means an online database of secondhand dealer's inventory that is accessible by peace officers and law enforcement agencies. 
    Pawnbroker means any person defined as such by the Texas Pawnshop Act, V.T.C.A. Finance Code  371.001 et seq., as amended. 
    Secondhand dealer means any person who buys used or secondhand personal property for the purpose of reselling the same, or any person who lends money on the security of used or secondhand personal property deposited with the person and does not include any secondhand dealer who is expressly excluded by any other law from regulation by the City. As used in this article, the term "secondhand dealer" shall include both crafted precious metal dealers and pawnbrokers. 
    Transactions means the exchange or transfer of funds for used or secondhand goods. 
    Used or secondhand children's item business means a business where the majority of transactions involve used or secondhand children's items, including but not limited to; toys, strollers, walkers, cribs or infant care items. 
    Used or secondhand clothing business means a business where the majority of transactions involve used or secondhand clothing. 
    Used or secondhand furniture business means a business where the majority of transactions involve used or secondhand furniture. 
    Used or secondhand personal property means personal property that is not sold directly from its manufacturer or original retailer. Used or secondhand personal property does not include property sold at a used or secondhand furniture business, used or secondhand clothing business or used or secondhand children's item business or property expressly excluded by any other law from regulation by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4087 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 8-324. - Record keeping and reporting requirements. 
(a)  Electronic inventory tracking system. The Chief of Police will designate an electronic inventory tracking system for secondhand dealers to record used or secondhand personal property transactions. If the Chief of Police does choose to designate a new electronic inventory tracking system, secondhand dealers will have 30 days to report to the new electronic inventory tracking system. 
(b)  Entering transactions. The secondhand dealer must enter the recorded transaction information recorded into the electronic inventory tracking system within 48 hours of the transaction. 
(c)  Twenty dollar transactions. When used or secondhand personal property having a $20.00 or more total transaction value is purchased by a secondhand dealer, the secondhand dealer must record in the electronic inventory tracking system the following information for each transaction: 
(1)  The name, date of birth, current address, current phone number, a physical description of the seller, and driver's license number or other identification number of the seller; 
(2)  Confirm that the photograph on the driver's license or personal identification certificate presented is a photograph of the actual seller; 
(3)  The date, time, and location of the transaction; 
(4)  A description of the used or secondhand personal property, including the serial number if present, and any identifying characteristics including size, color, brand or model name; 
(5)  The actual price paid for the used or secondhand personal property; and 
(6)  A signed statement from the seller stating the seller has the right to possess and dispose of the used or secondhand personal property. 
(d)  Fifty dollar transactions. When used or secondhand personal property having a $50.00 or more total transaction value is purchased by a secondhand dealer, the entire transaction the secondhand dealers must record in the electronic inventory tracking system the same transaction information in Section 8-324(c), plus take digital photographs clearly depicting the purchased used or secondhand personal property. The photographs must include one overall item photograph, and if visible one photograph showing the serial number or unique identifying the item. 
(1)  Without serial numbers. If the transaction includes multiple similar items without serial numbers or a unique identifying marking one photograph must be taken clearly depicting all the items. 
(2)  With serial numbers. If the transaction includes multiple similar items with serial numbers or unique identifying markings then each item must be clearly photographed showing the entire item and another photograph showing the serial number or unique identifying marking of the item. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4087 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 8-325. - Exceptions. 
    This article does not apply to transactions for: 
(1)  Used or secondhand furniture; 
(2)  Used or secondhand clothing; 
(3)  Used or secondhand children's or baby items; 
(4)  Charitable organizations; 
(5)  Books or magazines; 
(6)  Property purchased at a garage or yard sale, auction or under consignment; or 
(7)  Property expressly excluded by any other law from regulation by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4087 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 8-326. - Penalty. 
    A violation of this article shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4087 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 8-327. - Violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer or any agent or employee thereof to not use the electronic inventory tracking system or violate any other provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4087 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 8-328. - Immediate physical alteration prohibited. 
    Before 120 hours has passed after purchasing the property, it shall be unlawful for the secondhand dealer or of their any agents or employees causing or allowing any used or secondhand goods physical alteration in such a manner as destroying or preventing the property from being identified. This section only applies to property not bearing a serial number or unique identifying marking. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4087 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 8-329. - Holding period. 
    The secondhand dealer must retain all property purchased covered in this article for at least 120 hours after the transaction. After proper documentation, the items not manufactured with a serial number or unique identifying marking are not subject to the 120 hour retention period. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4087 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-25-2019) 
Secs. 8-330-8-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Mobile food units, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 437. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-381. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Edible goods shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Prepackaged food, including, but not limited to, candy, beverages, and ice cream. 
(2)  Prepared food, including, but not limited to, hot dogs, desserts, and pizza. 
(3)  On-site prepared food, including, but not limited to, shaved ice, sandwiches, and tacos. 
    Food service establishment means businesses that sell edible goods and have been inspected and approved by the County Health Department, including commercial kitchens and commissaries, and shall specifically exclude accessory or self-serve retail food sales. 
    Mobile means the state of being in active, but not necessarily continuous, movement. 
    Mobile food court means a land use approved though a conditional use permit (see Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A)) and developed in conformity with an approved site plan (see Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A)), where two or more mobile food vendors congregate to offer edible goods for sale to the public and amenities are provided for all vendors' customers. 
    Mobile food vendors means any business that sells edible goods from a non-stationary location within the City. The term "mobile food vendors" shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Mobile food trucks. A mobile food truck is a self-contained motorized unit selling items defined as edible goods. 
(2)  Concession carts. Concession carts are mobile vending units that must be moved by non-motorized means. 
(3)  Concession trailers. A concession trailer is a vending unit which is pulled by a motorized unit and has no power to move on its own. 
    Non-refrigerated means edible goods that are not required to be kept at a temperature below 41 degrees Fahrenheit according to the Federal Food and Drug Administration and the Texas Food Establishment Rules. 
    Sell means the act of exchanging a good for a profit or in return for a donation. 
    Stationary location means the position of the mobile food vendor when not in motion and addressing the public for the purpose of sales. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(A)) 
Sec. 8-382. - Exemptions. 
    Individuals selling only non-refrigerated farm products in an unrefined state shall be considered as a mobile food vendor, as defined by this article, but shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(F)) 
Sec. 8-383. - Miscellaneous offenses and regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any individual as the agent or employee of another regulated under this article to sell edible goods in the City unless its principal or employer has received a permit under this article. 
(b)  A permit issued under this article is not transferable. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for an individual to sell edible goods while displaying a valid permit issued by the City in the name of another individual, organization, or entity. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any individual directly or through an agent or employee to sell goods within the corporate limits of the City after the expiration of the permit issued by the City under this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for an individual directly or through an agent or employee to misrepresent on the permit affidavit any acts that are regulated under this article. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any individual directly or through agents or employees to represent that the issuance of a permit by the City constitutes the City's endorsement or approval of the product for sale. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful to operate a mobile food vendor operation that is not in compliance with the Texas Food Establishment Rules as amended from time to time. 
(h)  A mobile food vendor permit may only be granted to a business that is associated with a food service establishment, as defined by this article, unless the mobile food vendor is not required to obtain a permit from the County Health Department. 
(i)  A violation of this article shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(E)) 
Sec. 8-384. - Zoning and location restrictions. 
(a)  Distance regulations. 
(1)  No mobile food vendor shall conduct business within any single-family residential or agricultural zoning district, including townhouse districts, but may be located in such districts when serving and within 100 feet of a property with an active building permit or located within a public park facility. 
(2)  A mobile food vendor may not be located within 100 feet of the primary entrance of an open and operating fixed-location food service establishment outside of Northgate. This buffer may be reduced upon receiving written permission from said establishments. 
(3)  In Northgate only, a mobile food vendor may not be located within 100 feet of an existing business lawfully operating as a restaurant as defined by the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A) within Northgate. This buffer may be reduced upon written permission from said restaurant. 
(4)  Minimum distance regulations for mobile food courts are described in Section 6.4, Specific Use Standards, of Article 6, Use Regulations, of the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). Minimum distance requirements may be increased through the conditional use permit process described in Article 3, Development Review Procedures, of the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). Individual mobile food vendors within a mobile food court shall be located as identified on the approved mobile food court site plan. 
(b)  A mobile food vendor shall not conduct sales at a stationary location: 
(1)  For a duration exceeding five hours per location per day. 
(2)  In NG-1 Core Northgate and NG-2 Transitional Northgate zoning districts only; for a duration exceeding 21 hours per location per day. 
(3)  For a duration exceeding 30 minutes on any public street designated on the City's Thoroughfare Plan as a minor collector or lesser. 
(4)  On any public street designated on the City's Thoroughfare Plan as a major collector or greater. 
(5)  In congested areas where the operation impedes vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(6)  In a designated bike lane. 
(7)  Between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., mobile food vendors within a mobile food court shall not be open between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. Sales shall only be within the approved hours of operation for the court, which may be restricted through the conditional use permit. 
(8)  Mobile food vendors on an approved pad site within a mobile food court may remain at the mobile food court with the following exceptions: 
a.  Mobile food vendors shall leave a short-term mobile food court site at least once a year to retain their status as mobile food vendors. 
b.  Mobile food vendors shall leave a long-term mobile food court site, or a pad site within the court, at least once a year to retain their status as mobile food vendors. 
(c)  Concession carts, permitted as mobile food vendors, may be located only within the Northgate zoning districts and Wolf Pen Creek District when operating at a mixed-use development, or within an approved mobile food court. Carts must be positioned as to not disrupt pedestrian traffic and must maintain an abutting five-foot clear space. 
(d)  Location regulations. 
a.  No mobile food vendor shall locate on any private property without written permission to do so and must comply if asked to leave by the property owner or City official. A copy of the written permission to operate in a specific location, signed by the private property owner, shall be kept within the mobile vending unit at all times. 
b.  A mobile food vendor may not be located within 20 feet of another mobile food vendor unless they are within a mobile food court and located in accordance with the approved mobile food court site plan. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(C)) 
Sec. 8-385. - Mobile food vendor requirements. 
    The following regulations shall apply to mobile food vendors within any zoning district: 
(1)  Each unit shall be equipped with a portable trash receptacle, and shall be responsible for proper disposal of solid waste and waste water in the sanitation facility legally accessed by the food service establishment. All disturbed areas must be cleaned following each stop at a minimum of 20 feet of the sales location. 
(2)  With the exception of the required trash receptacles, mobile food vendors shall not provide freestanding fixtures (e.g., tables, chairs, tents, and canopies). 
(3)  Continuous music or repetitive sounds shall not project from the mobile unit. 
(4)  A five-foot clear space shall be maintained around the mobile food vending unit. 
(5)  The mobile unit will be subject to inspection upon permit application through the Planning and Development Services Department and the Fire Marshal, and may be subject to random inspection and upon renewal of the permit. 
(6)  No sales are allowed within public park facilities while park concession units are operating. 
(7)  A "No Smoking" sign must be posted next to the order window or area. 
(8)  A tagged fire extinguisher shall be kept accessible as directed by the City Fire Marshal or designee. 
(9)  An extinguishing vent hood, Type 1 or other if approved by the City Fire Marshal, shall be required when the cooking process produces grease laden particles within the mobile unit. Said hood shall require testing in the presence of a College Station Fire Marshal designee. 
(10)  A service log for the mobile food vendor, documenting the date and time of arrival and departure from the food service establishment where the vendor's services are performed shall be maintained. The mobile food vendor shall make the service log available for inspection upon request. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(D)) 
Secs. 8-386-8-413. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 8-414. - Permit. 
    Every mobile food vendor shall have a permit issued by the City Planning and Development Services Department to conduct business in the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(B)(1)) 
Sec. 8-415. - Application. 
    An applicant shall apply for a permit on a form promulgated by the City Planning and Development Services Department. A complete application shall require the following information from the applicant to be considered: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Legal name of business or entity; 
(3)  State of incorporation or filing of a partnership or articles of association; 
(4)  If applicable, copy of Charter or Articles of Incorporation and current listing of directors, partners, or principles (publicly traded companies are exempted); 
(5)  Sales tax number with a copy of sales tax permit; 
(6)  Signed permission from the private property owner to use the property and its amenities; 
(7)  Name, phone number, and driver's license number of business owner; 
(8)  Contact name and phone number for mobile food vending unit while en route; 
(9)  Copy of permits to do business in the State for foreign companies; 
(10)  Description of product being sold; 
(11)  Description of attached signage; 
(12)  Vehicle identification number and description of mobile food vending unit; 
(13)  Proof of business auto liability insurance covering the mobile food vending unit; 
(14)  A signed affidavit under oath with photo identification that each individual applicant has no unpaid civil judgments against him or her in any state or U.S. possession which arise from a business activity which would have been covered by this article if in effect at the time in the jurisdiction where such judgments are of record; 
(15)  A statement of all convictions in any state, the United States or U.S. possession within the last ten years; 
(16)  A bond in the sum of not less than $1,000.00, executed by the mobile food vendor with two or more good and sufficient sureties satisfactory to the Finance Director, which bond shall be payable to the City, for the use and benefit of any person or persons entitled thereto, and conditioned that the principal and sureties will pay all damages to persons caused by or arising from or growing out of any action of the mobile food vendor while conducting business in the City. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the permit provided herein. The bond shall not be required for the sale of goods in interstate commerce; 
(17)  Copy of the County Health Department permit issued to the food service establishment; 
(18)  Copy of written permission to utilize the private facilities of the food service establishment. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(B)(2), (4)) 
Sec. 8-416. - Issuance procedures. 
    The application shall be processed through the following method: 
(1)  Application submitted to the City; 
(2)  Application shall be reviewed by designated City staff; 
(3)  City staff shall inform the County Health Department when the application is eligible for approval by the City; 
(4)  County Health Department may then accept an application from a mobile food vendor; 
(5)  Following notification from the City, the County Health Department may issue a permit when their application is eligible for approval; 
(6)  Applicant shall submit their County Health Department permit to the City; 
(7)  The City may then, and only then, approve a mobile food vendor permit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(B)(3)) 
Sec. 8-417. - Permit denial. 
    A permit may be denied where: 
(1)  An applicant is found to have an unpaid civil judgment against him or her which relates to the duties and responsibilities of the permitted occupation which shall be determined by the nature and the amount of the judgment, the relationship of the judgment to the purpose of the permit and the extent that the permit would allow someone to engage in further activity that would lead to unsatisfied civil judgments; 
(2)  An applicant has been convicted of a crime which directly relates to the duties and responsibilities of the licensed occupation which shall be determined by the nature and seriousness of the crime, the relationship of the crime to the purpose of the permit and the extent that the permit would allow someone to engage in further criminal activity; 
(3)  The required information is incomplete or incorrect or shows that a person is not otherwise entitled to conduct business as a mobile food vendor; or 
(4)  The opportunity to reissue a permit has been denied due to previous violations as described in this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(B)(6)) 
Sec. 8-418. - Permit fee. 
(a)  The application fee for a mobile food vendor permit shall be established in Section 2-117. Each mobile food vendor unit shall be permitted separately. 
(b)  Mobile food vendor permits shall be valid for one year from the date of permit issuance. 
(c)  Upon renewal, the applicant must provide a new complete application, payment of a renewal fee established in Section 2-117, and new permitting documentation. The applicant must submit the application and renewal fee within 30 days after expiration of the permit or must reapply as a new applicant. 
(d)  Concession carts shall apply under a reduced fee for initial application, and a reduced fee for a renewal, all as established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(B)(5); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-419. - Display of permit. 
    Every permit, including those from the City and the County Health Department, shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place where it can be read by the general public on the mobile food vendor's truck, concession cart, or concession trailer. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(B)(7)) 
Sec. 8-420. - Permit revocation or suspension. 
(a)  A permit may be revoked upon conviction of any offense committed by an individual operating as a mobile food vendor in the City while engaged in the permitted business, or if a final conviction occurs or is found to have existed at the time of application, or if civil judgments, as set forth above, are placed or found of record against an applicant. A permit may be suspended in the event of pending charges of a crime, as set forth above, upon a Magistrate's determination of probable cause in connection with such charges. 
(b)  A permit may be revoked for nonconformity to the application location specifications or requirements as well as to nonconformity to an approved location plan or diagram. 
(c)  Any employee working for an applicant permitted as an employer under this article may be denied the right to solicit under such permit, or such rights may be suspended or terminated, under the same circumstances and procedures which apply to the holder of the permit. Revocation or suspension of an employer's permit terminates all employee permits. 
(d)  A permit may be suspended or revoked for not complying with the requirements of this article, or any other ordinances, or laws. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(B)(8)) 
Sec. 8-421. - Appeal of permit revocation, suspension, or denial. 
(a)  The notice of revocation, suspension, or denial of a permit shall include the procedure for appealing the suspension, revocation, or denial. 
(b)  If a City official revokes, suspends or denies a mobile food vendor permit, the holder or applicant of the permit which has been revoked, suspended, or denied shall have the right of appeal to the City Planning and Development Services Director or designee by submitting an appeal in writing to the Director within ten business days of the revocation, suspension, or denial. 
(c)  Pending action on the appeal, a permit which has been revoked or suspended shall be considered revoked or suspended. 
(d)  If a written appeal is not submitted within ten business day of revocation, suspension, or denial, or if the appeal is denied, the permit shall hence be considered revoked, suspended, or denied. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(B)(9)) 
Sec. 8-422. - Reapplication after revocation, suspension, or denial of permit. 
(a)  If a mobile food vendor or applicant is not in compliance with this article or any other ordinances, laws, or the approved vendor application, the following actions will be taken: 
(1)  First violation. A warning may be issued, or the permit may be revoked or suspended and the vendor may become ineligible for new or reissued permit for three months. 
(2)  Second violation. Permit will be revoked and the vendor may become ineligible for new or reissued permit for three months. 
(3)  Third violation. Permit will be revoked and the vendor will become ineligible for new or reissued permit for one year. 
(b)  If an applicant's permit has been denied and the appeal is denied the applicant may not reapply for three months. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-20(B)(10)) 
Secs. 8-423-8-442. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - NORTHGATE OUTDOOR DINING AND ENTERTAINMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-443. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the Executive Director of Business Services or designee. 
    Application or permit application means the requirements under this article to submit to the City to obtain a permit approval. 
    Establishment means a business in the Northgate Central Business District that has a permit or is seeking permit approval. 
    Non-peak period means the hours between 2:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. The non-peak period will not apply on the days of Texas A&M University Home Football Games, Graduation, Parents Weekend and City-sponsored or co-sponsored events. 
    Non-permitted area means the remainder of the public sidewalk that is not considered to be a permitted area as determined by the City. No consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted in the non-permitted area. 
    Peak period means the hours between 9:00 p.m. and 2:30 a.m. 
    Permit means a Northgate outdoor dining permit issued by the City under this article. 
    Permitted area means any street level portion of public sidewalks in the Northgate Central Business District, defined by the City, that is in front of and parallel to an establishment, which only tables and chairs are placed on for the sole purpose of patrons consuming food or beverages at the tables, including alcoholic beverages, following authorization from the City by obtaining a permit under this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-21(A)) 
Sec. 8-444. - Offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any section of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to sell, possess, or consume alcoholic beverages in a non-permitted area. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to use the permitted area for purposes not identified in the permit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-21(M)) 
Secs. 8-445-8-471. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 8-472. - Required. 
    A permit is required to conduct outdoor dining in the Northgate Central Business District. Special events in the Northgate Central Business District involving the sale or consumption of alcohol are not required to obtain a permit pursuant to Article VI of this chapter. A special event providing for alcohol sales and consumption shall have a valid permit or license to sell or serve alcoholic beverages issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-21(C); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-473. - Application requirements. 
    The Administrator will have 30 days to deny or approve a permit application. The application must be in writing on a form provided by the City and may include the following information: 
(1)  Application fee. 
(2)  Completed application. 
(3)  One copy of a site plan including the following information: 
a.  North arrow. 
b.  Site plan with clearly identified measurements. 
c.  Name of adjoining street. 
d.  Outdoor seating plan (e.g., tables, chairs). 
e.  Dimensions and area (SF) of proposed improvement. 
f.  Width of adjacent sidewalk. 
g.  Sidewalk width remaining for clear path of travel. 
h.  Location of property lines. 
i.  Location of building entrances. 
(4)  Copy of Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission license or permit. 
(5)  Notarized authorization from the property owner of establishment location. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-21(D)) 
Sec. 8-474. - Approval of application. 
    Applications will be processed in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Pre-application conference. Prior to the submission of an application and site plan for a permitted area, applicants are encouraged to schedule and attend an optional pre-application conference in accordance with and for the purposes as set forth in the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A) for pre-application conferences. 
(2)  Final action by the Administrator. 
a.  Approval. If the proposed site plan is determined to be consistent with all applicable provisions of this division, the Administrator shall approve the site plan. 
b.  Denial. If it is determined that all such requirements and provisions have not been satisfied, then the application and site plan will be denied and notice of such disapproval shall be given to the applicant in writing. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-21(E)) 
Sec. 8-475. - Application fee. 
    Applicants for peak period must pay a nonrefundable permit application fee established in Section 2-117 when the original permit application is submitted to the City and a nonrefundable permit application fee established in Section 2-117 for an annual renewal. Non-peak period only permits shall not be assessed a permit fee. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-21(H); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-476. - Amended application. 
(a)  All outdoor dining must take place according to the approved permit. Any changes made in the permit must be submitted for approval to the Administrator as an amended permit application. Failure to submit an application for an amended permit may result in denial or revocation of any permit. 
(b)  The applicant must pay a nonrefundable amended permit application fee established in Section 2-117 when the amended permit application is submitted to the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-21(G); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-477. - Insurance indemnification and release. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued under this division until the applicant has filed with the Administrator a certificate of insurance, indicating that there is in effect public liability insurance covering any damages arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in connection with the permitted area. A public liability insurance policy shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the State. The policy shall be accompanied by a certificate from such company that such policy will be in force and effect during the full duration of the valid permit. Such policy shall be in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 for the death or injury of one person, and not less than $2,000,000.00 for death or injury in any one accident. The applicant should have the City named as an additional insured. 
(b)  The applicant must indemnify and release the City in connection and use of the permitted area before receiving a valid permit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-21(I)) 
Sec. 8-478. - Inspection. 
    Upon receiving a valid permit from the City, the applicant will allow any City official to inspect the permitted area for the purpose of maintaining and ensuring the health, safety, and welfare of the City. Inspections may occur at any time and may be without notice. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-21(J)) 
Sec. 8-479. - Conditions of permit. 
    In addition to other requirements in this section, the applicant shall comply with the following conditions: 
(1)  Physical barrier. During peak periods, a permitted area must be equipped with a physical barrier that separates the permitted area from the public area or non-permitted area. The physical barrier, tables, and chairs utilized shall be as identified in the City of College Station Design Standards: Northgate in the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). In the event that such barrier is removed from the permitted area, all damaged or affected public infrastructures must be repaired to a pre-barrier condition by the applicant. 
(2)  Surface. The surface of the permitted area may not be altered and must remain standard brick pavers on the exterior layer as specified in the City of College Station Design Standards: Northgate in the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). The permitted establishment shall keep the permitted area and adjacent sidewalk free of litter, trash, paper, and other waste at all times. 
(3)  Location. A permitted area may be located on College Main, along University Drive, and along the Promenade. At all times, the permitted establishment is responsible for ensuring the sidewalks maintain compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines. 
a.  College Main. An establishment adjacent to College Main may be permitted to use the balance of space between its facade and a 26-foot clear zone as determined by the Fire Department during peak or non-peak periods. 
b.  University Drive. An establishment adjacent to University Drive may use the balance of space between its facade and a ten-foot clear zone for a permitted area during non-peak periods. 
c.  Promenade. An establishment adjacent to the Promenade may use the balance of the space between its property line and a minimum 13-foot clear zone measured between the property line and the edge of the pavilion supports during non-peak periods. This clear zone is in addition to the remainder of the promenade pedestrian area. 
(4)  Time and service. The permitted area may only operate during the permitted establishment's business hours. While not in operation the tables and chairs must be stored within the business establishment and may not be stored in the permitted area. Service in the permitted area shall be limited to persons seated at tables and chairs. 
(5)  Alcohol. If alcohol is to be present in the permitted area, then the permitted area must adhere to this Code and all laws, rules, and regulations identified by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. 
(6)  Display. The permit must be placed in a conspicuous place at the entrance of the establishment. The permitted area must have at least two signs in a conspicuous place stating it is: 
"UNLAWFUL TO POSSESS AN OPEN CONTAINER OR PUBLICLY CONSUME AN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE OUTSIDE THIS ESTABLISHMENT AND THE PERMITTED AREA." 
(7)  Non-transferable. A permit may not be assigned or transferred. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-21(F)) 
Sec. 8-480. - Expiration and renewal. 
    The duration of a permit issued under this division is for one year. Before the expiration of the permit, the establishment must resubmit a permit application and fee at least 60 days before the expiration of the current permit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-21(B)) 
Sec. 8-481. - Denial or revocation of permit. 
(a)  A permit issued pursuant to this division may be revoked or denied if: 
(1)  The applicant or establishment does not comply with this division, City ordinance, or any other applicable law. 
(2)  The application contains a false statement of material fact. 
(3)  The Administrator finds the applicant has not met all the requirements established in this division or if the Administrator deems the requested area to be in conflict with any City service, goal, or objective. 
(b)  The applicant or any other person responsible for the permit will be notified of such revocation and shall immediately cease and dismantle operations in the permitted area. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-21(K)) 
Sec. 8-482. - Appeal of permit denial or revocation. 
(a)  The notice of denial or revocation of a permit shall include the procedure for appealing the denial or revocation. 
(b)  If a City official denies an application or revokes a permit, the permit holder or applicant of the permit which was denied or revoked shall have the right of appeal to the Administrator by submitting an appeal in writing to the Administrator within ten business days of the denial or revocation. 
(c)  Pending action on the appeal, a permit which has been revoked shall be considered revoked and an application, which has been denied, shall be considered denied. 
(d)  If a written appeal is not submitted within ten business days of denial or revocation, the application or permit will be considered denied or revoked. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-21(L)) 
Secs. 8-483-8-502. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-3928 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 11, 2017, repealed Art. X,  8-503-8-535, which pertained to transportation network companies and derived from Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-23(A)-(C), (D)(1), (D)(2)(a)-(c), and which was altered in the 2017 recodification, (E)-(G), (H)-(L), and which was altered in the 2017 recodification. 

Secs. 8-503-8-563. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - TAXICABS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority relative to taxicabs, Texas Local Government Code  215.004. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-564. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any individual, firm or corporation in the process of attaining either a license to operate or a City taxi driver permit. 
    Cruise or cruising means the movement of unoccupied taxicabs over the public streets of the City in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire; provided, however, unoccupied taxicabs proceeded to answer a telephone call for taxicab service from an intending passenger, and taxicabs returning to the place where such taxicab is housed or to the place of discharge of the passenger, shall not be considered to be cruising. 
    Driver or chauffeur means every person in actual charge of operation of a taxicab whether as owner or agent, servant or employee of the owner. 
    Jitney means a motor vehicle designed to carry 15 or fewer persons, including the driver, and used to transport passengers for hire. 
    License means the authority granted by the City to operate a taxicab and shall authorize such operator of a taxicab to engage in the business of transportation by taxicab. 
    Overcrowding means that the driver is transporting a greater number of people in the vehicle than has been recommended by the manufacturer of the vehicle or for whom there is no seat belt, inclusive of the driver. 
    Owner or operator means any person who has the control, direction, maintenance, and the benefit of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of taxicabs on or over the streets of the City whether as owner or otherwise, except the term "driver" as herein defined. 
    Taxi driver permit means a permit issued by the City to the driver of a taxicab meeting the qualifications as described within this article. 
    Taxicab and limousine , as distinguished below, shall collectively encompass all vehicles which transport passengers for hire, except only for those classes of vehicles which are specifically excluded by Section 8-565(8). Taxicab service shall be distinguished from limousine service in the following manner: 
(1)  Taxicab service is rendered in prompt response to receipt of the request for service from the customer. Such requests are typically received in one of the following ways: 
a.  Via telephone, in which case a dispatcher forwards the customer's request to a taxicab driver via two-way radio as soon as a taxicab vehicle is available to respond. 
b.  Via direct contact, in which case the customer communicates directly with the driver of a taxicab waiting at a motel, hotel, airport, or bus terminal or similar location. 
c.  Via direct contact, in which case a customer hails or flags down a passing taxicab. 
(2)  Limousine service is chartered or reserved by the customer at a minimum of 24 hours in advance of the time the service is rendered. 
(3)  A taxicab is designed to carry no more than eight passengers. 
    Terminal means the depot at which place the taxicabs shall be housed or parked, and at which place the telephone calls and requests for service shall be made, and at which place a dispatcher shall control the movements of the taxicabs to the points of request for taxicab service; this term shall likewise be synonymous with taxi terminal and shall mean and embrace that space and area of land and buildings off of the streets of the City, and upon private property, and shall be and constitute the main office of the owner and taxicab operator. 
    Vehicle permit means a permit issued by the City to the owner of a taxicab that has been issued a license by the City to operate within the City, and that taxicab has met the qualifications as described within this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(A); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-565. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Motor buses regularly operated in the City to or from points outside of the incorporated limits of the City or transporting to or from school or college. 
(2)  Ambulances operating under permit from this City or another City. 
(3)  Vehicles rented or leased for self-operation by the person actually driving the same, unless such vehicle is transporting for compensation persons other than the one who actually rented or leased the same. 
(4)  Vehicles owned or operated by motels, hotels, and other businesses for transporting their guests or employees without charge. This article shall apply, however, to other companies or individuals providing such service under a contract with said motels, hotels, or other businesses. 
(5)  Any vehicle being operated pursuant to a franchise or permit legally issued by the Texas Railroad Commission or the Interstate Commerce Commission. 
(6)  Transportation of people where the taxicab or limousine is licensed by another governmental entity from a point outside the City to a destination inside the City if the taxicab or limousine leaves the City without receiving a passenger inside the City. 
(7)  Horse-drawn carriages. 
(8)  Limousines. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(B)) 
Sec. 8-566. - Miscellaneous offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the taxicab business to overcrowd the taxicab. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to represent himself or herself as another taxicab company. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab or for any other person acting for the driver to seek or solicit patrons or passengers for any such taxicab by word or sign, directly or indirectly, while driving any such taxicab over, through or on any public street or public place of the City, or while same is parked on any public street or alley of the City, or to repeatedly or persistently drive any taxicab through, over, or on, any public street or places in the City, except in response to calls of prospective passengers or while actually transporting passengers therein. 
(d)  When any taxicab is at any rail, air, or bus depot within the City, it shall be unlawful for the driver or person in charge thereof to leave the same and enter the depot or go upon the sidewalk or private property of any railroad company, airfield, or bus station for the purpose of soliciting the transportation of any passenger or passengers arriving on the trains, planes, or buses at such depot. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the City to accept, or a taxicab service licensee or employee to offer, either directly or indirectly, any gifts, discounts, or gratuities in association within the provision of taxicab services. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for a taxicab driver to receive or discharge passengers in the roadway of any street. It is a defense to this subsection that said driver drove to the right-hand sidewalk, the extreme right-hand side of the road as nearly as practical, or into a driveway or parking lot for such purposes. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for a taxicab driver employed to carry passengers to a definite point to fail to make the most direct route that will carry such passengers safely and expeditiously to their destination. 
(h)  Display of rates and fares. 
(1)  Rates and fares charged for passengers of the taxicab shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the inside of each taxicab for passengers in the front and back seats. 
(2)  Rates and fares charged for passengers of the taxicab shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the outside of the taxicab. 
(3)  All rates and fares, including flat, metered, and additional fees, shall be posted. 
(i)  Refusal to convey at specified rate; excessive fares. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of any taxicab to refuse to convey a passenger at the rate specified on the rate card displayed in the taxicab, or demand or receive an amount in excess of the rates displayed on such card. 
(2)  Unsolicited tips from the customer shall not be considered as part of the fare rate amount. 
(j)  Receipt for payment. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab, upon receiving full payment of a fare, to refuse to give a receipt upon the request of the passenger making such payment. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(O); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-567. - Property left in vehicle; disposition. 
    It shall be the responsibility of every taxicab driver to return to the owner any luggage, merchandise, or other property left in the taxicab whenever possible. If the owner is unknown or cannot be located, the driver shall deliver such articles to such driver's employer with a complete written report as to when it was left in the taxicab, the circumstances relating thereto and any other information which would assist in the identification or location of the owner of the article. The unclaimed article shall be maintained by the taxicab certificate holder for a six-month period prior to disposal. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(P)) 
Sec. 8-568. - Duty to transport passengers by shortest route. 
    Each driver of a taxicab in the City shall transport passengers to definite points designated by the passengers and shall take the most direct and shortest route to deliver such passengers safely and expeditiously to their destination. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(Q)) 
Sec. 8-569. - Central point of contact for complaints. 
(a)  The College Station Police Department shall be the central point of contact for any complaints or issues regarding taxicab companies located within in the City. Complainants shall call the Police Department's non-emergency phone at 978-764-3600. 
(b)  The College Station Police Department's non-emergency number shall be posted with the rates and fares inside and outside the taxicab. The complaint posting shall state: "Call the College Station Police Department for Complaints about this Taxicab at 978-764-3600." 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(R)) 
Secs. 8-570-8-586. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SERVICE LICENSE 

Sec. 8-587. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for an individual, firm, or corporation to drive or operate or cause to be driven or operated any taxicab service upon or over any street in the City unless there has first been obtained for such service, a license duly issued by the City as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(C)(1)) 
Sec. 8-588. - Application. 
(a)  Application for taxicab license service within the City shall be filed with the City on a form provided by the City. Applications shall be filed on or before December 1 of each calendar year. The applicant shall provide the following information on such form: 
(1)  Name of the owner, or person by whom such permit is desired; 
(2)  Name of company; 
(3)  Address of company; 
(4)  Telephone number of company; 
(5)  If a corporation, name and address of major officers of corporation and major stockholders; 
(6)  If a partnership or association, trade, partnership, or associate name, and name and address of partners; 
(7)  If a sole proprietorship, name and address of owner; and 
(8)  A statement that the applicant has not been finally convicted of any felony or other offense involving moral turpitude within the past ten years which adversely affects the applicant's ability to provide safe and reliable passenger transportation. 
(b)  The application shall include a sworn statement by the applicant that all information provided in the application is true and correct and shall further state that the City is authorized to require a copy of the applicant's driving record and criminal history provided by the applicant, if any. The City shall investigate the facts stated in the application. 
(c)  Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable license fee established in Section 2-117 to defray the expense of carrying out the provisions of this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(C)(2); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-589. - Insurance. 
(a)  Before the City will issue a taxicab service license, any applicant for a taxicab service license must deliver to the College Station Police Department a certificate of insurance showing the City as the certificate holder, and reflecting insurance coverage as stated below, with a cancellation endorsement. The applicant must keep in full force and effect during the term of the taxicab service license, a policy of commercial general (public) liability insurance issued by an insurance company fully authorized to do business in this State and performable in the County, insuring the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of such vehicle. The certificates of insurance must contain an endorsement providing that coverage under such policies shall not be canceled, non-renewed, or materially changed until at least 30 days' prior written notice has been given to the City. Passenger liability exclusions are expressly prohibited. Insurance shall be in the following minimum amounts: 
(1)  General liability insurance with limits of liability of not less than $500,000.00 per occurrence, with an aggregate amount of $1,000,000.00, covering property damage, bodily injury and personal injury, to secure payment of all lawful and proper claims arising out of the operations of the vehicle-for-hire service authorized hereunder. This section applies only to those vehicle-for-hire services with a fixed base of operation, such as an office or terminal, that is visited by customers to secure services. 
(2)  Automobile insurance with limits of liability of no less than $30,000.00 for bodily injury or death to any one person in any one accident, $60,000.00 due to bodily injury or death to two or more people in any one accident, and $25,000.00 for claims of property damage in any one accident; and personal injury protection coverage with a limit of liability of no less than $5,000.00. 
(b)  In the event any insurance policy is canceled upon the request of the surety or insured, and no insurance policy is filed by the license holder before the cancellation date, the taxicab service license shall be automatically revoked. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(E)) 
Sec. 8-590. - Issuance. 
    The City or designee shall issue to each applicant a taxicab service license for the business upon the filing of written proof of insurance as required herein and upon a determination that all requirements of this division have been met. The taxicab service license shall be issued for the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31. Any new license issued during the year shall begin on the date of issuance and end on December 31 of that year. The taxicab service license shall state the year for which it is valid. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(F)) 
Sec. 8-591. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The City is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke or suspend any license issued hereunder upon finding that any taxicab service operator has willfully violated any of the provisions of this article. Such revocation or suspension shall take effect upon delivery of written notice thereof to the taxicab service operator, with such delivery being made in person or by certified mail through the United States Postal Service; provided, however, that the taxicab service operator shall have the right to appeal to the City Manager from any such action of the City by delivering such appeal to the City Secretary not more than five days after the action appealed from. In the event the taxicab service operator shall fail to deliver such notice to the City Secretary within the time prescribed, the action of the City in revoking or suspending the license shall be final. If the taxicab service operator timely delivers the notice to the City Secretary, the City Manager or designee shall hear the appeal not more than 20 days after the filing of the notice of appeal with the City Secretary. 
(b)  A license may be revoked or suspended by the City upon the verification of any of the following: 
(1)  The taxicab service operator has been finally convicted of a felony or other offense involving moral turpitude, which adversely affects the operator's ability to provide safe and reliable passenger transportation to the public; 
(2)  The license was obtained by an application in which any material fact was intentionally or otherwise omitted or falsely stated; 
(3)  The taxicab service operator has persisted in the operation of motor vehicles that are in violation of any law; 
(4)  The taxicab service operator has willfully and knowingly violated or failed to comply with any of the provisions hereof or any policies or rules set out pursuant to this article; 
(5)  The taxicab service operator or any agent hereof has been guilty of willfully operating said service in a negligent manner; 
(6)  The taxicab service operator has allowed its insurance to be canceled, withdrawn, terminated, or to fall below the minimum prescribed in this division; 
(7)  The taxicab service operator has allowed any of its vehicles or equipment to become damaged, deteriorated, or unclean to the extent that it is unsatisfactory for public use; 
(8)  The taxicab service operator is delinquent on any taxes owed to the City or fails to show financial ability to maintain services in compliance with the terms hereof; or 
(9)  The taxicab service operator has allowed any driver or attendant to drive taxicabs after final conviction of an offense as described in Section 8-617(3). 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(D); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 8-592-8-615. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER PERMIT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority relative to cabdrivers, Texas Local Government Code  215.029. 

Sec. 8-616. - Required; display to City officials. 
    In accordance with the terms and provisions of this article, every individual desiring to drive a taxicab in the City, before driving a taxicab, shall apply for and obtain a City taxi driver permit. A taxicab service licensee may not cause or otherwise allow a person to drive for hire a taxicab owned, controlled or operated by the licensee unless the driver has a valid City taxi driver permit issued to them under this division. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any taxicab unless and until the person has provided the person's name, address, date of birth, and State driver's license number to the City and been issued a City taxi driver permit. All drivers shall display, upon request of a City official, a City taxi driver permit issued by the City as described herein. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(G)) 
Sec. 8-617. - Application. 
    Every individual proposing to drive a taxicab within the City shall submit an application to the City. The application shall include a sworn statement by the applicant that all information provided in the application is true and correct and shall further state that the City is authorized to require a copy of the applicant's driving record and criminal history provided by the applicant, if any. The City shall investigate the facts stated in the application. A City taxi driver permit shall be issued to each driver fulfilling the requirements of this division. Every applicant shall furnish under oath the following information: 
(1)  Name, local residence address, date of birth, and telephone number. 
(2)  State driver's license number, expiration date and three-year driving record. 
(3)  A statement that the applicant has not been finally convicted within the past ten years of a felony or the following offenses involving moral turpitude which adversely affects the applicant's ability to provide safe and reliable passenger transportation: 
a.  Prostitution or related offenses; 
b.  Driving while intoxicated; 
c.  Driving while under the influence of drugs; 
d.  Violations of the Texas Controlled Substance Act (Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 481); 
e.  Rape, murder, attempted murder, aggravated assault; 
f.  Theft over $500.00; or 
g.  A felony or other offense involving moral turpitude which adversely affects the applicant's ability to provide safe and reliable passenger transportation. 
(4)  That the applicant has read in full and understands the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(H)) 
Sec. 8-618. - Grounds for refusal to issue. 
    The City representative shall approve or deny the application. The application shall be denied if the applicant's past criminal or traffic record indicates unfitness for driving a taxicab. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(J)) 
Sec. 8-619. - Fee generally; issuance; term. 
(a)  Upon finding that the applicant meets the qualifications stated herein, the City shall cause to be issued to such applicant a City taxicab driver permit. Each permit issued shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year in which the permit is issued. 
(b)  The annual fee for driver's permits shall be established in Section 2-117. No portion of the fee shall be refunded in the event the permit is terminated prior to expiration. Permit documents which are lost or destroyed may be replaced upon payment of a fee established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(I); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-620. - Term; expiration; renewal. 
    The term of all permits shall be for not more than one year with expiration on December 31. Renewals shall be applied for in the same manner as specified for the original permit. Renewal permits may be issued during the month of December for expiration on December 31 of the following year. Permit documents which are lost or destroyed may be replaced upon payment of a fee established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(K); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-621. - Display. 
(a)  No person shall drive a taxicab within the City unless the driver's permit issued by the City is displayed at a conspicuous place inside the vehicle in view of the passengers. The permit, including the photo, shall not be altered in any manner. 
(b)  The City shall provide the permit along with a picture which shall be laminated. A second picture will be kept on file along with the taxi permit application. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(L)) 
Sec. 8-622. - Revocation and suspension. 
(a)  The City is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke or suspend any taxicab driver permit issued hereunder upon finding that any permittee has willfully violated any of the provisions of this article. Such revocation or suspension shall take effect upon delivery of written notice thereof to the permittee, with such delivery being made in person or by certified mail through the United States Postal Service; provided, however, that the permittee shall have the right to appeal to the City Manager from any such action of the City by delivering such appeal to the City Secretary not more than five days after the action appealed from. In the event the permittee shall fail to deliver such notice to the City within the time prescribed, the action of the City in revoking or suspending the permit shall be final. If the permittee timely delivers the notice to the City Secretary, the City Manager or designee shall hear the appeal not more than 20 days after the filing of the notice of appeal with the City. 
(b)  A permit may be revoked or suspended by the City upon the verification of any of the following: 
(1)  The permittee has been finally convicted of a felony or other offense involving moral turpitude within the past ten years which adversely affects the applicant's ability to provide safe and reliable passenger transportation; 
(2)  The permit was obtained by an application in which any material fact was intentionally or otherwise omitted or falsely stated; 
(3)  The permittee has persisted in the continued operation of motor vehicles that are in violation of any law; 
(4)  The permittee has willfully and knowingly violated or failed to comply with any of the provisions hereof or any policies or rules set out pursuant to this article; 
(5)  The permittee has been found guilty of willfully operating said taxicab in a negligent manner; 
(6)  The permittee has allowed insurance on a taxicab driver by said permittee to be canceled, withdrawn, terminated, or to fall below the minimum prescribed in this article; 
(7)  The permittee has allowed any of its vehicles or equipment to become damaged, deteriorated or unclean to the extent that it is unsatisfactory for public use; 
(8)  The permittee has continued to drive a taxicab after final conviction of an offense as described in Section 8-617(3); 
(9)  The permittee has altered, or cause to be altered, the City taxi driver permit photograph. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(M); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 8-623-8-647. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VEHICLE PERMIT 

Sec. 8-648. - Required. 
    No taxicab shall be operated without a vehicle permit therefor. 
(Added in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-649. - Application. 
(a)  Every application for a vehicle permit under this division shall be in writing, signed and sworn by the applicant to be true and correct, and shall be filed with the City. The application shall be on the form provided by the City and shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant; 
(2)  If a corporation, corporate name, place of incorporation, address and telephone number; 
(3)  If a partnership, name of the partnership, and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all partners; 
(4)  Number of the applicant's operating license; 
(5)  Make, model, body style, model year, color of vehicle, and seating capacity per manufacturer's recommendations; 
(6)  Number and expiration date of State license plate number and State vehicle inspection sticker; 
(7)  Vehicle identification number; 
(8)  Owner of vehicle, if different than applicant. 
(b)  Vehicle requirements. Vehicles must meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Conform to all minimum safety standards as required by the State; 
(2)  Display the City permit inside the vehicle at a place visible to the occupants; 
(3)  Each taxicab must have affixed thereto a valid and current state certificate of inspection and state certificate of registration; 
(4)  Each vehicle shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher that is in good operating order; 
(5)  Each vehicle shall be reasonably free from dirt or rubbish and shall be otherwise clean and sanitary; 
(6)  The vehicle identification number and the license number of each taxicab must match the numbers listed for that taxicab on the license application; 
(7)  Each vehicle shall have the business name and phone number affixed to the door and it must show that it is a taxicab in lettering of not less than 21/2 inches in height. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(N)(2)) 
Sec. 8-650. - Fees. 
    The annual fee for vehicle permits issued prior to June 30 shall be established in Section 2-117. The fee is not refundable in the event the permit is canceled or revoked prior to expiration. Permit documents which are lost or destroyed may be replaced upon payment of a fee established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(N)(1); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-651. - Inspection of vehicle. 
    No permit shall be issued or reinstated until the vehicle has been inspected by a City official. An inspection checklist form provided by the City to certify that the vehicle has fully complied with all requirements thereon shall be completed at that time. Vehicles shall be subject to re-inspection at any time by a City official. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(N)(4)) 
Sec. 8-652. - Term; expiration; renewal. 
    The term of all vehicle permits shall be not more than one year with expiration on December 31. Renewals shall be applied for in the same manner as specified for the original permit. Renewal permits may be issued during the month of December for expiration on December 31 of the following year. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(N)(5)) 
Sec. 8-653. - Suspension of vehicle permit. 
    Every vehicle permit issued under this division shall be suspended by the City if the vehicle has ceased to comply with the requirements set forth in Section 8-649(b). 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(N)(7)) 
Sec. 8-654. - Reinstatement of suspended permit; fee. 
    Vehicle permits suspended because of failure to comply with the requirements of Section 8-649(b) may be reinstated as soon as the vehicle is brought back into compliance with Section 8-649(b). Application for such reinstatement shall be made in writing to the City on the form provided by the City. The non-proratable fee for such reinstatement shall be established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(N)(9); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-655. - Revocation of vehicle permit. 
    Every vehicle permit issued under this division shall be revoked by the City or designee if the operating license or combined operating license under which the permit was granted has been terminated. Every vehicle permit issued under this division shall also be subject to revocation for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The permit was obtained by an application of which any material fact was omitted or stated falsely. 
(2)  The permit holder has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or has persisted in permitting the holder's vehicle to be operated in violation of any law. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(N)(6)) 
Sec. 8-656. - Suspension or revocation proceedings. 
    If the City determines that grounds exist for revocation or suspension of a permit, the permit holder shall be notified of such revocation or suspension in writing by certified mail, stating the reasons for such revocation, the effective date of revocation, and that the holder of the permit has the right to appeal the revocation or suspension to the City Manager by filing within five days a written notice of appeal with the City Secretary. Otherwise, the revocation or suspension is final and non-appealable. In addition, the City may confiscate the permit document. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-6(N)(8)) 
Secs. 8-657-8-685. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - PEDICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-686. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means any person, individual, firm, or corporation in the process of attaining either a license or permit. 
    Driver or operator means every person in charge of the operation of a pedicab whether as owner, agent, servant, or employee of the owner. 
    Overcrowding means the driver is transporting a greater number of passengers in the pedicab than has been recommended by the pedicab manufacturer or in violation of the limits set by this article. 
    Owner or operator means any person who has the control, direction, maintenance, and the benefit of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of pedicabs on or over the streets of the City whether as owner or otherwise, except "driver" as herein defined. 
    Pedicab means a tricycle not wider than 54 inches at its widest point specifically designed and manufactured to transport passengers. 
    Pedicab driver permit means a permit or license issued by the City to the driver of a pedicab meeting the qualifications as described within this article. 
    Pedicab permit means a permit or license issued by the City to the owner of a pedicab that has been issued a license by the City to operate within the City, and that pedicab has met the qualifications as described within this article. 
    Pedicab service means the business of offering or providing transportation of persons for hire or for a gratuity in a pedicab when a driver is furnished as part of the service. 
    Pedicab service license or license means the authority granted by the City to operate a pedicab and shall authorize an operator of a pedicab service. 
    Tricycle means a device that is propelled by human power on which a person may ride and has three wheels in contact with the ground, any of which is more than 16 inches in diameter. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(A); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-687. - Central point of contact for complaints. 
(a)  The College Station Police Department shall be the central point of contact for any complaints or issues regarding pedicab companies located within in the City. Complainants shall call the Police Department's non-emergency phone at 978-764-3600. 
(b)  The College Station Police Department's non-emergency number shall be posted with the rates and fares inside and outside the pedicab. The complaint posting shall state: "Call the College Station Police Department for Complaints about this Pedicab at 978-764-3600." 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(R)) 
Sec. 8-688. - Pedicab requirements and inspections. 
(a)  The permittee, license holder or driver shall at all times provide and maintain in good operating condition the following equipment for each pedicab: 
(1)  A headlight capable of emitting a light at a distance of 500 feet or greater, as delegated by Texas Transportation Code  551.104. 
(2)  Two properly functioning and operating taillights and signal lights. 
(3)  Rear and side reflective devices. 
(4)  A properly functioning and operating braking system. 
(5)  A properly functioning and operating horn. 
(6)  A rearview mirror. 
(7)  Sufficient rubber and treading on all wheels. 
(8)  A slow-moving vehicle emblem. 
(9)  Proof of insurance and City map. 
(10)  No exposed rust, ripped upholstery or fabric, visible chips or scratches on any painted surface, exposed wood that is not painted and in good condition, or dirt or debris on any surface accessible to passengers. 
(11)  Seat strap available for passenger use. 
(12)  A sign on the body of the pedicab stating the name under which the pedicab is operated. The name must be in letters not less than 21/2 inches in height and 5/16 -inch in width, and must be of a solid color that contrasts with the background. 
(13)  The identification number assigned by the College Station Police Department for the pedicab and the telephone number or web page address of the pedicab company shall be displayed on the rear of the pedicab with numerals not less than 21/2 inches in height and 5/16 -inch in width. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued or reinstated until the pedicab has been inspected by a City official. An inspection checklist form provided by the City to certify that the pedicab has fully complied with all requirements thereon shall be completed at that time. Pedicabs are subject to re-inspection at any time by a City official. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(N)) 
Sec. 8-689. - Conduct of drivers. 
    Drivers at all times shall: 
(1)  Act in a reasonable, prudent, and courteous manner. 
(2)  Maintain a sanitary and well-groomed appearance. 
(3)  Not inhale or consume any alcoholic beverage, drug, or other substance that could adversely affect their ability to operate a pedicab. 
(4)  Not permit a person other than another employee of the pedicab service with a valid pedicab driver permit to operate a pedicab under their control. 
(5)  Not permit any person to ride on a place not intended for passengers of the pedicab. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(B)) 
Sec. 8-690. - Operation of pedicabs. 
(a)  When travelling on roadways with multiple lanes a pedicab driver must travel in the right lane, unless the destination requires otherwise. 
(b)  Pedicabs may not operate on sidewalks or other pedestrian designated areas. 
(c)  Pedicabs may not travel on roadways with a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour, except for the purpose of crossing the roadway. 
(d)  Pedicabs may not stand or park on public roadways for longer than is reasonably necessary to load or unload passengers. All loading of passengers from a roadway must be from the curb lane. 
(e)  A pedicab operator may not disrupt pedestrian traffic and must obey all traffic laws of the State and the City. 
(f)  A pedicab is limited to a maximum passenger capacity of three, excluding the pedicab driver. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(C)) 
Sec. 8-691. - Miscellaneous offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the pedicab business, or driving or operating a pedicab to overcrowd the pedicab. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any pedicab driver to represent themselves as another pedicab company. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any driver of any pedicab or for any other person acting for the driver to seek or solicit patrons or passengers for any such pedicab by word or sign, directly or indirectly, while driving any such pedicab over, through or on any public street or public place of the City, or while same is parked on any public street or alley of the City. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the City to accept, or a pedicab service licensee or employee to offer, either directly or indirectly, any gifts, discounts, or gratuities in association within the provision of pedicab services. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a pedicab driver to receive or discharge passengers in the roadway of any street. It is a defense to this subsection that said driver drove to the right-hand sidewalk, the extreme right-hand side of the road as nearly as practical, or into a driveway or parking lot for such purposes. 
(f)  Failure to pay fare. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any pedicab after having hired the same or to hire any pedicab with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any part of this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(P)) 
Sec. 8-692. - Display of rates and fares. 
(a)  Posted amounts. Rates and fares charged for passengers of the pedicab shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the inside of each pedicab for passengers in the front and back seats and on the outside. 
(b)  Receipt for payment. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any pedicab, upon receiving full payment of a fare, to refuse to give a receipt upon the request of the passenger making such payment. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(Q)) 
Secs. 8-693-8-712. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE AND PERMIT 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 8-713. - License, required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, individual, firm, or corporation to drive or operate or cause to be driven or operated any pedicab service upon or over any street in the City, unless there has first been obtained a license and permit issued by the City as provided in this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(D)(1)) 
Secs. 8-714-8-739. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - License 

Sec. 8-740. - Application requirements. 
    Application for pedicab license service within the City shall be filed with the City Police Department on a form provided by the City. Applications shall be filed on or before December 1 of each calendar year. The applicant must provide the following information: 
(1)  Name of the owner or person seeking the pedicab license. 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of company or person. 
(3)  If a corporation, name and address of major officers of corporation and major stockholders. 
(4)  If a partnership or association, trade, partnership, or associate name, name and address of partners. 
(5)  If a sole proprietorship, name and address of owner. 
(6)  A statement that the applicant has not been convicted of any felony or other offense involving moral turpitude within the past ten years, which may adversely affect the applicant's ability to provide safe and reliable passenger transportation. The application shall include a sworn statement by the applicant that all information provided in the application is true and correct and shall further state that the City is authorized to require a copy of the applicant's driving record and criminal history provided by the applicant, if any, of the applicant. The City will investigate the facts stated in the application. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(D)(2)(a), (b)) 
Sec. 8-741. - Insurance requirements. 
    Any applicant for a pedicab license under this division shall, before any license can be issued, deliver to the City's Risk Management Department a certificate of insurance reflecting insurance coverage as provided below. 
(1)  Commercial general liability. An applicant, owner, or operator shall keep in full force and effect during the term of the pedicab service license a policy of commercial general liability insurance, issued by an insurance company licensed and authorized to do business in the State, insuring against any injury, loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of such pedicab or pedicabs for hire. 
(2)  Notice. Coverage under such policies shall not be non-renewed, canceled or materially changed until at least 30 days' prior written notice has been given to the City. Passenger liability exclusions are expressly prohibited. 
(3)  General liability insurance minimum requirements. General liability insurance with limits of liability of $500,000.00 per occurrence, with an aggregate limit of $1,000,000.00, covering property damage, bodily injury and personal injury; to secure payment of all lawful and proper claims arising out of the operations of the pedicab for hire service authorized hereunder. 
(4)  Canceled policies. In the event any of the aforementioned required insurance policies are canceled upon the request of the surety or insured, and no insurance policy is filed by the license holder before the cancellation date, the pedicab service license shall be revoked automatically without further notice. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(F)) 
Sec. 8-742. - License fee. 
    Each application must be accompanied by a non-refundable license fee established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(D)(2)(c); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-743. - Indemnification and release. 
    Each license will contain an agreement that the licensee will release and indemnify the City in performance of the pedicab service. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(D)(2)(d)) 
Sec. 8-744. - Issuance of license and term. 
(a)  Issuance. The Chief of Police or designee shall issue to each applicant a pedicab service license after the applicant has met all requirements of this division. 
(b)  Term. The pedicab service license will be issued for the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31. Any new license issued during the year shall begin on the date of issuance and end on December 31 of that year. The pedicab service license must state the year for which it is valid. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(G)) 
Sec. 8-745. - Revocation or suspension of pedicab service operator license. 
(a)  Revocation or suspension. The Chief of Police may revoke or suspend any license issued under this article upon finding that any pedicab service operator has violated any provision of this article. 
(b)  Notice. A revocation or suspension shall take effect upon delivery of written notice to the pedicab service operator in person or by certified mail through the United States Postal Service. 
(c)  Appeal. The pedicab service operator shall have the right to appeal to the City Manager from any such action of the City by delivering such appeal to the City Secretary not more than five days after the action appealed from. In the event the pedicab service operator shall fail to deliver such notice to the City Secretary within the time prescribed, the action of the City in revoking or suspending the license shall be final. If the pedicab service operator timely delivers the notice to the City Secretary, the City Manager or designee, shall hear the appeal not more than 20 days after the filing of the notice of appeal with the City Secretary. 
(d)  Reasons for revocation or suspension. A license may be revoked or suspended by the Chief of Police upon the verification of any of the following: 
(1)  The pedicab service operator has been arrested or convicted of a felony or other offense involving moral turpitude, which may adversely affect the operator's ability to provide safe and reliable passenger transportation to the public. 
(2)  The license was obtained by an application in which any material fact was intentionally or otherwise omitted or falsely stated. 
(3)  The pedicab service operator has persisted in the operation of pedicabs that are in violation of any law. 
(4)  The pedicab service operator has violated or failed to comply with any of the provisions in this article, any City ordinance or State law, or any policies or rules set out pursuant to this article. 
(5)  The pedicab service operator or any agent or employee has been operating the pedicab service in a negligent manner. 
(6)  The pedicab service operator has allowed its insurance to be canceled, withdrawn, terminated, or to fall below the minimum prescribed in this division. 
(7)  The pedicab service operator has allowed any of its pedicabs or equipment to become damaged, deteriorated, or unclean to the extent that it is unsatisfactory for public use. 
(8)  The pedicab service operator is delinquent on any taxes owed to the City or fails to show financial ability to maintain services in compliance with this article. 
(9)  The pedicab service operator has allowed any driver or attendant to drive pedicabs after conviction of a felony or other offense involving moral turpitude, which may adversely affect the operator's ability to provide safe and reliable passenger transportation to the public. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(E); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 8-746-8-773. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Permit 

Sec. 8-774. - Pedicab permits. 
(a)  Pedicab permit application. Application for a pedicab permit within the City shall be filed with the City Police Department on a form provided by the City. The applicant must provide the following information on such form: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of applicant. 
(2)  If a corporation, corporate name, place of incorporation, address and telephone number. 
(3)  If a partnership, name of the partnership, and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all partners. 
(4)  Number of the applicant's operating license. 
(5)  Make, model, body style, model year, color of pedicab, and seating capacity per manufacturer's recommendations. 
(6)  Pedicab identification number. 
(7)  Owner of pedicab, if different than applicant. 
(b)  Sworn statement. The application shall include a sworn statement by the applicant that all information provided in the application is true and correct. The City shall investigate the facts stated in the application. 
(c)  Fees. The annual fee for pedicab permits shall be established in Section 2-117. The fee is not refundable in the event the permit is canceled or revoked prior to expiration. Permit documents which are lost or destroyed may be replaced upon payment of a fee established in Section 2-117. 
(d)  Term, expiration, and renewal. The term of all pedicab permits are no longer than one year with expiration on December 31. Renewals shall be applied for in the same manner as specified for the original permit. Renewal permits may be issued during the month of December for expiration on December 31 of the following year. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(M); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-775. - Revocation and suspension of pedicab permit. 
(a)  General. The Chief of Police may revoke or suspend any permit issued under this division upon finding that any permittee has violated any provisions of this article or any of the following: 
(1)  The permit was obtained by an application of which any material fact was omitted or stated falsely. 
(2)  The permit holder has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or has persisted in permitting the holder's pedicab to be operated in violation of any law. 
(b)  Notice. A revocation or suspension shall take effect upon delivery of written notice to the permittee, in person or by certified mail through the United States Postal Service. 
(c)  Appeal. The permittee shall have the right to appeal to the City Manager from any such action of the City by delivering such appeal to the City Secretary not more than five days after the action appealed from. In the event the permittee shall fail to deliver such notice to the City Secretary within the time prescribed, the action of the City in revoking or suspending the license shall be final. If the permittee timely delivers the notice to the City Secretary, the City Manager or designee, shall hear the appeal not more than 20 days after the filing of the notice of appeal with the City Secretary. 
(d)  Reinstatement of suspended permit and fee. Pedicab permits suspended because of failure to comply with the requirements of this article may be reinstated as soon as the pedicab is brought back into compliance. Application for such reinstatement shall be made in writing to the City on the form provided by the City. The fee for reinstatement shall be established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(O); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 8-776-8-803. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DRIVER PERMIT 

Sec. 8-804. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or individual to drive or operate a pedicab in the City without applying and obtaining a pedicab driver permit. 
(b)  If a person or entity has a valid pedicab service license obtained under this article it does not allow any person to drive or operate a pedicab owned, controlled or operated by the licensee, unless the driver has a valid City pedicab driver permit issued under this division. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(H)) 
Sec. 8-805. - Application requirements. 
    Application for pedicab driver permit within the City shall be filed with the City Police Department on a form provided by the City. Applications shall be filed on or before December 1 of each calendar year. The applicant must provide the following information on such form: 
(1)  Name, local residence address, date of birth, and telephone number. 
(2)  State driver license number, expiration date and three-year driving record. 
(3)  A sworn statement that the applicant has not been convicted within the past ten years of a felony or the following offenses involving moral turpitude which adversely affects the applicant's ability to provide safe and reliable passenger transportation: 
a.  Prostitution or related offenses. 
b.  Driving while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs. 
c.  Violations of the Texas Controlled Substance Act (Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 481). 
d.  Rape, murder, attempted murder, aggravated assault. 
e.  Theft over $500.00. 
f.  A felony or other offense involving moral turpitude which may adversely affect the applicant's ability to provide safe and reliable passenger transportation. 
(4)  The application shall include a sworn statement by the applicant that all information provided in the application is true and correct and shall further state that the City is authorized to require a copy of the applicant's driving record and criminal history, provided by the applicant, if any. The City shall investigate the facts stated in the application. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(I)(1)-(4)) 
Sec. 8-806. - Fee. 
    The fee for driver permits issued shall be established in Section 2-117. No portion of the fee shall be refunded in the event the permit is terminated prior to expiration. Permit documents which are lost or destroyed may be replaced upon payment of a fee established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(I)(5); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 8-807. - Issuance and term. 
(a)  The Chief of Police or designee shall issue to each applicant a pedicab driver permit after the applicant has met all requirements of this division. 
(b)  The pedicab driver permit will be issued for the period beginning January 1 and ending December 31. Any new permit issued during the year shall begin on the date of issuance and end on December 31 of that year. The pedicab driver permit must state the year for which it is valid. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(J)) 
Sec. 8-808. - Display. 
(a)  No person shall drive or operate a pedicab within the City, unless the driver permit issued by the City is displayed on a conspicuous place inside the pedicab in view of the passengers. The permit, including the photo, shall not be altered in any manner. 
(b)  The City shall provide a laminated permit with a picture of the permittee. A second picture will be kept on file along with the pedicab permit application. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(L)) 
Sec. 8-809. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  Revocation or suspension. The Chief of Police may revoke or suspend any permit issued under this division upon finding the permittee has violated any provision of this article. 
(b)  Notice. A revocation or suspension shall take effect upon delivery of written notice to the permittee, in person or by certified mail through the United States Postal Service. 
(c)  Appeal. The permittee shall have the right to appeal to the City Manager from any such action of the City by delivering such appeal to the City Secretary not more than five days after the action appealed from. In the event the permittee shall fail to deliver such notice to the City Secretary within the time prescribed, the action of the City in revoking or suspending the license shall be final. If the permittee timely delivers the notice to the City Secretary, the City Manager or designee shall hear the appeal not more than 20 days after the filing of the notice of appeal with the City Secretary. 
(d)  Reasons for revocation or suspension. A permit may be revoked or suspended by the Chief of Police upon the verification of any of the following: 
(1)  The permittee has been arrested or convicted of a felony or other offense involving moral turpitude, which may adversely affect the operator's ability to provide safe and reliable passenger transportation to the public. 
(2)  The permit was obtained by an application in which any material fact was intentionally or otherwise omitted or falsely stated. 
(3)  The permittee has persisted in the operation of pedicabs that are in violation of any law. 
(4)  The permittee has violated or failed to comply with any of the provisions in this article, any City ordinance or State law, or any policies or rules set out pursuant to this article. 
(5)  The permittee or any agent hereof has been guilty of operating the pedicab service in a negligent manner. 
(6)  The permittee has allowed any of its pedicabs or equipment to become damaged, deteriorated, or unclean to the extent that it is unsatisfactory for public use. 
(7)  The permittee is delinquent on any taxes owed to the City or fails to show financial ability to maintain services in compliance with this article. 
(8)  The permittee has altered, or cause to be altered, the City pedicab driver permit photograph. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-22(K); altered in 2017 recodification) 
ARTICLE XIII. - DOCKLESS BIKE SHARE PROGRAM 

Sec. 8-810. - Applicability. 
    This Article applies to all dockless bike share systems and to all dockless bike share operators unless expressly provided otherwise herein. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-811. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Customer means a person who rents or otherwise uses a bicycle from a dockless bike share operator. 
    Dockless bike, bicycle or bike means a device that a person may ride that is propelled by human power, typically has two tandem wheels, and is part of a dockless bike share system. 
    Dockless bike share operator or operator means a corporation, firm, joint venture, limited liability company, partnership, person, or other organized entity that operates a dockless bike share system, whether for profit or not for profit. 
    Dockless bike share system means a system which provides bicycles for short-term rentals for point-to point trips and which may be locked and unlocked without the requirement of a bicycle rack or other docking station within the City. 
    Geo-fence platform means an interactive geographic spatial layer or map controlled by the City to quickly and effectively detect and manage connected devices, like shared bicycles, in the City's public spaces. 
    Geo-fence zone means an area used for commercial, single-family, or multi-family purposes in the City and which is designated in accordance with this Article defined by GPS or RFID that registers when a mobile device like a bicycle enters or leaves such designated area and in which operator is allowed to conduct certain activities as set forth in this Article. 
    Home zone means one or more areas located within a geo-fence zone which is approved by the City as a home zone for an operator within which operator may store, relocate or rebalance its fleet of bikes for availability to its customers or within which the City may relocate bikes which fail to meet the standards under this Article. 
    Public right-of-way means public land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, deed, or condemnation and intended for use by the public as a street, alley, or other public way. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-812. - Permit required. 
    Only dockless bike share systems are allowed pursuant to this Article, and expressly exclude scooters, and other electronic modes of transportation systems. Dockless bicycle share systems may operate in the City only in accordance with the terms of a City permit and must comply with all the provisions of this Article and applicable law. Permits shall be issued for a 12-month period unless expressly provided otherwise in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-813. - Permit application. 
    A person desiring to provide a dockless bike share system must first submit an application for a permit or for renewal of a permit, and may not operate such system until the permit or renewal thereof is approved by the City. The permit application shall contain the following: 
(a)  The name and form of business of the operator; 
(b)  The name, phone number, and business street address (and mailing address if different) of the operator and operator's agent for service of legal process, if different; 
(c)  The name, phone number (including cell number), street address of the local representative of the operator to the City available and authorized to act on behalf of the operator; 
(d)  Size and location of fleet; 
(e)  A photographic image or visual representation of each type of bicycle to be deployed as part of operator's dockless bike share system; 
(f)  A description of an internet-enabled mobile device application to be used by customers to register membership to locate, use, pay for, lock, and unlock each bicycle; 
(g)  The proposed geo-fence zones, including any area in which operator plans to expand its dockless bike share system during the permit period; 
(h)  Proposed home zones in the City, if any; 
(i)  A plan for operator to maintain each bicycle in a safe and operable condition, and to recover and repair bicycles discovered or reported to be unsafe or inoperable before redeployment; 
(j)  A plan for operator to rebalance and relocate bicycles; 
(k)  A plan for educating customers on the safe use of a bicycle, knowledge of compliance of all applicable laws and proper bicycle parking; 
(l)  Proof of current coverage of insurance as required by this Article; 
(m)  Payment of a permit fee in the amount applicable to the operator as specified in this Article; 
(n)  The provision of any other information reasonably requested by the City in making its determination; and 
(o)  An escrow account as required by this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-814. - Granting, renewing permit and permit terms. 
(a)  Granting or renewing permit. A person may operate a dockless bike share system only with a properly granted or renewed City permit as set forth in this Article, and only in accordance with applicable law. 
(b)  Terms of permit . The City may identify geo-fence zones and home zones within which an operator may conduct certain activities and such other reasonable terms as are necessary in order to ensure the public health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-815. - Permit denial and revocation. 
(a)  Denial of permit . The application shall be denied and no permit shall be issued if the City finds that: 
(1)  Any statement made in the application is incomplete, inaccurate, misleading, or false; 
(2)  The operator, its partners, officers, owners, and other principals have not paid to the City all fees due under this Article; or 
(3)  The operator has otherwise not complied with this Article or has had a history of noncompliance with the provisions of this Article. 
(b)  Revocation of permit . The City may revoke a permit due to operator's failure to comply with its permit, this Article, or any applicable federal, state, or local law or regulation. Permits may also be revoked for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  Poor customer response or service; 
(2)  Posing an unreasonable risk to the health, safety and welfare of the general public; 
(3)  Having a history of violating one or more requirements of this Article; or 
(4)  Nonpayment for monies owed City in accordance with this Article. 
(c)  Notice of denial or revocation. The City shall provide written notice within ten days of the denial or revocation of a permit to operator, which notice shall state the reason(s) for the decision and inform the operator of its right to appeal the decision in writing including by when and to whom it must be delivered. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-816. - Appellate review. 
    An operator may appeal the revocation, denial or terms of a permit to the City Manager or designee if it requests an appeal in writing and delivers it to the City Manager or designee not more than ten business days after receiving notice of the action. 
    The City Manager or designee shall act as the appeal hearing officer and shall conduct a hearing as soon as practicable or within five business days of receipt of notice of appeal. The hearing officer shall give the appealing party an opportunity to present information and to make argument on its behalf. The hearing officer may affirm, modify or reverse all or part of the action being appealed. If operator is in non-compliance with this Article or other applicable law, the hearing officer may give the operator an opportunity to correct the problem. 
    The decision of the hearing officer shall be rendered in writing to operator and as soon as practicable or within five business days of such hearing. The decision of the hearing officer is final. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-817. - Dockless bike sharing operating requirements. 
Each dockless bike share operator shall do the following: 
(a)  Customer communication . Provide a mechanism for customers to notify the operator that there is a safety or maintenance issue with the bicycle, and to include a telephone number, web address, and email address that must be properly established, maintained and available 24 hours a day; 
(b)  Affix on each bike . Affix on each bike the following: 
(1)  Contact information of the operator, including the web site address; 
(2)  Contact information of operator's customer service and report incorrectly parked dockless bicycle, safety concerns, complaints, or questions; 
(3)  A clearly visible name, logo, trademark, or other identifying information of the operator; and 
(4)  A unique identification for each deployed bicycle, consisting of number or letters or both. 
(c)  Customer notification . Notify customers via a web site or mobile device application the following information: 
(1)  Bicycle riders are encouraged to wear helmets; 
(2)  Bicycle riders must follow all traffic laws; 
(3)  Customers must park the bicycles properly and in compliance with this Article and applicable laws; and 
(4)  That the City is not responsible for educating users regarding bicycle laws. Neither is the City responsible for educating users on how to ride or operate a bicycle. 
(d)  Staffing . Maintain sufficient staff to relocate or rebalance bicycles on a regular basis as needed, in addition to handling local issues as they arise, including timely removals, installation or maintenance of equipment and other issues arising pursuant to this Article requiring local action on the part of operator; 
(e)  Contact information to City . Provide to City contact information for operator's staff responsible for the relocating or rebalancing bicycles, and the handling of all local issues as they arise, including removals, installation or maintenance of equipment, and other issues arising pursuant to this Article requiring local action on the part of operator; 
(f)  Repairs . Assume responsibility for the cost and all obligations associated with properly maintaining its bikes in good, safe operating condition, including fixing, repairing, or correcting each bicycle that is considered inoperable, unsafe, or otherwise in violation of the standards under this Article before re-deployment back into service; 
(g)  Repair and reimbursement of City costs . Be responsible for repair and payment of actual costs of repair to public infrastructure damaged by the use of operator's bicycles, including reimbursement to City if City makes such repair, and including payment of costs incurred by the City to remove and/or store bicycles that have been improperly parked or otherwise are required to be removed from the Public right-of-way or other areas pursuant to this Article. Payment shall be due within 30 days of written notice by City to operator; 
(h)  Change of information on permit . Operator's permit must be kept current and accurate at all times. Changes in the information of the permit, including geo-fence zones, home zones, size of fleet, change of inventory of fleet, change of address, contact person, or any other information must be approved through amending the permit before instituting such change. 
(i)  Geo-fence zones . Operators must identify the geo-fence zones in which they desire to conduct operations in the City. The City shall consider approval of these areas if operator establishes to city's satisfaction that it has an adequate plan for the geo-fence zones including an overall implementation plan that ensures the orderly conduct of its system as a whole, and that includes a bike parking system such as a rack or designated area, and which addresses all traffic, safety, public nuisance, and aesthetic issues. 
Dockless bike share operators shall have the capability to create geo-fence platform(s) operable on six workstations simultaneously, compatible with the City of College Station GIS system and must keep same operational at all times when operating within the City. 
(j)  Escrow accounts . The Operator must provide $5,000.00 in cash that the City will hold in escrow for the term of this permit to cover direct costs incurred by the City due to violations of the permit. Should the escrow account be debited and drop to an amount below $500.00, operator shall provide additional funds to raise the amount back to $5,000.00. 
(k)  Home zones . One or more home zones may be required or requested in the permit application. In such case, the City may approve one or more home zones if operator establishes to City's satisfaction that it has an adequate plan for the home zones including an overall implementation plan that ensures the orderly conduct of its system as a whole, and that includes a bike parking system such as a rack or designated area, a rebalancing program, and which addresses all traffic, safety, public nuisance, and aesthetic issues. 
(l)  Inoperable or unsafe. Any inoperable bicycle, or any bicycle that is not safe to operate shall be removed from service within 24 hours after notice from a customer, the City, or any third party, and shall be repaired before the bicycle is returned to service. 
(m)  Use of latest technology . Operator shall use and employ the latest technology reasonably available to it in carrying out its dockless bike share operations in the City, including enhancements to safety, accountability, and precision of location of bikes as possible. 
(n)  Operations center . Operators shall maintain a staffed operations center located within the City. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-818. - Safety. 
(a)  Standards . All bicycles deployed by an operator shall meet the standards outlined in the following: 
(1)  Code of Federal Regulations, Title 16, Chapter II, Subchapter C, Part 1512 - Requirements for Bicycles, as may be amended; 
(2)  International Standards Organization 43.150 - Cycles, subsection 4210, as may be amended; and 
(3)  Section 551.104 of the Texas Transportation Code, as may be amended, regulating the safety equipment of bicycles. 
(b)  Signage . All operators shall have visible language on signs approved by the City in designated parking areas or other appropriate places that notify the user that: 
(1)  Helmet use is encouraged while riding the bicycle; 
(2)  User shall yield to pedestrians on sidewalks; and 
(3)  When riding on a street, bicyclists must follow the rules of the road as one would in a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-819. - Bicycle parking. 
(a)  Proper parking . All bicycles deployed by an operator shall be parked: 
(1)  In an upright position on top of a hard surface; 
(2)  In a manner that does not detrimentally impact vehicular or pedestrian traffic; and 
(3)  Only within a geo-fence zone or home zone. 
(b)  Improper parking . Bicycles shall not be parked adjacent to or within: 
(1)  Transit zones, including bus stops and shelters; 
(2)  Loading zones; 
(3)  ADA handicap parking zones; 
(4)  Street furniture that requires pedestrian access; 
(5)  Curb ramps; 
(6)  Entryways and driveways; 
(7)  Within the visibility triangle at intersections; 
(8)  Rail road tracks and crossings; 
(9)  Passenger loading zones or valet parking service areas; and 
(10)  A place where the City determines poses an unreasonable risk to the health, safety, and welfare of the general public. 
(c)  Block faces . City reserves the right to determine certain block faces where dockless bicycle parking is prohibited; 
(d)  Remove or relocate . Relocate or remove from the public right-of-way or anywhere within the City each bicycle that is inoperable, unsafe, or otherwise failing to meet the standards under this Article, within the following times: 
(1)  Within two hours of when operator becomes aware of or receives notice between 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., seven days per week, except a holiday observed by the closure of City offices; and 
(2)  Within 12 hours of when operator becomes aware of or receives notice during all other times. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-820. - Survey, records, and data sharing. 
    Dockless bike share operators are required to report monthly information to the City regarding their operations, fleet, and membership. The goal of these reports is to better understand how the entire dockless bike share system is being utilized and to better inform future policy changes. Operators will work with the City to provide the following information on their operations in the City: 
(1)  Number of bicycles in their dockless bike share system; 
(2)  Origin and destination data; 
(3)  Usage (total trips, per timeframe, per location, per bicycle); 
(4)  Total number of customers; 
(5)  Customer survey and general demographics (if available); 
(6)  Reported repairs, collisions; 
(7)  Removal or relocation data including response times and locations; and 
(8)  Any other data determined by City as necessary to ensure compliance with this Article and with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-821. - Relocation, removal or impoundment. 
    The City has the right to relocate, remove, or impound any obstruction or encumbrance caused by a bicycle anytime such bicycle poses a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the general public or anytime a bicycle has been parked or otherwise located in violation of this Article. In such case the operator may be assessed a fee in accordance with this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-822. - Indemnity. 
    By making application for a permit, the operator, its assigns, successors, and representatives agree to and shall defend, indemnify, release, and hold the City, its agents, employees, officers, volunteers, and legal representatives harmless for all claims, causes of action, liabilities, fines, and expenses (including, without limitation, attorneys' fees, court costs, and all other defense costs and interests) for injury, death, damage, or loss to personal or real property sustained in connection with or incidental to the activity related to operating a dockless bike share system in the City and as may be authorized by the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-823. - Insurance. 
The following types of insurance must be procured and maintained by Operator: 
(a)  Commercial general liability with minimum limits of liability per occurrence of $1,000,000.00 with $2,000,000.00 general aggregate. 
(1)  Policy shall be written by a licensed carrier authorized to do business in Texas, rated A:VI or better under the current A. M. Best Key Rating Guide. 
(2)  Policy shall be endorsed to name the City of College Station as an additional insured, with a waiver of subrogation rights and "primary and non-contributory" language with regard to any self-insurance or insurance the City may have or obtain. 
(3)  Policy shall not exclude: personal and advertising liability, contractual liability (for the indemnity provided herein), products/completed operations; independent contracts. 
(b)  Business automobile liability . 
(1)  Policy shall be written by a licensed carrier authorized to do business in Texas rated A:VI or better under the current A. M. Best Key Rating Guide. 
(2)  Policy shall name the City of College Station as an additional insured, with a waiver of subrogation rights and "primary and non-contributory" language with regard to any self-insurance or insurance the City may have or obtain. 
(3)  Minimum combined single limit of liability of $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and property damage. 
(4)  Coverage shall include any autos, owned autos, leased or rented autos, non-owned autos and hired autos. 
(c)  Workers' Compensation Insurance. 
(1)  Statutory limits required. 
(2)  Employer's liability minimum limits of liability of $1,000,000.00 for each accident/each disease/each employee. 
(3)  "Texas Waiver of Our Right to Recover From Others Endorsement, WC 42 03 04." 
(4)  Texas must appear in Item 3A of the Workers' Compensation coverage or Item 3C must contain the following: "All States except those listed in Item 3A and the States of NV, ND, OH, WA, WV, and WY." 
Operator shall provide the City with evidence of required coverage on the most current State of Texas Department of Insurance-approved form. Carrier may be an eligible non-admitted insurer in the State of Texas. 
Policy shall not be canceled, non-renewed, suspended or reduced in limits of liability until the City has received 30 days' written notice of such change. Should policies lapse or expire, the permit shall automatically be suspended and operator shall discontinue its dockless bike share system within the City. Such permit suspension shall be in effect until operator provides City with evidence of a replacement policy. If operator fails to provide evidence of replacement policies acceptable to the City within five business days following the policy lapse, the permit shall terminate automatically. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-824. - Fees and costs. 
(a)  The following fees are established and may be assessed by the City in the amount set forth in Section 2-117: 
(1)  Permit application fee. 
(2)  Permit renewal fee. 
(3)  Removal, impoundment and/or relocation fee. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Sec. 8-825. - Violation; penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for a dockless bike share operator to operate, maintain or conduct within the City a dockless bike share system without first securing a permit, and/or without complying with all of the provisions of this Article or any other law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4024 , Pt. 2(Exh. A), 7-12-2018, effective 8-13-2018) 
Chapter 10 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Cemeteries, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 711 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY OWNED OR MAINTAINED CEMETERIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal cemetery authorized, Texas Health and Safety Code  713.001. 

Sec. 10-19. - Defined. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City cemeteries means the College Station Cemetery and the Memorial Cemetery of College Station, including the Aggie Field of Honor. College Station Cemetery consists of approximately 18 acres located at 2530 Texas Avenue South. Memorial Cemetery of College Station consists of approximately 56 acres located at 3800 Raymond Stotzer Parkway. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(A)(1)) 
Sec. 10-20. - General provisions. 
(a)  City cemeteries are set apart for the interment of human remains subject to the rules established in this article, the City Code of Ordinances, and any applicable Federal or State laws. Availability of spaces in the Aggie Field of Honor sections within the Memorial Cemetery of College Station is not restricted but is designed to be desirous to students, former students, faculty, staff, their families, and friends of Texas A&M University. 
(b)  All spaces in the City cemeteries owned and operated by the City are conveyed to the purchaser by warranty deed for the purpose of burial only. The rights of the purchaser therein are subject to such rules and ordinances as may be enacted or amended, from time to time, by the City Council. 
(c)  The rules and regulations herein contained are designed for the protection of the rights of all space owners. The rules adopted have been determined to be reasonably necessary and incidental to achieve the aforestated objectives. 
(d)  The City cemeteries shall be generally platted into sections, blocks, lots, and spaces by the City Manager or designee, who shall prepare, maintain and keep in the City Sexton's Office a plat of the City cemeteries. 
(e)  The Shiloh and Salem portions of the College Station Cemetery are closed to future burials except in those spaces which are clearly identified as available by the Cemetery Sexton. The term "clearly identifiable" means by headstones, curbing, or other physical and visual indicators or demarcations. If a family member is interred, and space in the proximity is available, the Cemetery Sexton may allow the space to be used. If an available space is not locatable, then other alternate locations will have to be sought other than the Shiloh and Salem portions of the cemetery. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(A)(2)-(6)) 
Sec. 10-21. - Administration. 
    All administrative matters pertaining to the operation of the City cemeteries shall be under the direction of the City Manager or designee. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(B)) 
Sec. 10-22. - Records. 
    Records giving full data on all interments shall be kept in the City files, and shall be open to authorized persons. The data is to include the section, lot, and grave location; and the name, age, and the date of interment of each grave occupant. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(G)) 
Sec. 10-23. - Cemetery care. 
(a)  The City shall provide for the continuing care, maintenance, operation, and improvements to the City cemeteries. In general, this shall include road maintenance, mowing, pruning, landscaping or removal of plant material, policing of the grounds, pest control, leveling of monuments, and such other maintenance as may be necessary to keep the City cemeteries presentable at all times. 
(b)  Cemetery care does not include the purchase, erection, repair, or replacement of monuments, headstones, markers, or any other item on a space. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(C)) 
State Law reference- Municipal maintenance of cemeteries, Texas Health and Safety Code  713.011. 
Sec. 10-24. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  No monument, headstone, or marker may be set in the City cemeteries without the prior approval of the City Manager or designee and issuance of a permit. A permit request form may be obtained from the Cemetery Sexton or the Parks and Recreation Department. 
(1)  All permit requests shall include renderings with size dimensions, names, dates, engravings, and any other ornamentation for each requested monument, foot marker, corner marker, or niche covering. 
(2)  Any monument, headstone or marker set in violation of this section shall be subject to removal by the City as provided below. 
(b)  Whenever the City Manager or designee determines that a violation of this section has occurred, the City shall: 
(1)  Record and document the violation. 
(2)  Notify space owners in writing by regular mail to the last known address for the space owner, of the violation. 
(3)  Allow 14 days from the date the notice was mailed for compliance or appeal to the City Manager or designee. 
(4)  If the space owner neither complies with the section nor requests an appeal, the City may remedy the violation. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(M)) 
Sec. 10-25. - Purchase options. 
(a)  Standard space. 
(1)  College Station Cemetery: A standard space is five feet by ten feet; 
(2)  Memorial Cemetery of College Station: A standard space is four feet by nine feet. 
(b)  Infant space. 
(1)  College Station Cemetery, Babyland and Section O: Infant spaces are four feet by five feet; 
(2)  Memorial Cemetery of College Station. Infant spaces are four feet by 41/2 feet. 
(c)  Cremate only spaces. College Station Cemetery: Designated cremate only spaces in Section LR are 21/2 feet by 21/2 feet. 
(d)  Columbarium niches. Memorial Cemetery of College Station: 12 inches by 12 inches by 12 inches. 
(e)  Price. The price of all spaces in the City cemeteries shall be established in Section 2-117. 
(f)  Purchasers are limited to a maximum of 20 spaces per family. 
(g)  Purchasers are limited to one space per each casket interment. The interment of two cremains shall be allowed in a single standard space. Combinations of casket burials and cremates shall be allowed in a single standard space provided that the cremains are interred towards the head line of the space. A maximum of one cremate burial shall be allowed per designated cremate space in Section LR of the College Station Cemetery. A maximum of one cremate shall be allowed per columbarium niche in the Memorial Cemetery of College Station. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(E); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 10-26. - Resale options. 
    The sale, transfer or assignment of any space in the City cemeteries by any owner or purchaser shall not be binding upon the City until: 
(1)  A written request from the current owner detailing the sale, transfer, or assignment of spaces is received by the City; 
(2)  It has been approved in writing by the City Manager or designee; and 
(3)  The space is reconveyed by the City through the reissuance of a warranty deed to the new owner or purchaser. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(F)) 
Sec. 10-27. - Hours of operation. 
    The City cemeteries shall be open Monday through Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to sundown, and Sunday from 6:00 a.m. to sundown. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(D)) 
Sec. 10-28. - Planting and other decorations in City cemeteries. 
(a)  Grass, flowers, shrubs, trees, or other types of vegetation shall be planted only by or at the direction of the City Manager or designee in accordance with a landscape plan for the entire cemetery. Plantings by individuals are prohibited and shall be removed by the City. 
(b)  The City shall establish grass on spaces after an appropriate amount of time has elapsed since burial to allow for settling. During this time the City shall establish the final grade to match the surrounding area. 
(c)  Plantings of trees, shrubs or flowers on grave spaces at the College Station Cemetery that existed prior to adoption of Ordinance No. 1959 on June 11, 1992, which were specifically grandfathered with the adoption of that ordinance, shall continue to be grandfathered. These plantings may be removed by the City whenever they become unsightly, or as necessary to provide access to grave spaces. Replacement of grandfathered plantings that have been removed shall not be allowed. 
(d)  The placing of potted plants, cut flowers, baskets, floral pieces, funeral designs, decorations, and all other objects of a temporary nature is permitted adjacent to the monument only, and on the owner's space only. Only two items of this nature shall be allowed per space. No glass containers are allowed, and the digging of holes for the placement of any items is prohibited. Items associated with a funeral can remain on the space for a reasonable amount of time after the interment in that space. Determination of a reasonable amount of time shall be determined by the City Manager or designee. 
(e)  The City Manager or designee shall have the right to remove all flowers, potted plants, wreaths, baskets, floral pieces, funeral designs, decorations and all other objects of a temporary nature when they become withered, unsightly, a safety concern, or an obstruction to maintenance. In addition, the City shall conduct a general grounds clean-up of the cemeteries four times a year. In general, these will be conducted as follows: mid-January, mid-April, mid-July, and mid-October. 
(f)  No artificial flowers shall be permitted in, on, or around grave spaces. 
(g)  The City Manager or designee is empowered to and may enter upon any space within the City cemeteries and remove anything that may have been erected or placed thereon contrary to the provisions of this section, and may remove any dead or damaged tree, shrub or vine. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(H)) 
State Law reference- Municipal maintenance of cemeteries, Texas Health and Safety Code  713.011. 
Sec. 10-29. - Copings, hedges, fencing, etc. 
(a)  No copings, coverings, ledgers, hedges, fences, exposed vaults, walls, or other enclosures shall be permitted in, on, or around any space; except that coverings and ledgers shall be permitted only in the College Station Cemetery upon the approval of the City Manager or designee. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, copings are materials placed above grade to define the grave space. A covering means any material other than turf that may be placed over the grave. A ledger is any stone, monument, or marker that may be placed in such a way as to cover the grave space. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(I)) 
Sec. 10-30. - Monuments, foot markers, and corner markers in College Station Cemetery. 
    The following provisions apply to College Station Cemetery: 
(1)  The term "monuments" shall mean those markers placed on the head line of a space. The term "foot markers" shall mean markers placed on the foot line of the space. Corner markers shall mean markers placed on the corners of a space. 
(2)  Monuments for single standard spaces shall not exceed 30 inches in height, 48 inches in length, or 16 inches in width. These maximum dimensions shall also pertain to any design that incorporates a base. If a base is included, it shall be set flush with ground level or must have a minimum of four inches above ground level. The back of the monument shall be set on the head line of the space and equidistant from the side boundaries of the space, and the monument shall be located on undisturbed ground. No more than one monument shall be permitted per single space. 
(3)  Family or double monuments shall only be placed on a minimum of two adjoining (side by side) standard spaces, and shall not exceed 30 inches in height, 72 inches in length, or 16 inches in width. These maximum dimensions shall also pertain to any design that incorporates a base. If a base is included, it shall be set flush with ground level or must have a minimum of four inches above ground level. The back of the monument shall be set on the head line of the spaces and equidistant from the side boundaries of the spaces, and the monument shall be located on undisturbed ground. No more than one family or double monument shall be permitted per two adjoining (side by side) standard spaces. 
(4)  Monuments for single baby spaces (Babyland and Section O only) shall not exceed 22 inches in height, 24 inches in length, or 12 inches in width. These maximum dimensions shall also pertain to any design that incorporates a base. If a base is included, it shall be set flush with ground level or must have a minimum of three inches above ground level. The back of the monument shall be set on the head line of the space and equidistant from the side boundaries of the space, and the monument shall be located on undisturbed ground. There shall be only one monument per infant space and no other markers shall be allowed. 
(5)  Foot markers shall be set on the foot line of the space with the long side of the foot marker parallel to the foot line and centered equidistant from the side boundaries of the space. The foot marker shall not exceed 28 inches in length or 16 inches in width. Flat foot markers shall be set flush with the ground; slanted foot markers shall not exceed eight inches in height. Only one foot marker per standard space shall be allowed. Exception: One flat foot marker not to exceed 72 inches in length is allowed when family or double monuments are placed on a minimum of two adjoining standard spaces. All other regulations still apply. 
(6)  Corner markers shall not exceed eight inches by eight inches and shall be set flush with the ground. 
(7)  Any additional items incorporated into any monument or foot marker design shall be permanently affixed to the monument or marker and shall not extend beyond the maximum dimensions allowed for the monument or foot marker. 
(8)  Single monuments for the designated cremate only spaces in Section LR shall not exceed 28 inches in length or 16 inches in width, and shall be set flush with the ground or up to a maximum of two inches above ground level. The back of the monument shall be set on the head line of the space and equidistant from the side boundaries of the space. There shall be only one monument per designated cremate only space and no other markers shall be allowed. 
(9)  Family or double monuments for the designated cremate only spaces in Section LR shall not exceed 54 inches in length or 16 inches in width. The monument shall be set flush with the ground or up to a maximum of two inches above ground level. The back of the monument shall be set on the head line of the spaces and equidistant from the side boundaries of the spaces. There shall be only one double monument per two adjoining (side by side) designated cremate only spaces and no other markers shall be allowed. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(J); Ord. No. 2017-3854, exh. A, 1-26-2017) 
Sec. 10-31. - Monuments, foot markers, and corner markers in Memorial Cemetery of College Station. 
    The following provisions apply to Memorial Cemetery of College Station: 
(1)  The term "monuments" shall mean those markers placed on the head line of a space. The term "foot markers" shall mean markers placed on the foot line of the space. Corner markers shall mean markers placed on the corners of a space. 
(2)  Municipal sections. 
a.  Monuments for single standard spaces shall not exceed 30 inches in height, 36 inches in length, or 16 inches in width. These maximum dimensions shall also pertain to any design that incorporates a base. If a base is included, it shall be set flush with ground level or must have a minimum of four inches above ground level. The back of the monument shall be set on the head line of the space and equidistant from the side boundaries of the space, and the monument shall be located on undisturbed ground. No more than one monument shall be permitted per single space. 
b.  Family or double monuments shall only be placed on a minimum of two adjoining (side by side) standard spaces, and shall not exceed 30 inches in height, 72 inches in length, or 16 inches in width. These maximum dimensions shall also pertain to any design that incorporates a base. If a base is included, it shall be set flush with ground level or must have a minimum of four inches above ground level. The back of the monument shall be set on the head line of the spaces and equidistant from the side boundaries of the spaces, and the monument shall be located on undisturbed ground. No more than one family or double monument shall be permitted per two adjoining (side by side) standard spaces. 
c.  Monuments for single infant spaces shall not exceed 22 inches in height, 24 inches in length, or 12 inches in width. These maximum dimensions shall also pertain to any design that incorporates a base. If a base is included, it shall be set flush with ground level or must have a minimum of three inches above ground level. The back of the monument shall be set on the head line of the space and equidistant from the side boundaries of the space, and the monument shall be located on undisturbed ground. There shall be only one monument per infant space and no other markers shall be allowed. 
d.  Foot markers shall be set on the foot line of the space with the long side of the foot marker parallel to the foot line and centered equidistant from the side boundaries of the space. The foot marker shall not exceed 28 inches in length or 16 inches in width. Flat foot markers shall be set flush with the ground; slanted foot markers shall not exceed eight inches in height. Only one foot marker per standard space shall be allowed. Exception: One flat foot marker not to exceed 72 inches in length is allowed when family or double monuments are placed on a minimum of two adjoining standard spaces. All other regulations still apply. 
e.  Corner markers shall not exceed eight inches by eight inches and shall be set flush with the ground. 
f.  Any additional items incorporated into any monument or foot marker design shall be permanently affixed to the monument or marker and shall not extend beyond the maximum dimensions allowed for the monument or foot marker. 
g.  Niche coverings for the columbarium shall be supplied by the City, and there shall be no substitutions of material. Engraved lettering on all columbarium niche covers shall be painted black. If other engravings and carvings are painted, the only allowed color is black. The niche covering shall have no more than one attached item, such as bronze emblems, and these items shall not extend more than one inch from the face of the niche covering, and shall not extend beyond the edges of the niche covering. 
(3)  Aggie Field of Honor Sections. 
a.  All monuments shall be base and tablet style, and shall be gray granite with polished tops, sides, and backs. Foot markers shall be polished gray granite, bronze, or a combination of the two. There shall be no corner markers. 
b.  Monuments for single standard spaces shall be set so that the overall height is 30 inches above grade. The monument tablet shall be 26 inches in height, 30 inches in length, six inches in width, and rectangular in shape. The tablet sides shall be perpendicular to the ground, and the top shall be flat. The monument base shall be 36 inches in length; 12 inches in width; and rectangular in shape. The base shall be set so that the top of the base is four inches above grade. The back of the monument base shall be set on the head line of the space and equidistant from the side boundaries of the space. The monument tablet shall be set on the base equidistant left to right and front to back. The monument shall be located on undisturbed ground. No more than one monument shall be permitted per single space. 
c.  Family or double monuments shall only be placed on a minimum of two adjoining (side by side) standard spaces. Family or double monuments shall be set so that the overall height is 30 inches above grade. The monument tablet shall be 26 inches in height, 60 inches in length, six inches in width, and rectangular in shape. The tablet sides shall be perpendicular to the ground, and the top shall be flat. The monument base shall be 72 inches in length, 12 inches in width, and rectangular in shape. The base shall be set so that the top of the base is four inches above grade. The back of the monument base shall be set on the head line of the spaces and equidistant from the side boundaries of the spaces. The monument tablet shall be set on the base equidistant left to right and front to back. The monument shall be located on undisturbed ground. No more than one family or double monument shall be permitted per two adjoining (side by side) standard spaces. 
d.  Engraved lettering on all monument tablet faces and backs, granite foot markers, and columbaria niche covers shall be painted black. If other engravings and carvings are painted, the only allowed color is black. 
e.  The following applies for all monuments: engraving, carving, and sandblasting are allowed only on the tablet face. Any ornamentation on the face of the tablet shall not extend to the sides, top, or back of the tablet or base. No more than two attached items, such as bronze emblems, shall be allowed on the tablet face, and these items shall not extend more than two inches from the face of the tablet, and shall not extend beyond the edges of the tablet. 
f.  The only allowed ornamentation on the back of the monument shall be the surname of the interred and the lettering shall not exceed three inches in height. The top of the lettering shall be six inches below the top of the tablet, the lettering shall be centered equidistant from the sides of the tablet, and the lettering shall be parallel to the top of the tablet. The lettering shall be painted black, and no additional engraving, carving, or sandblasting is allowed on the back of the monument. 
g.  Foot markers shall only be set on the foot line of the space, with the long side of the foot marker parallel to the foot line, centered equidistant from the side boundaries of the space, and shall not exceed 28 inches in length or 16 inches in depth. All foot markers shall be set flush with the ground. Only one foot marker per space shall be allowed. Exception: One flat foot marker not to exceed 72 inches in length is allowed when family or double monuments are placed on a minimum of two adjoining standard spaces. All other regulations still apply. Foot markers shall be polished gray granite, bronze, or a combination of the two. 
h.  There shall be no additional items incorporated into monuments or foot markers in the Aggie Field of Honor sections. 
i.  Niche coverings for the columbaria shall be supplied by the City, and there shall be no substitutions of material. Engraved lettering on all columbaria niche covers shall be painted black. If other engravings and carvings are painted, the only allowed color is black. The niche covering shall have no more than one attached item, such as bronze emblems, and these items shall not extend more than one inch from the face of the niche covering, and shall not extend beyond the edges of the niche covering. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(K); Ord. No. 2017-3854, exh. A, 1-26-2017) 
Sec. 10-32. - Mausoleums. 
    In College Station Cemetery, mausoleums shall be permitted only in Sections F, G, M, and J. The locations, size, and design must be approved and be issued a permit by the City Manager or designee. Mausoleums are not permitted in Memorial Cemetery of College Station. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-29(L)) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12-1-12-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, Texas Government Code ch. 418; local emergency management programs, Texas Government Code  418.103 et seq.; emergency management plans, Texas Government Code  418.106. 

Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Division of Emergency Management means an office managed by the Emergency Management Coordinator to operate the day to day operations of emergency management functions of the City. 
    Emergency Management Coordinator means a person designated to serve as an assistant to the Emergency Management Director for emergency purposes as authorized by Texas Government Code ch. 418. 
    Emergency Management Director means the Mayor or the Mayor Pro Tem in the Mayor's absence as authorized by Texas Government Code ch. 418. 
    Emergency Management Plan means any plan including this article to provide for disaster mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery. 
    Mayor means the Mayor of the City or the Mayor Pro Tem in the Mayor's absence and is the Emergency Management Director as authorized by Texas Government Code ch. 418 (herein after referred to as Chapter 418). 
    Volunteer means a person or entity contributing service, equipment, supplies or facilities without remuneration or without a formal agreement or contract for hire. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-4) 
Sec. 12-20. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is set out of the City's Emergency Management Plan as required by Texas Government Code ch. 418. The Division of Emergency Management shall be the coordinating agency for all activity in connection with the Emergency Management Plan; and during a period of attack or natural disaster, the Emergency Management Plan will be the instrument through which the Mayor may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibility vested in him or her by State law through this article. 
(b)  By the enactment of an Emergency Management Plan the City intends to further the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City in the event of an emergency disaster, major public disturbance, or other calamity. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to tamper with or damage any warning systems or equipment. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-5) 
Sec. 12-21. - Duties of the Mayor. 
    The Mayor, as deemed necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare, shall have all the authority as authorized by Texas Government Code ch. 418 and is hereby authorized to perform all actions as permitted under Chapter 418, including: 
(1)  Serve as the Emergency Management Director for the City. 
(2)  Serve as the Governor's agent in the administration and supervision of duties and to exercise the powers granted to the Governor on an appropriate local scale. 
(3)  Establish wage, price, rent controls and other economic stabilization methods. 
(4)  Establish a curfew during day or night affecting categories of persons that may be designated and establish limitations on utility use in a disaster area. 
(5)  Control the ingress and egress of people and occupation of premises of disaster areas and establish other security measures. 
(6)  Suspend or limit the sale, distribution, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, firearms, explosives, ammunition, and all other combustible products and require the closing of those businesses or parts of businesses that sell, distribute, dispense or transport these items. 
(7)  Appoint volunteers to act at the direction of the Mayor or designee to provide any necessary services. 
(8)  Order the closing of bars, lounges, private clubs, liquor stores or any business establishments having a liquor, beer, or wine permit, gasoline stations, theaters, and public buildings. The Mayor shall also have the power to prohibit the sale of beer, wine and intoxicating liquor and the sale, distribution or gift of gasoline or other flammable liquid or combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle. 
(9)  Establish blockades, close any and all streets, alleys, sidewalks, bike paths, public parks, or public ways. 
(10)  Require that goods and services shall not be sold for more money than was charged on the date of the disaster. 
(11)  Have the power and authority to suspend or modify ordinances of the City that would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with a disaster. 
(12)  Supervise the development of emergency management plans for the City and all agreements deemed necessary for the implementation for such plans. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-6) 
Sec. 12-22. - Penalty provisions. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating this article or any rule, order, declaration, or ordinance adopted under the Emergency Management Plan is an offense and punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or confinement in jail for a term not to exceed 180 days upon conviction thereof, and each offense shall be deemed to be a separate violation and punishable as a separate offense. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Government Code  418.173. 
Sec. 12-23. - Liability and responsibility of the City. 
    The City assumes no liability for injury or death of volunteers in the performance of their duties as volunteers except that which is imposed by State law or any provision in a City ordinance or resolution of the City Council. The City employees assigned to duty as part of the Emergency Management Program shall retain all of the rights, privileges, and immunities of City employees, and shall receive the compensation incident to their regular employment. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-8) 
Secs. 12-24-12-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMBULANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency medical services, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 773; municipal regulation of emergency medical services, Texas Health and Safety Code  773.051. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-50. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambulance means a motor vehicle used, designed or redesigned, and equipped for the primary purpose of rendering emergency medical care and/or the transportation of sick or injured persons and approved as such by the Texas Department of Health Services. 
    Automatic aid means the automatic response of providers for emergency ambulance service other than the College Station Fire Department as set forth in automatic aid agreements between the College Station Fire Department and that provider. 
    Direct call means a request for ambulance service made by telephone or other means directly to an ambulance operator, or agents or employees thereof. 
    Dispatch means the College Station Fire and Police Dispatch. 
    Emergency ambulance means an ambulance used, designed or redesigned, and equipped for the primary purpose of transporting sick or injured persons under emergency circumstances, and the rendering of first aid or the performance of rescue work, or both, under such circumstances. 
    Emergency ambulance service means a trip made by an emergency ambulance under emergency circumstances to the place of an emergency, performance of any necessary rescue operations, rendering of any necessary emergency medical care and assistance, and the trip to the hospital or other place of medical attention. 
    Emergency circumstance means the existence of circumstances in which the element of time in expeditiously rendering emergency medical care and transporting a sick or injured person for medical or surgical treatment is essential to the health or life of such person, and in which rescue operations or competent emergency medical care or both at the place of emergency and/or during transportation to a hospital may be essential to the health or life of such person. 
    Emergency response means the operation of an ambulance with visual (lights) and auditory (siren) warning devices working. This is also known as Code 3 Response. 
    EMS Division means the Emergency Medical Service Division of the City Fire Department. 
    Hospital (general) means an establishment that: 
(1)  Offers services, facilities, and beds for use for more than 24 hours for two or more unrelated individuals requiring diagnosis, treatment, or care of illness, injury, deformity, abnormality, or pregnancy; and 
(2)  Regularly maintains, at a minimum, clinical laboratory services, diagnostic X-ray services, treatment facilities including surgery or obstetrical care or both, or other definitive medical or surgical treatment of similar extent. 
    Hospital (special) means an establishment that: 
(1)  Offers services and beds for use for more than 24 hours for two or more unrelated individuals who are regularly admitted, treated, and discharged and who require services more intensive than room, board, personal services, and general nursing care; 
(2)  Has clinical laboratory facilities, diagnostic X-ray facilities, treatment facilities, or other definitive medical treatment; 
(3)  Has medical staff in regular attendance; and 
(4)  Maintains records of clinical work performed for each patient. 
    Mutual aid means the request for emergency ambulance service by the College Station Fire Department to the provider as set forth in mutual aid agreements between the College Station Fire Department and that provider. 
    Non-emergency ambulance service means a trip made by an ambulance to transport a sick or injured person from place to place under other than emergency circumstances. 
    Person includes a partnership, firm, association, and corporation. 
    Provider means the person, partnership, corporation or other entity holding a City ambulance permit and listed as a licensed provider with the Texas Department of Health Services. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(A); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 12-51. - Emergency ambulance service; government function declared. 
    The operation of emergency ambulances on the streets of the City for furnishing of emergency ambulance service is hereby declared to be primarily a governmental function of the City to be performed by the College Station Fire Department in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(B)) 
Sec. 12-52. - Operation according to State statutes. 
    Nothing herein shall prohibit any person owning an ambulance duly licensed and operating in accordance with Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 773 from operating such ambulance on the public streets for the sole purpose of furnishing non-emergency ambulance service only. The driver of any such ambulance shall comply with all the traffic laws of the State and ordinances of the City in furnishing such ambulance service. The operator thereof shall not permit such ambulance to be used for emergency ambulance service unless all requirements of this article regarding emergency ambulance service have been complied with, and an ambulance permit has been obtained from the College Station Fire Department. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(H)) 
Sec. 12-53. - Miscellaneous requirements. 
(a)  Authorized services. It shall be unlawful for the ambulance of any provider, except the College Station Fire Department, to provide emergency ambulance service unless it is consistent with a mutual aid or automatic aid response. Under mutual aid and automatic aid, ambulances will operate on College Station Fire Department frequencies and through dispatch. 
(b)  When immediate attention is required. If a provider's ambulance, while operating as a non-emergency ambulance, upon responding to a direct call, finds that an emergency circumstance exists, said provider's ambulance will immediately contact College Station Fire and Police Dispatch and notify of the emergency. Upon arrival of a College Station Fire Department ambulance, the provider's ambulance crew will release the patient to the College Station Fire Department for further care and transport. 
(c)  Maintaining ambulances at particular locations. 
(1)  Any permitted ambulance is allowed to place ambulances at events (standbys) within the City. This is for the purpose of providing medical care and transport at that event if the need arises. The ambulance will notify dispatch of the fact that a patient is being transported from that location. 
(2)  If an ambulance is to be stationed within the City, the ambulance must be kept inside of a building. Any building or structure used by a provider to station ambulances within the City limits of College Station must be approved through the City Planning and Development Services Department. Exception: General and special hospitals shall be exempt from this provision. Hospital-based ambulances shall park at a hospital in such a manner that emergency entrances or ambulance loading or unloading areas are not obstructed or blocked. Any hospital-based ambulance must park at the hospital so as to not violate any City ordinances such as the City's sign ordinance, fire lane provisions, or any other ordinances impacting parking or obstruction of entrances or exits or any State or Federal law. 
(d)  Emergency response to hospitals located inside City limits. Any provider and ambulance is allowed to respond with lights and sirens to any hospital located within the City limits if indicated by patient care needs. Such ambulance will notify dispatch of an emergency response within the City limits and the route the ambulance will be taking to the hospital. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(D); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 12-54. - Personnel requirements. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate or drive, or cause to be operated or driven, an emergency ambulance on a public street of the City when furnishing ambulance service, unless such ambulance meets the personnel requirements set forth in Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 773, and Texas Department of Health Services EMS Rule  157.11. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(C)(3); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 12-55. - Equipment requirements. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate or drive, or cause to be operated or driven, an emergency ambulance on a public street of the City when furnishing ambulance service, unless such ambulance meets the equipment requirements set forth in Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 773, and Texas Department of Health Services EMS Rules  157.11-157.14. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(C)(4); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 12-56. - Vehicle inspection requirements. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate or drive, or cause to be operated or driven, an emergency ambulance on a public street of the City when furnishing ambulance service, unless such ambulance meets the vehicle equipment requirements set forth in Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 773 and Texas Department of Health Services EMS Rules  157.11-157.14. A valid State inspection sticker and a valid Texas Department of Health Services certificate must be prominently displayed. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(C)(5); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 12-57. - Driving restrictions. 
(a)  Emergency sirens and lights. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specified in this article, it is unlawful to operate visual warning devices (emergency lights) and/or auditory warning devices (sirens) on the streets of the City unless operating in emergency ambulance service. 
(2)  Code 2 response, the use of only visual or auditory warning devices, but not both, is not permitted within the City limits. 
(b)  Speed limits. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to operate ambulances on the streets of the Northgate area of the City in excess of the posted speed limit for non-emergency vehicles. Northgate is the area bounded by and includes University Drive on the south, F.M. 2154 on the west, Patricia Street on the north, and on the east by College Avenue. 
(2)  In areas other than Northgate, it shall be unlawful while operating in emergency response to exceed a rate of more than ten miles per hour over the posted speed limit. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to operate or drive any ambulance through any intersection within the City at a speed in excess of ten miles per hour. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(E)) 
Sec. 12-58. - Refusal to render aid. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the driver or the attendant of any ambulance to fail to render aid and assistance to the sick or injured at the place of emergency. It shall be unlawful for any emergency ambulance service to refuse to transport the sick or injured to a local hospital. The fact that the sick or injured appears to be indigent and unable to pay the cost of such service shall not serve as an excuse from this requirement. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while operating or accompanying an ambulance on the streets or easements of the City, to solicit the business of transporting the sick or injured. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(F)) 
Sec. 12-59. - False reporting. 
    Any person intentionally or otherwise sending and/or communicating a false report in relation to an ambulance service shall be guilty of a criminal offense. This action will be construed as an offense of telephone harassment as already prohibited by Texas Penal Code  42.06. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(G); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 12-60-12-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 12-77. - Required; term. 
    Any person operating an ambulance upon the streets of the City must secure a permit from the College Station Fire Department, which permit shall be valid for the calendar year in which issued. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(C)(1)) 
Sec. 12-78. - Evidence of liability insurance. 
    Each applicant provider must submit evidence of financial responsibility as set forth in Texas Civil Statutes, Article 6675a-2a. If using standard liability coverage, a certificate of insurance must be submitted. The evidence of financial responsibility and/or standard liability coverage will be reviewed by the City Risk Management Office on behalf of the College Station Fire Department. Auto liability shall be at least $500,000.00 combined single limit. Professional liability shall be at least $1,000,000.00 aggregate. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(C)(2)) 
Sec. 12-79. - Permit fees, conditions and renewal. 
(a)  The fee for the permit required in Section 12-77 shall be established in Section 2-117, and all permits issued under this division shall terminate on December 31 of each year. Such permits may be renewed by paying a permit fee established in Section 2-117 and submitting proof of current Texas Department of Health Services license and liability requirements as provided in Section 12-78. 
(b)  No ambulance permit shall be granted unless the ad valorem taxes on all properties used or useful in the furnishing of ambulance and transfer service shall have been previously paid. The ambulance operator shall furnish proof that payment has been made. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(C)(6); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 12-80. - Books and record to be open. 
    The books and record of any permit holder shall be open at a reasonable time for inspection by the City Council or any duly authorized representative. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-7(I)) 
Secs. 12-81-12-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of alarm system companies, Texas Occupations Code ch. 1702; local regulation of burglar alarms, Texas Local Government Code ch. 218. 

Sec. 12-104. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm agent means any individual employed by an alarm business whose duties include altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, responding to, or monitoring an alarm system. The term "alarm agent" shall also mean any person employed or otherwise associated with an alarm business who has access to confidential information relating to a customer or subscriber of such alarm business which could be used to compromise or defeat an alarm system. 
    Alarm business means any company whose duties include altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, responding to, or monitoring an alarm system. 
    Alarm user means any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles or alarms that summon only the security services of a private security company or other private entity. 
    Central station means any premises, usually maintained by an alarm company, equipped to receive and displace signals from any type of alarm. 
    Dial alarm means any alarm or device which automatically selects a telephone line connected to the Police Department and reproduces a prerecorded message to report a criminal intrusion or other emergency requiring a police response. 
    False alarm means the activation of an alarm system or device through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner of an alarm system or device or of employees or agents thereof. Such terminology does not include, for example, alarms caused by hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes or other violent condition. 
    Hold-up alarm means any type of alarm system or device designated to be activated by the alarm user or subscriber in the event of a holdup or robbery. 
    Home alarm means any alarm device or system which is connected to a residence. 
    Subscriber means any person or business which buys or otherwise obtains an alarm system and has a contract with an alarm business to monitor and/or service the alarm system. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-8(A); altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2018-4045 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 12-105. - Penalty. 
    A violation of this article shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-8(J); Ord. No. 2018-4045 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 12-106. - Violations. 
(a)  Notice to City. The Police and Fire Departments shall be responsible for notifying the Fiscal Services Department of the amount of any fees to be collected. The Fiscal Services Department shall be responsible for collecting any fees. 
(b)  Waiver of imposition. In the event that the Chief of Police or Fire Chief determines that the false alarms occurred as a direct result of an interruption of electrical power, a telephone system malfunction or other causes clearly beyond the control of the owner, the Chief of Police or Fire Chief may waive the imposition of the applicable false alarm penalty or administrative sanction. 
(c)  Hearing from administrative decision finality. Any person subject to the imposition of a fee, order of disconnection or other administrative sanction under the terms of this article shall have a right to appeal the decision of the Chief of Police or Fire Chief to the City Manager. Requests for a hearing must be made in writing filed with the Office of the City Manager within 15 days of the date of the notice of administrative decision. Upon receipt of such written request, the City Manager shall schedule a hearing date and inform the owner of the date, time and place of the past false alarms, corrective action taken, and any inspection reports on the cause of false alarms. If the City Manager determines that the false alarms were not caused by the owner or employees, representatives or agents thereof, and that reasonable steps have been taken to correct the problem, the penalty disconnection order or administrative sanction may be suspended in whole or part. The City Manager shall keep a written report of the hearing, including a statement of the reasons for the action taken. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-8(I); altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2018-4045 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 12-107. - Alarm business license. 
    No person shall conduct an alarm business, unless licensed under the Texas Occupations Code ch. 1702. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-8(B); Ord. No. 2018-4045 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 12-108. - Records. 
(a)  All alarms within the City are subject to the City ordinance regulating alarms whether or not they terminate at the Police Department. Upon the date the ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted, no additional alarm terminals shall be permitted to be installed at the Police Department. Every subscriber of an alarm system or device within the City shall have an emergency response card on file with the Chief of Police. The card must contain the names and current telephone numbers of at least three individuals authorized to enter upon the premises and turn off any such alarm. The person must acknowledge in writing that the employees of the Police Department of the City are authorized to enter any premises where an alarm has been activated, and they may use reasonable means necessary to gain entry to determine if the alarm is valid or false. 
(b)  The City shall maintain a record of all responses to activated alarms. Such records shall include the time, date, location of the alarm, any individuals who responded to the alarm and information indicating if activation of the alarm was valid or false. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-8(C); Ord. No. 2018-4045 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 12-109. - Operational characteristics. 
    The sensory mechanisms used in connection with the alarms shall be adjusted to suppress for all signals so the alarms will not be activated by impulses due to transient pressure surges, electrical power surges or failures, short flashes of light, normal room temperature changes, wind noises, rattling or vibrating doors or windows, vehicular noises or other causes unrelated to genuine signals. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-8(D); Ord. No. 2018-4045 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 12-110. - Alarm system standards. 
(a)  Power supply. Any alarm system which necessitates response by a law enforcement agency or fire department response or is a public alarm, shall be provided with standby power to automatically maintain the system in a normal condition for a period of four hours in the event of the interruption of the primary power source. This does not apply where the central monitoring equipment produces a distinctive signal indicating power failure at the protected premises and a police response is not required. 
(b)  Inspection. The City shall be entitled to inspect any installation for standby power supply function or any other problem during regular business hours. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-8(E); Ord. No. 2018-4045 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 12-111. - Maintenance. 
(a)  All alarm systems shall be subject to repair or correction no later than the end of the business day following the day on which the user or alarm agent receives notification of the need for such service. 
(b)  The Police Chief or Fire Chief or their designees may require inspections of any alarm to correct any problems. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-8(F); Ord. No. 2018-4045 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 12-112. - Audible or local alarm cutoff. 
    Every audible local alarm shall be equipped with an automatic 15-minute cutoff and reset device, or shall be capable of being silenced manually by the owner or a representative thereof upon arrival at the location of the alarm. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-8(G); Ord. No. 2018-4045 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 12-113. - False alarms. 
(a)  Upon notification by the Police Department or Fire Department, the designated alarm user or subscriber, or one of the persons listed on the emergency response card shall come to the scene of an alarm activation within 30 minutes of being notified of the alarm activation. Verification that an alarm is false shall be done by Police Officers or Fire Officials. 
(b)  An alarm user or subscriber shall be allowed three false alarms in a preceding 12-month period without penalty. After this, a user or subscriber shall be assessed a fee established in Section 2-117. 
(c)  Any false alarms resulting from a failure to take the necessary corrective action to prevent any such reoccurrence and/or nonpayment of any false alarm penalty may result in the Chief of Police providing a written notice ordering a disconnection of such alarm until such corrective action or payment of fee is made, provided that no disconnection shall be ordered on any premises required by law to have an alarm system in operation. 
(d)  Any false fire alarm systems resulting from a failure to take the necessary corrective action to prevent any such reoccurrence and/or nonpayment of any false alarm penalty may result in the Fire Official or Building Official suspending or revoking in writing the alarm user, subscriber or owner's Certificate of Occupancy for the building with the reoccurring false alarms or nonpayment until the fire alarm system is inspected by the City and is in proper working order and payment is made. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-8(H); altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2018-4045 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Release, discharge, or deposit of hazardous substances. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Hazardous substance means any substance that, because of its quantity, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to health, safety or to the environment when used, transported, released or improperly stored. 
    Hazardous waste means a solid waste that may cause or significantly contribute to serious illness or death, or that may pose a substantial threat to human health or the environment if not managed properly, and which includes liquids, semisolids, and compressed gases. 
(b)  Nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to release, discharge or deposit any hazardous substance or waste upon or into any facility or property, including airspace, within the City limits or within 5,000 feet outside the City limits. A violation of this section shall constitute a public nuisance which endangers the safety, health, and welfare of residents of the City. 
(c)  Abatement. 
(1)  The Fire Chief is authorized to abate and remove the effects of any hazardous substance or waste unlawfully released, discharged or deposited upon or into any property or facilities within the City limits or within 5,000 feet outside the City limits. 
(2)  In the event that any person undertakes, either voluntarily or upon order of the Fire Chief or other City official, to abate or remove the effects of any hazardous substance or waste unlawfully released, discarded or deposited upon or into any property or facilities within the City, the Fire Chief may take such action as is necessary to supervise or verify the adequacy of the abatement or removal. 
(d)  Recovery of costs. 
(1)  The following described persons or entities shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for the payment of all costs incurred by the City as a result of such cleanup or abatement activity: 
a.  The persons or entities whose negligent or willful act or omission proximately caused such release, discharge or deposit; 
b.  The persons or entities who owned or had custody or control of the hazardous substance or waste at the time of such release, discharge or deposit, without regard to fault or proximate cause; and 
c.  The persons or entities who owned or had custody or control of the container which held such hazardous waste or substance at the time or immediately prior to such release, discharge or deposit, without regard to fault or proximate cause. 
(2)  Recoverable costs incurred by the City shall include, but not be limited to, the following: actual labor costs of all utilized City personnel, including benefits and administrative overhead, cost of equipment operation, cost of any contract labor and materials, and costs of actual fire suppression services provided by the Fire Department, in addition to any other services provided by the Fire Department provided in abating or removing the nuisance. If legal assistance is required in order to enforce this section, recoverable costs shall also include any attorney's fees and court costs incurred in the enforcement of this section. 
(3)  The remedies provided by this section shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-10) 
State Law reference- Hazardous substances, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 501. 
Secs. 14-2-14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OIL AND GAS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Oil and gas, Texas Natural Resources Code ch. 81 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandonment is as defined by the Commission and includes the restoration of the drill site as required by this article. 
    Air Quality Monitoring Plan means the reporting of the equipment, location, methods, frequency and processes to be utilized to ensure compliance with all US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) laws and regulations and this article governing emissions generated at an oil or gas operations site. 
    Approved type and approved design means improvements, equipment, or facilities of a type or design approved by the Commission, Fire Department, or consultant. 
    Area means property within a radius of 1,000 feet of the perimeter of an oil or gas operations site. 
    Blowout preventer means a mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, or other device or combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing, including valves, fittings and control mechanisms connected therewith, which can be closed around the drill pipe or other tubular goods to completely close the top of the casing and prevent blowout. 
    Cellar means an excavation around and above the top joint of the well casing. 
    City Oil and Gas Inspector means the person appointed by the City Engineer to conduct inspections, make reports and recommendations, and impose restraints, restrictions and issue citations, including the requirement to halt operations, relative to the conduct of oil or gas operations within the City. 
    Commission means the Texas Railroad Commission. 
    Completion of drilling means the date work is completed after drilling, completing or hydraulic fracturing, and the crew is released by completing their work, contract, or by their employer. 
    Comprehensive Plan means the Comprehensive Plan of the City. 
    Consultant means such person familiar with and educated in the oil and gas industry or the law as it relates to oil and gas matters who may be retained from time to time by the City. Any consultant retained by the City under this article shall have the authority as the City Oil and Gas Inspector. 
    Derrick means any framework, tower, mast, or structure required or used to drill, re-enter, re-work, operate, or maintain a well. 
    Desertion means the cessation of the operation at any drill site without compliance with this article relating to suspended operations, idle wells, or abandonment. 
    Disposal well means any well converted, drilled or intended to be converted or drilled, to inject fluids under pressure, including salt water, brine water, produced or flow-back water, solutions and liquids containing solids in suspension, produced from any well into subsurface zones not productive of potable water, oil or gas or other hydrocarbons. 
    Drill site means the premises used during the drilling, re-entry or re-working of a well located thereon. 
    Drilling means any digging or boring of a new well or re-entry of an existing well, to explore, develop, or produce oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons, or to inject gas, water, or any other fluid or substance into the earth. 
    Drilling equipment means the derrick, all parts and appurtenances to such structure, and every piece of apparatus, machinery, or equipment used, erected, or maintained for drilling. 
    Emergency Response Plan means the plan drafted, maintained, updated as necessary and submitted by the operator to the Fire Chief and City Engineer describing the practices and procedures, including an evacuation plan, to be implemented if an emergency event occurs on an oil or gas operations site, drill site or other facility or equipment in the care, custody or control of the operator or is caused by activity of the operator. 
    Exploration means geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for oil, gas, or other subsurface hydrocarbons. 
    Fire Chief means the Fire Chief of the City. 
    Fire Department means the Fire Department of the City. 
    Fluids means any gas or liquid. 
    Gas means any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and which maintains a gaseous or rarified state at standard temperature and pressure conditions, and/or the gaseous components or vapors in or derived from petroleum or natural gas. 
    Gas well means any well drilled, re-entered, or to be drilled, or used for the intent or actual production of natural gas. 
    Hydraulic fracturing (also frac'ing, fracking, or hydrofracturing) means a well-stimulation technique in which rock is fractured by a hydraulically pressurized liquid. A high-pressure fluid (usually chemicals and sand suspended in water) is injected into a well bore to create cracks in the deep-rock formations through which natural gas, petroleum, and brine will flow more freely. 
    Lessee means a person or entity who has acquired an oil or gas lease or sublease, or the owner of the land or minerals, or heirs thereof, who conduct or carry on any oil or gas exploration, development, and operation thereof, or a person conducting the operation. 
    Lessor means the owner of mineral rights who has executed an oil and gas lease. The lessor may also own the surface rights. 
    Maintenance means the repair or replacement of any machinery, equipment, apparatus, structure, facility, or parts used with an oil or gas operations site, drill site, or any other work to reduce fire hazards or hazards to employees, public health, safety, and welfare. 
    New well means a new well bore or new hole established at the ground surface and shall not include re-entry or re-working of an existing well not abandoned. 
    Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or is unwanted or which causes an adverse psychological effect on human beings. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound which endangers or injures the health of humans or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities. 
    Oil and gas industry. Words or phrases not defined herein shall have the meaning customarily attributable to them in the oil and gas industry. 
    Oil or gas operation means construction, maintenance, or use of any installation, facility, or structure, directly or indirectly, to carry out or facilitate one or more of the following functions: repair, development, drilling, re-entry, re-working, production, recovery, storage, processing, extraction, enhanced recovery, stimulation, including hydraulic fracturing, abandonment, or movement of oil, gas or related hydrocarbons from the subsurface of the earth, including site development. 
    Oil or gas operations site means and includes the drill site for an oil or gas well, or another site upon which Oil or Gas Operations are conducted. 
    Oil well means any well re-entered, drilled, or to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of oil, associated gas or related hydrocarbons. 
    Operator means a person seeking to obtain a permit, or to whom a permit is issued, authorizing oil or gas operations, and the person's heirs, administrators, executors, successors, and assigns, and for each well, or permit, the person designated on the Commission form W-1 or form P-4 for an oil or gas well that is, or will be, actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any well, including, without limitation, a unit operator. The term "operator" shall also mean the person designated on a Seismic Survey permit. If the operator is not the lessee under an oil and gas lease of any premises affected by this article, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an operator. If there is no oil and gas lease relating to any premises affected by this article, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator. 
    Outer boundary line means a situation in which several contiguous parcels of land in one or different ownerships are operated as a single oil or gas lease or operating unit, or the exterior limits of the land in a lease or unit. In determining the contiguity of any such parcel, all public rights-of-way crossing through or within the lease boundaries shall be part of the leased tract or unit. 
    Owner means a person who owns the legal or equitable title in the surface of the drill site or oil or gas operation site. 
    Permit means a drilling permit issued or sought to be issued under this article authorizing the drilling, re-entry or re-fracking of an oil or gas well or other oil or gas operations. 
    Public building means all buildings used, designed or intended to be used for assembly of persons for such purposes as deliberation, entertainment, amusement, retail sales, or health care. Public buildings include, but shall not be limited to, theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, armories, mortuary chapels, dance halls, exhibition halls, museums, gymnasiums, bowling lanes, libraries, skating rinks, courtrooms, restaurants, religious institutions, schools, and hospitals. 
    Public park means any land area dedicated to and/or maintained by the City for traditional park-like recreational purposes, but shall not include private equestrian trails, trailheads, trails, and privately-owned or privately-managed golf courses. 
    Practicable means available and capable of being done, as determined by the City Engineer, using best available control technology (BACT) after considering existing technology, costs, and logistics in light of the overall purpose of the activity. 
    Processing means the use of oil or gas operations for gauging, recycling, compressor re-pressuring, injection, reinjection, dehydration, stimulation, separation (including, but not limited to, separation of liquids from gas), consolidation, shipping and transportation, and gathering oil, gas, other hydrocarbon substances, water or any combination thereof. 
    Re-entry means re-entry of an existing well within the City to drill, re-drill, deepen, complete or produce oil, gas and related hydrocarbons. 
    Re-fracking means hydraulic fracturing, frac'ing, fracking, or hydrofracturing that is not the first or initial hydraulic fracturing conducted in any oil or gas operations. 
    Re-working means re-occupation of an existing permitted well within the existing bore hole to install, repair or replace equipment or replace well liners, tubing, rods, casings, subsurface pumps, or gas lift equipment. 
    Religious institution means any building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
    Residence means a house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home, or other building designed for dwelling, including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for an oil, gas, or combined well permit is filed with the City Oil and Gas Inspector. The term "residence" also includes structures attached to the residence, including, but not limited to, garages, porches, carports and similar structures. 
    Right-of-way means public rights-of-way including streets, sidewalks, easements, and other property in the City dedicated to public use and benefit. 
    Road maintenance agreement means the agreement between the operator and the City, when required, to permit the operator reasonable use of the City roads, streets, and thoroughfares, provide for a credit, reduction or other benefit to the operator for the election to use recycled water to reduce the number of truck trips, extraordinary stress, or damage to the roads, streets, and thoroughfares of the City and provide roughly proportionate compensation to the City for the repair of certain roads, streets, and/or thoroughfares used and damaged by the operator that are maintained in whole or in part by the City. 
    Rural permit area means adjacent tracts or parcels of land that, when combined, are not less than 25 acres and characterized by open space involving a proposed oil or gas operations site with no oil or gas operations to be conducted within 1,000 feet of residential, retail, business and commercial or public use buildings or structures, public or private schools, religious institutions, medical offices, dental offices, places of assembly, child or adult care or group residential facilities. 
    Seismic receiver means the non-surface invasive device which receives and records the reflected energy waves from the seismic source points used to perform a seismic survey. 
    Seismic receiver point means the location where a seismic receiver receives and records the reflected energy waves from the seismic source points used to perform a seismic survey. 
    Seismic source means the device, such as a vibroseis truck, which generates non-surface invasive controlled seismic energy used to perform a seismic survey. 
    Seismic source point means a location at which the seismic source device generates controlled seismic energy used to perform a seismic survey. 
    Seismic survey means the geologic or geophysical activities and operations necessary or useful to determine the potential location of subterranean oil, gas or related hydrocarbon deposits using vibroseis equipment. 
    Seismic survey permit means a permit issued or sought to be issued under this article authorizing seismic survey activities and operations. 
    Source of ignition means any flame, arc, spark, heated object, or surface capable of igniting liquids, gases, or vapors. 
    Street means any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area, or other public right-of-way, including the entire right-of-way. 
    Sump or sump pit means one or more steel containers, commonly known as a "closed mud system," for the discharge or circulation of oil field drilling fluid, mud or wastes. 
    Tank means a container, covered or uncovered, used to hold or store fluids in conjunction with drilling, production, or storage of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons. 
    Urban permit area means adjacent tracts or parcels of land that, when combined, are less than 25 acres or characterized by platting, residential, retail, business and commercial or public use buildings or structures, public or private schools, religious institutions, medical offices, dental offices, places of assembly, child or adult care or group residential facilities where the perimeter of any proposed oil or gas operations site, after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, is less than 1,000 feet from any of them. 
    Water Resources Commission means the Texas Water Resources Commission. 
    Well means a hole or bore drilled to any horizon, formation, or strata with the intent to produce oil, gas, liquid hydrocarbon, brine water, sulphur water, or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery or disposal of produced or recovered fluids from the earth. 
    Well servicing means maintenance work performed in any existing well bore which does not involve drilling or re-entry. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(A); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 14-22. - Purpose. 
    The exploration, development, and production of oil, gas, and other fluid hydrocarbons in the City is an activity which necessitates reasonable regulations. Such regulations avoid or lessen injury or damage to persons or property in the City and make these activities conform to the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). Conflicting property rights exist in such activities and all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to peaceably enjoy their property and its benefits and revenues. This article implements reasonable regulations for present and future mineral activities to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public and accomplish the orderly and practical regulation of the production of oil, gas, and related hydrocarbons and activities related to such production. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(B)) 
Sec. 14-23. - City Engineer empowered to oversee article. 
(a)  The City Engineer is authorized and directed to enforce this article. Whenever necessary to enforce any provision of this article, or whenever the City Engineer has reasonable cause to believe any condition exists upon any premises or in any building contrary to this article, the City Engineer may enter such place at any reasonable time as determined by the City Engineer to inspect or perform any duty imposed by this article. 
(b)  If entry is refused, the City Engineer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law and equity to gain entry. No owner, occupant, or any other person having charge, care, custody, or control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect after proper demand to permit prompt entry by the City Engineer. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(C)) 
Sec. 14-24. - City Oil and Gas Inspector. 
(a)  Inspector. The City Engineer may designate the City Oil and Gas Inspector who shall enforce this article. The City Engineer may retain an Independent Contract Inspector that may serve as the City Oil and Gas Inspector. The City Oil and Gas Inspector shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out the requirements of this article and its particular provisions. Failure of any person to comply with any such order or directive within a reasonable time as determined by the City Oil and Gas Inspector shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(b)  Authority. The City Oil and Gas Inspector shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by this article to determine compliance with this article and all laws, rules, regulations, standards, or directives of the State. Failure of any person to permit access to the City Oil and Gas Inspector shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  Inspection. The City Oil and Gas Inspector shall conduct periodic inspections of all permitted wells in the City to determine that the wells are operating in compliance with this article and in accordance with the approved permit. 
(d)  Records. The City Oil and Gas Inspector shall have the authority to request and receive in a timely manner any records, including any records sent to the Commission, logs, or reports relating to the status or condition of any permitted well. Failure of any person to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(D)) 
Sec. 14-25. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to: 
(1)  Permit noncompliance. Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of a permit issued under this article; 
(2)  Article noncompliance. Fail to comply with any condition in a permit issued under this article; or 
(3)  Article violation. Violate any provision or requirement under this article. 
(b)  Penalty. Any violation of this article shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(R)) 
Sec. 14-26. - Re-working notice. 
    A permit is not required for re-working any permitted well. Seventy-two-hour prior written notice to the City Engineer of any re-working is required. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(E)(2)) 
Secs. 14-27-14-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRODUCTION PERMITS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 14-56. - Activities requiring a permit. 
(a)  Any person wanting to participate in oil, gas, or other fluid hydrocarbon production activities in the City shall apply for, obtain, and maintain a permit under this division, as it may be amended from time to time, and shall indicate what type of permit is requested. Such activities shall include, but are not limited to, exploration, re-entry, re-fracking, site preparation, drilling, operation, construction of drill sites or oil or gas operations sites, the transportation of rigs, equipment or tank batteries on City streets, fracturing, flowback and pressurizing and removal of oil, gas, and related hydrocarbons through or from a surface location located within the City. It shall be unlawful to conduct any activities within the City limits related to the production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons without a permit or to conduct re-fracking or re-entry of a well without a permit. 
(b)  Application forms for permits are available from the City Engineer. No permit shall authorize the drilling, re-entry, re-fracking, deepening, activating, or converting of more than one well in the City. Multiple permits may be obtained on the basis of one permit for each well. A permit shall be required when a well is to be re-entered, drilled, hydraulically fractured, deepened, activated, or converted on a surface location in the City to be used for the production of oil, gas and related hydrocarbons from the well, injection of fluids into a well (but not disposal), or when the primary access to the drill site or oil or gas operations site is by way of a City street or public right-of-way. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(E)(1)) 
Sec. 14-57. - Surface owner notification. 
    Before filing a permit application, the operator shall notify the surface owner where the permitted activity will occur by certified mail, return receipt requested, and show proof of such notice to the City Engineer. The operator has 30 days before filing a permit application to designate the location of the operator's drill site or oil or gas operations site on the proposed plat or site plan, and provide that site plan to the surface owner. Thirty-day notice is not required if the surface owner has contracted with operator. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(E)(6)) 
Sec. 14-58. - Permit application generally. 
    A permit application shall include: 
(1)  Application fee as established in Section 2-117. 
(2)  Consultant retainer fee, if applicable. 
(3)  Independent Contract Inspector retainer fee. 
(4)  Notice to surface owner. Provide copy of notice to the surface owner, or confirmation of a contract with the surface owner. 
(5)  Site plan. These plans shall include the following information: 
a.  Overall site plan. Depict proposed site tract showing the location of all improvements and major equipment, including the location of the proposed well and other facilities, including, but not limited to, all existing utilities, and proposed utilities to serve the site, including fire hydrants proposed to serve the site, fresh water tanks, storage tanks and berms, pipelines, water wells, access drives, fencing, wetlands, and 100-year floodplain. Indicate proposed pipeline routes on the plan, location of planned thoroughfares, roads, water, sewer and drainage ways, green space, natural areas and trails or byways set out in the Comprehensive Plan; 
b.  Drilling site plan. Provide a detailed plan of the oil and gas operations site depicting equipment, lighting, required utilities, source and quantity of water required, material and equipment storage, fencing or watchman proposed during drilling; 
c.  Hydraulic fracturing site plan. Provide a detailed plan of the oil and gas operations site depicting equipment, lighting, required utilities, source and quantity of water required, material and equipment storage, fencing or watchman proposed during hydraulic fracturing; 
d.  Production site plan. Provide a detailed plan of the oil and gas operations site depicting and describing equipment proposed during production, storage tanks, berms, line location between well head and tanks, screening, pump height and engine energy source, and a fencing and landscaping plan including the 16-foot-wide minimum perimeter fire access drive; 
e.  Grading plan. Provide a detailed plan for the site and all areas proposed to be graded that includes details for the proposed location of the major components of the site, any proposed ponds, affected vegetation, creeks, with existing and proposed contours; 
f.  Erosion control plan. Provide a detailed plan with best management control practices, and Notice of Intent or Site Notice under the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System; 
g.  Flood certification. Provide an engineering certification that the drill site or oil or gas operations site is not within the 100-year floodplain; 
h.  Driveway plan. Provide a detailed plan with existing and proposed contours and elevations for roads, drives, and culverts; demonstrate stopping sight triangles and distances; depict turn-outs and proposed gate location; and provide driveway apron and culvert details; and 
i.  Traffic control plan. Provide a plan in compliance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(6)  Transportation route map. Provide a map showing the proposed transportation route within the City, including all streets and roads for the passage of equipment, chemicals, production, including pipelines, or waste products produced by the oil or gas operation. 
(7)  Heavy trucks. Description of type, kind, size, and number of heavy trucks, weighing 24,000 pounds or more, and major equipment used for each phase: site preparation, drilling, hydraulic fracturing, and annual operations. 
(8)  Water well permits. Description, location, and source of water for all oil or gas operations, including copies of the Brazos Valley Groundwater Conservation District ("BVGCD") well operating permits, if applicable, or a letter from BVGCD stating that the proposed operations are exempt, and a plan for recycling or disposal of drilling, fracturing, flowback and produced water. 
(9)  Hazardous materials management plan. Provide a copy of the plan and all material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous materials that will be located, stored, transported, and/or temporarily used on the oil or gas operations site shall be provided to the Fire Chief. 
(10)  Emergency response plan. Provide a copy of the plan and any other emergency or response plans to the Fire Chief and the City Engineer. 
(11)  Air quality monitoring plan. Provide a copy of the plan including location map of monitor. 
(12)  Environmental constraints study. Provide a study, conducted by a qualified environmental professional, as defined by ASTM E1527, of the site to identify potential wetlands and threatened and endangered species and any required site-specific Corps of Engineers permits. 
(13)  Surrounding area map. Provide an aerial exhibit with location and description of all existing improvements and structures within 1,000 feet of the drill site or oil or gas operations site; and depict all existing and proposed water wells, specifying which wells are intended to be used for oil and gas operations. 
(14)  Surrounding area property owners. Owner and address of the surface of each parcel of property within 1,000 feet of the proposed drill site or oil or gas operations site; provide parcel identification number and address if applicable. 
(15)  Distance waivers. If applicable, include all waivers for retail, business and commercial, and residential properties within 600 feet of site on pre-approved instruments that are in recordable form. 
(16)  Well surface casing and cementing program. 
(17)  Commission permit. Provide copies of Commission forms and drilling permit. 
(18)  Security instrument. Provide security comprising of an irrevocable letter of credit, indemnity bond, or certificate of deposit, as required by this article and in an amount determined by the City Engineer or the Council. 
(19)  Emergency contacts. Provide the operator's primary corporate 24 hours a day emergency contact phone number, the name and 24 hours a day phone number of the operator's local representative with supervisory authority over the drill site and oil or gas operations site, and well and lease identification required by the Commission. 
(20)  Media contact. Name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of a point of contact for members of the public and/or media. 
(21)  Proposed well name. 
(22)  Mineral lessee name and address 
(23)  Operator name and address. 
(24)  Surface owner name and address. 
(25)  Insurance. Provide evidence of insurance information as required by this division. Provide the name and address, including facsimile and electronic mail address, of an individual designated to receive notice. 
(26)  Road maintenance agreement and fee. Execute and provide an agreement and the associated, calculated fee if the approved transportation route includes City streets or rights-of-way. 
(27)  Geologic description. Provide name of the target geologic formation as used by the Commission. 
(28)  Legal. Legal description of the property to be used for the oil or gas operation, the parcel, and the production unit (plat description or metes and bounds bearings). Property recorded by plat should reference subdivision, block and lot numbers. 
(29)  Site and pooled unit surveys. A survey of the drill site or oil or gas operations site and the proposed production or pooled unit at a scale of one per 300 (1:300) or greater by a certified surveyor including: 
a.  Lengths and bearings of all boundary lines for the drill site, oil or gas operations site and production or pooled unit; 
b.  Exact acreage of the production or pooled unit; 
c.  Exact location of the well within production unit with distances showing a minimum of two adjacent boundary lines of the production or pooled unit; 
d.  Length of maximum diagonal within the production or pooled unit. 
(30)  Water board letters. Copies of all reports required by the Groundwater Protection Determination Letters issued by the Groundwater Advisory Unit, formerly the Surface Casing Program Area of the TCEQ. They are also sometimes referred to as "water board letters." 
(31)  Noise abatement plan. Description of noise control devices and abatement. 
(32)  Alternate oil or gas operations site location. Provide a map and discussion on alternate well locations due to adjacent land uses. 
(33)  Contractual responsibilities. Provide proof of all contractual responsibilities, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Emergency services, including firefighting and control of well; 
b.  Site operations and maintenance; and 
c.  Monitoring and testing. 
(34)  Waste disposal. Describe handling, storage, and disposal of all sludge and all waste, including final destination. 
(35)  Work hours. Describe work hours for each phase of work: site development, drilling, hydraulic fracturing, and operations. 
(36)  Handling gas. Description of equipment and plans for handling gas for each phase of work: drilling, hydraulic fracturing, and operations. Associated equipment should be depicted on drilling Site Plan, Hydraulic Fracturing Site Plan, and Production Site Plan. 
(37)  Operator's certification of application. Provide a statement under oath signed by the operator that the information submitted in the application is true and correct and shall abide by all Federal, State, and local laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(F)(1); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 14-59. - Security instrument. 
(a)  Requirements of operator. Any security instrument shall require the operator to: 
(1)  General conditions. Comply with terms and conditions of this article and the permit issued; 
(2)  Site restoration. Promptly clear all premises and oil or gas operations site of all litter, trash, waste, and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the operations, and after abandonment or completion, grade, level and promptly restore such property to the same surface conditions as nearly as possible as existed before operations commenced, unless written evidence from the surface owner to the contrary is provided by the operator to the City Engineer; 
(3)  Repair damage. 
a.  Repair damage to all streets, roads, storm drains, traffic control devices, utility infrastructure, and any other infrastructure damage caused or accelerated by the conduct of oil or gas operations; 
b.  Reasonable pavement degradation of the road surface on streets and transportation routes approved by the City Engineer shall be covered by a separately executed Road Maintenance Agreement with the City; 
(4)  Indemnification. Agree to indemnify and hold harmless the City, its officers, agents, employees and volunteers from and against all claims, losses, damages, causes of action, suits, and liability of every kind, including oil and gas development activity, all expenses of litigation, court costs, and attorney's fees, for injury to or death of any person, or for damage to any property caused by or arising from the operator's or agents' activities under a permit: 
a.  Except where such injuries, death or damages are caused by the City's sole negligence or the joint negligence of the City and any other person or entity other than the operator; 
b.  Regardless of whether such injuries, death, or damages are caused in part by the negligence of City; and 
c.  Operator agrees to pay for all damages to the City's trees, buildings, streets (except for reasonable pavement degradation of the road surface on specifically identified streets and approved transportation routes contained in an executed Road Maintenance Agreement with the City), fixtures, utility lines (above and below ground), personal property, and any other things damaged because of the operator's or agents' actions in carrying out any operations under this article. The operator further agrees to indemnify and hold the City harmless from all damages to third persons and the property of third persons resulting from such operations; 
(5)  Notice of cancellation. The operator agrees not to cancel such instrument without 30 days' prior written notice thereof to the City Engineer; 
(6)  Fines. The operator agrees to pay fines, penalties, and other assessments imposed by reason of breach of any of the terms of the permit promptly; 
(7)  Restoration from damage. The operator agrees to promptly restore to their former condition any public property damaged by the oil or gas operation; and 
(8)  Fees. The operator agrees to promptly pay all fees of a consultant and Contract Inspector whose services are engaged by the City under this article. 
(b)  Letter of credit. Any irrevocable letter of credit or indemnity bond shall be executed by a reliable banking institution or insurance company authorized to do business in the State as a surety. Such banking institution or insurance company must be acceptable to the City. The operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the City for the benefit of the City and all persons concerned. Such letter or bond shall become effective by the date the permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least the permit term and all renewals. The City may permit a reduction of the letter of credit after completion of drilling and hydraulic fracturing operations. 
(c)  Certificate of deposit. Applicant may substitute a certificate of deposit (CD) in lieu of the letter or bond if the CD is in an amount equal to or greater than the letter or bond required. The CD shall be issued by a bank in the County, selected by the applicant, and shall be payable to the order of the bank; however, accrued interest thereon shall be payable to the operator and the bank shall be so instructed. The CD shall be delivered to the bank and evidence of the delivery shall be submitted to the City Engineer. The bank shall be instructed of the terms and conditions in this section for oil or gas operation security instruments. 
(d)  Minimum surety. The initial principal amount of any security instrument shall be determined by the City Engineer or Council, and shall never be in an amount less than $100,000.00 per well. The operator may make a written request to the City for a reduction in the principal amount of and the consolidation of any surety instrument after the completion of drilling and hydraulic fracturing operations, but the minimum surety shall be at least $50,000.00 regardless of the number of wells operated by the operator in the City. 
(e)  Acceptance and indemnity agreement. The operator who has a net worth of not less than $100,000,000.00, as shown in such operator's most recent audited financial statements, may substitute an acceptance and indemnity agreement in lieu of the bond or irrevocable letter of credit, provided that such acceptance and indemnity agreement shall be in a form acceptable to, and approved by, the City Attorney and the City Manager. The Oil and Gas Inspector may request an annual review of the operator's most recent audited financial statements to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(F)(2)) 
Sec. 14-60. - Insurance. 
(a)  Minimum coverage. Insurance in the following minimum amounts of coverage are required: 
(1)  Commercial general liability. Commercial general liability insurance (including pollution liability) with limits of liability of not less than $5,000,000.00 per occurrence and $10,000,000.00 in the aggregate per policy year. 
(2)  Excess liability. Excess liability insurance policy with limits of liability of not less than $25,000,000.00 over the above required general liability insurance policy. Excess policy must follow the form of the underlying liability policy. 
(3)  Environmental pollution liability. Environmental pollution liability coverage in full force and effect in an amount not less than $5,000,000.00 per occurrence and $10,000,000.00 in the aggregate per policy year for the duration of the urban, rural, or seismic survey permit, with insurance for environmental pollution liability applicable to bodily injury and property damage, including loss of use of damaged property or of property not physically damaged or destroyed; cleanup costs; and defense costs, including costs and expenses in the investigation, defense or settlement of claims; all for a loss arising from operations of the operator. 
a.  Sudden and accidental. Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste material or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants. 
b.  Continuous coverage. The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that any retroactive date applicable to coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of issuing the permit by the City. 
(4)  Control of well. Control of well coverage shall cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control; re-drilling or restoration expenses; seepage and pollution damage as first-party recovery for the operator; and related expenses, including, but not limited to, expenses related to retaining experts and consultants, loss of equipment, and evacuation of residents. 
a.  $5,000,000.00 per occurrence with no aggregate, if available; otherwise an aggregate of $10,000,000.00; 
b.  $500,000.00 sub-limit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the operator has care, custody and control. 
(5)  Workers' compensation insurance: 
a.  Statutory Benefits (Coverage A): Statutory. 
b.  Employers Liability (Coverage B): 
1.  $1,000,000.00 each accident. 
2.  $1,000,000.00 disease/employee. 
3.  $1,000,000.00 disease/policy limit. 
(6)  Automobile liability insurance. Minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury and property damage. Coverage shall include any vehicle, owned vehicles, non-owned vehicles, scheduled vehicles and hired vehicles. 
(b)  Terms and conditions. The following terms and conditions regarding standard insurance policies are required: 
(1)  Commercial general liability and auto liability insurance must be issued by a carrier rated "A" or better, in a financial size category of XV or greater under the current A.M. Best Key Rating Guide. Only insurance carriers licensed and authorized to do business in the State will be accepted. Deductibles shall be shown on the certificate of insurance. Claims-made policies must include a retroactive date and availability of an extended reporting period of no less than 36 months. 
(2)  The City, its officials, agents, employees, and volunteers will be listed as additional insureds on the commercial general liability, auto liability, and excess (umbrella) policies. The coverage shall have no special limitations on protection afforded the City, its officials, agents, employees, or volunteers. A letter of self-insurance shall provide the same level of protection for the City, its officials, agents, employees and volunteers as additional insured status in a commercial policy. 
(3)  Waiver of subrogation. Policies will be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation rights in favor of the City on all policies. A letter of self-insurance shall include a waiver of subrogation rights in favor of the City. 
(4)  Change of coverage notice. Coverage shall not be suspended, voided, canceled, modified or reduced in coverage or in limits of liability except after 30 days' prior written notice has been given to the City. 
(5)  Certificates. Certificates of Insurance on the most current State Department of Insurance-approved form must be filed with the City as evidence of compliance with the insurance coverage required under this section. Such certificates must be endorsed to indicate that the carrier will provide the City, as certificate holder, 30 days' written notice of cancellation (ten days for non-payment) or material change. Certificate will show coverage for pollution liability; control of well; property damage liability arising from blasting or explosion; collapse or structural damage; underground property damage; damage to underground resources and equipment; and blowout or cratering of any well. Upon request, the operator will provide the City with full copies of the insurance policies required under this section. 
(6)  Notice. The individual designated to receive notice shall be a resident of the State upon whom all orders and notices provided in this division may be served in person or by facsimile, electronic mail, or certified mail. The operator shall within ten days notify the City Engineer in writing of any change in such individual or mailing address unless operations in the City are discontinued and abandonment is completed. 
(c)  Self-insurance. The City, in its sole discretion, may accept from the operator, a letter of self-insurance or assumption of risk in an amount not less than the required limits of liability stated herein. The operator shall provide, upon the City's acceptance of such letter of self-insurance, financial statements supporting the operator's capacity to defend and indemnify all claims related to or regarded as having resulted from the operator's activities for which the City has issued any such permit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(F)(3)) 
Sec. 14-61. - Application submitted to City Engineer. 
(a)  The applicant shall complete the application and deliver it and any additional required information to the City Engineer. Any costs of processing the application, including any unpaid fees of a consultant, shall be paid by the applicant prior to any public hearing. Applications shall be filed with the City Engineer for review. After the City Engineer review, a report for Council will be prepared recommending conditions that should be included in any permit to be issued to the applicant relative to the conduct of oil or gas operations. 
(b)  Application copies. The original permit application, all attachments, all fees, a minimum of three hard copies of the application, and one electronic copy of the application (contained on a thumb, flash drive, or disk), shall be submitted to the City Engineer. Upon request by the City Engineer, the operator will provide any additional hard copies of the permit application and attachments. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(E)(7)) 
Sec. 14-62. - Engaging a consultant. 
    The City Engineer may require additional or supplemental information before action is taken on an application. The City Engineer may seek authorization from the City Manager to engage the services of a consultant, without submission of the application to the Council, where the City Engineer believes that additional expertise is required. The actual cost of the consultant will be paid by the applicant. The City Engineer shall provide the applicant with an opportunity to withdraw the application prior to engaging the services of a consultant. The applicant shall be required to pay to the City a retainer to cover the cost of the services prior to consultant's commencement of the work. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(E)(3)) 
Sec. 14-63. - Engaging a Contract Inspector. 
    The City Engineer may, at applicant's actual cost, retain an independent Contract Inspector. The City Engineer shall provide the applicant with an opportunity to withdraw the application prior to engaging the services of a Contract Inspector. The applicant will be required to pay a retainer to cover the cost of the services prior to the contractor's commencement of the work. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(E)(4)) 
Sec. 14-64. - Public hearing. 
(a)  Required. The Council shall hold a public hearing on any application for a permit to drill an urban permit oil or gas well or construct an urban oil or gas operations site. 
(b)  Requirements. Written notice of such hearing shall be sent by the City Engineer to the applicant and all other persons deemed by the City Engineer to be affected and all owners of real property within 1,000 feet of the proposed drill site or urban oil or gas operations site. Such notice shall be given not less than two weeks before the date to all such property owners who have rendered their property for City taxes as the ownership appears on the last certified tax roll of the Brazos County Appraisal District. Such notice may be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the U.S. Post Office. Notice shall also be given, at the operator's expense, by publishing the same in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least two weeks prior to the date, which notice shall state the time and place of such hearing. All notice provisions contained herein shall be deemed sufficient upon substantial compliance with this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(I)) 
Sec. 14-65. - Criteria for granting or denying permit. 
(a)  Council actions. The Council shall review the application and any other related information and shall set the principal security instrument. Granting the permit shall be conditioned on the applicant submitting the security instrument to the City within 30 days. The Council may require any change in the operations, plan, air quality monitoring plan, design, layout, fencing, screening, lighting, or other matters reasonably required in the interest of the public. The Council may accept, reject, waive or modify the recommendations to secure compliance with this article, this Code, or to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City. 
(b)  Criteria. The following additional criteria shall be addressed by the Council: 
(1)  Reasonable. The operations proposed are reasonable under the circumstances and conditions prevailing in the area; 
(2)  Health, safety, and welfare. The operations proposed do not harm the health, safety, and welfare of the public when and if conducted under the permit conditions to be imposed; and 
(3)  Balancing factors. The oil or gas operations conducted in compliance with the permit are reasonable and justified and minimally affect adjacent property and the general public, balancing the following factors: 
a.  Mineral rights. The right of the owner of the mineral estate to explore, develop, and produce the minerals; 
b.  Alternate drill sites. The availability of alternate drill sites, both presently and at other times during the lease term; and 
c.  Timing. The date of acquisition by the owners of the surface and mineral estates. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(J)) 
Sec. 14-66. - Permit terms. 
    Permits shall be for a term of one year and may be extended for additional terms of one year each, provided that the permitted oil or gas operations site has been maintained in compliance with the operator's permit and this division, upon successful completion of an annual inspection and the payment of the fee for a renewal of a permit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(E)(9)) 
Sec. 14-67. - Permit period and renewal. 
(a)  Permit period. A permit shall be issued for one year. At the end of such time, it shall be updated (if operator wishes to continue the oil or gas operation) by filing a renewal application. The operator must reapply during the permit period for a renewal application if a change of operations is proposed or takes place. Multiple wells on one drill site are encouraged. 
(b)  Renewal. 
(1)  Period. The operator will submit an application form for a renewal permit no later than 30 days before the expiration of the operator's permit, and indicate in the application what changes are requested at the oil or gas operations site. An inspection and renewal fee established in Section 2-117 shall be paid at the time of reapplication. The operator recognizes the reclassification of a permit from rural to urban may occur due to adjacent development. 
(2)  Application requirements. Renewal applications shall include any of the following items which have changed since the original permit application, which shall be current and updated, as applicable, to cover the renewal period: 
a.  Renewal application fee established in Section 2-117; 
b.  Independent contract Inspector retainer fee; 
c.  Production site plan. Site plan of any proposed operational changes showing the location of all improvements, modifications, and equipment; ensure fencing complies, equipment is well-maintained and painted, and site is clean under article requirements; 
d.  Transportation route plan. Map showing any changes to the previously approved transportation route within the City including all streets and roads for the passage of equipment, chemicals, production, including pipelines, or waste products produced by the oil or gas operation; 
e.  Water sources. Description, location, and source of any new water sources for all oil or gas operations, and if proposed, a plan for recycling flowback and produced water; 
f.  Water analyses. Annual post-drilling water testing and analyses (if applicable); 
g.  Hazardous materials management plan. A copy of the hazardous materials management plan and all material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous materials located, stored, transported, and/or temporarily used on the oil or gas operations site shall be provided to the Fire Chief; 
h.  Emergency response plan. A copy of the Emergency Response Plan and any other emergency or response plans shall be provided to the Fire Chief; 
i.  Emergency contacts. Confirm and update the emergency contact information on permanent weatherproof signs; 
j.  Air quality monitoring plan. A copy of the air quality monitoring plan; 
k.  Surrounding area map. Location and description of all improvements and structures (including water wells) within 1,000 feet of the drill site or oil or gas operations site; 
l.  Security instrument. Current security instrument comprising an irrevocable letter of credit, indemnity bond, or certificate of deposit, as required by this division and in an amount determined by the City Engineer or the Council; 
m.  Mineral lessee name and address; 
n.  Operator/applicant name and address; 
o.  Surface owner name and address; 
p.  Name and address, including facsimile and electronic mail address, of an individual designated to receive notice; 
q.  Insurance. Evidence of current insurance information as required by this division; and 
r.  Operator's certification of application. Statement under oath signed by the operator which items have not changed and that the information submitted in the renewal application is true and correct. 
(3)  Inspection. Before the expiration of the permit, the City Oil and Gas Inspector shall inspect the oil or gas operations site to determine compliance with this article. 
(4)  Process. If no change in operations is proposed or has taken place and inspection reveals compliance with the ordinance in effect at the time of the original permit or this article during the preceding permit period, the City Engineer shall issue a renewal permit. Otherwise the renewal application shall be processed as an original application. 
(5)  Remedial conditions. Upon application for a renewal permit, the City Oil and Gas Inspector may consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of which such facility or structure is constructed, rust and its appearance, and recommend repainting or other remedial steps to be taken as a condition of renewal. 
(6)  Notice of changes. If any change or addition to the permit information on the application occurs, such change or addition during the period of the permit shall be communicated to the City Engineer within ten days of such change or addition. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(L); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 14-68. - Permit suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Conditions. The City Engineer or the City Oil and Gas Inspector may suspend or revoke any permit issued under this division upon finding and notification to the operator if: 
(1)  Permit noncompliance. The operator failed, neglected, or refused to perform and comply with the conditions of the permit; 
(2)  Article noncompliance. The operator failed, neglected, or refused to comply with or abide by, or violated any provision of this article or any regulation, law, rule, or order, either directly or indirectly, by or in connection with or incidental to the conduct of the operator's oil or gas operation; 
(3)  Health, safety, and welfare. Any of the operator's operations or the continuance thereof upon the premises covered by the permit are polluting, unsafe, a menace or hazard to public or private property, or to the lives or safety of persons; 
(4)  Public nuisance. Any of the operator's operations or the continuance thereof upon the premises covered by the permit constitute a public nuisance; 
(5)  Misrepresentation. The operator made any willful or otherwise misrepresentation of facts in any application for any such permit or in any report or record required by this division to be submitted to the City; 
(6)  Flaring. The operator burned or allowed to be burned, oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons in the City by unapproved means; 
(7)  Abandonment marker. The operator failed to install a permanent aboveground marker identifying the location of each plugged and abandoned well; and 
(8)  Noncompliance with laws. The operator failed to comply with all Federal and State laws and regulations or City ordinances. 
(b)  Stop-work order. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a stop work order or other order by the Fire Chief or Police Chief when, in either Chief's professional opinion, there exists a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons. An operator shall comply with such order and efforts shall be undertaken by an operator and such City official to bring such circumstances or condition into compliance with this article or pertinent provisions of the International Fire Code, as amended, and any other applicable local, State or Federal regulations establishing the issuance of such order. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation. No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of any permit during any period of permit suspension or revocation, or pending a judgment of the court upon any application for writ taken to review the decision or order of the City in suspending or revoking such permit; provided, however, nothing contained shall be construed to prevent the performance of such operation in connection with a diligent and bona fide effort to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the suspension or revocation of the permit was ordered, or such operation for the safety of persons or as required by the Commission. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(M); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 14-69. - Appeal. 
    Besides the hearing provided for by this division, any person who has a drilling, re-entry, re-fracking, activating, converting, or renewal permit refused or revoked may, within 30 days, file a written appeal to the City Council under the following procedure: 
(1)  Council authority. The Council shall have and exercise the power to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion regarding the revocation or denial of any permits issued or determination of any idle well, as provided by this division; 
(2)  Submittal in writing. An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the City Engineer. The grounds for appeal must be set forth specifically and the error described by the appellant; 
(3)  Process. Upon receipt of the appeal, the City Engineer shall place the matter on the Council agenda for hearing and give notice by mail of the time, place, and purpose thereof to the appellant, and any other party who requested notice in writing. Within 15 days after filing the appeal, the City Engineer shall transmit to the Council all documents involved in the proceedings. The City Engineer shall make and transmit to the Council such supplementary reports as the City Engineer may deem necessary to present the facts and circumstances. Copies shall be mailed to the appellant at least ten days prior to the hearing; and 
(4)  Council action. The Council shall hear the appeal on the hearing date unless, for cause, Council shall continue the matter. No notice of continuance need be given if the order therefor is announced at the time for which the hearing was set. The decision of the Council shall be final and may only be reviewed on the abuse of discretion standard. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(O)) 
Secs. 14-70-14-96. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Permit Types and Requirements 

Sec. 14-97. - Permit types. 
    Permits shall be determined by the activity and the character of the area. There shall be the following permits: urban, rural, and seismic survey. Any proposed activity conducted in more than one designated type of area shall be required to follow the permit procedure for the most restrictive area included therein. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(E)(5)) 
Sec. 14-98. - Approving authority. 
    All urban permits require City Council approval. All rural permits and seismic survey permits may be approved by the City Engineer. The City Engineer for rural permits and the Council for urban permits shall review the application, City Engineer's report, and any other related information. The City Engineer or Council shall set the dollar amount of the security to be provided by the applicant. The City Engineer or Council may require any change in the plans, operations, air quality monitoring plan, design, layout, fencing, screening, lighting, noise levels or other matters reasonably required in the interest of the public's health, safety, and welfare. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(E)(8)) 
Sec. 14-99. - Urban permit. 
(a)  Process. The City Engineer shall review urban permit applications and shall retain a consultant at the expense of the operator to review the environmental constraints study of the site that identifies potential wetlands and threatened and endangered species; a preliminary review of the need for any site-specific Corps of Engineers permits; and the permit application for the proposed site, and proposed operations or drilling program; the air quality monitoring plan; and at the direction of the City Engineer, draft recommended additional restrictions or conditions to be appended to the urban permit, if issued, including minimum setback and separation distances for drilling or other operations, special safety equipment and procedures, and prohibited operations or techniques. Consultant may recommend additional noise reduction levels and noise and light attenuation screening where deemed appropriate. The consultant's study shall be completed and delivered to the City Engineer and operator within 45 days after the application is submitted. 
(b)  Notice. Before consideration of an urban permit application by the City Council, the City Engineer shall cause the following notices of public hearing to be issued, at the operator's expense, no later than two weeks before the regular Council meeting in which the public hearing will be held: 
(1)  Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
(2)  Notice of the public hearing shall be made to all persons with property within 1,000 feet of the proposed oil or gas operations site as shown by the latest Brazos County Appraisal District certified tax rolls, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The operator shall pay the City the fee established in Section 2-117 for each such notification letter. No notification letter shall be required for property owners who have signed and acknowledged before a Notary Public the consent form acceptable to the City. 
(c)  Council action. After the public hearing, Council, in its sole discretion, may approve or deny the permit based upon the recommendations submitted or may add, remove or waive any conditions not deemed a nuisance or necessitated by the health, safety, and welfare of the public, whether or not they are included in the consultant's recommendations. 
(d)  Public hearing. At the public hearing, the recommendation of the City Engineer shall be presented, the consultant's recommendations considered, and any interested party shall be allowed to speak or present evidence. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Council shall approve or deny the permit based upon the reports, recommendations and testimony submitted. The Council may table any application for up to 60 days and direct the City Engineer to provide additional information. The Council may add or modify any conditions necessitated by the health, safety, and welfare of the public, whether or not included in the recommendations of the City Engineer. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(G)(1); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 14-100. - Rural permit. 
(a)  Notice. Before final consideration of a rural permit application by the City Engineer, the City Engineer shall cause the following notices to be issued, at the operator's expense, to provide at least a two-week public comment period before any final action is taken by the City Engineer: 
(1)  Notice of the rural permit application shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City; and 
(2)  Notice shall also be made to all persons with property within 1,000 feet of the proposed oil or gas operations site as shown by the latest Brazos County Appraisal District certified tax rolls, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The operator shall pay the City the fee established in Section 2-117 for each such notification letter. No notification letter shall be required for property owners who have signed and acknowledged before a Notary Public consent to the proposed oil or gas operations or waiver of the right to receive further notices about rural permit applications in a form acceptable to the City. 
(b)  Process. At least two weeks following such notice, the City Engineer shall consider the application and any comments received regarding the application, and grant or deny the permit based upon ordinance requirements and any received comments. The City Engineer may refer the permit to Council for consideration and table the application for a period of up to 60 days to obtain additional data from the operator or from a consultant engaged to study and evaluate the proposed activity. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(G)(2); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 14-101. - Seismic survey permit. 
    Permit is required for all seismic surveys performed on any property within the City. 
(1)  Process. To obtain a permit, the operator must apply to the City, pay the permit fee established in Section 2-117, and execute a License Agreement on a form approved by the City Attorney. The City Manager or designee may negotiate and execute the License Agreement on behalf of the City. 
(2)  Term. The term of the seismic survey permit shall be for a period of one year. 
(3)  Permit required. It violates this division to conduct a seismic survey in the City without a valid, existing permit and License Agreement with the City. 
(4)  Application. The application for a permit will require the following information to be provided by the operator: 
a.  Name and address of the operator. If the operator is a corporation, the state of incorporation; if the operator is a limited partnership, the name and address of the general partner; 
b.  Emergency contact. Name, address, telephone number, and email address of two individuals who will be the 24-hour emergency contact for the operator; 
c.  Media contact. Name, address, telephone number, and email address of a point of contact for members of the public and/or media; 
d.  Seismic project route plan. Sheets on 24-inch by 36-inch tax maps that identify all utilities, streets, properties, the location of source points, and the location of receiver points; 
e.  Traffic control plan. Plan in compliance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; 
f.  Vibroseis trucks. A list of the type, weight, and specifications of the vibroseis equipment and/or vehicles to be used in the seismic survey; 
g.  Insurance. Certificates of insurance evidencing the insurance required under the license agreement which lists the City, its officers, agents, employees and volunteers as an additional insureds; and 
h.  Security. A security instrument that secures the operator's obligations to repair any damage caused by the seismic survey to sidewalks, rights-of-way, easements, water/sewer/electric infrastructure, or other public property or infrastructure. 
(5)  Prohibitions. 
a.  Explosives. Under no circumstances may explosive charges, including, but not limited to, pentolite or dynamite, be a seismic source or related to the preparation and/or operation of conducting a seismic survey in the City, including public and private properties, City rights-of-way, and on City-owned properties. 
b.  Source points on City property. Seismic source points shall not be permitted within City rights-of-way, or on City-owned properties within City limits. 
c.  Clearing on City property. Clearing trees and vegetation, associated with seismic survey operations, greater than a one-inch caliper is prohibited in City rights-of-way and on any City-owned properties. 
(6)  Violations. It violates this article to conduct seismic surveys: 
a.  Permit required. In the City without a valid, existing permit and License Agreement with the City; 
b.  Explosives. Using pentolite, dynamite, or any other explosive; 
c.  Source point setbacks. If source point activity encroaches upon the minimum established setbacks; 
d.  Peak particle velocity and frequency. If the peak particle velocity or frequency exceed the allowed parameters under the license agreement; 
e.  Source points on City property. Using City rights-of-way, or City-owned properties within the City limits for seismic source points; 
f.  Receiver points. Using public streets, sidewalks, or drainage ditches for seismic receiver points and/or using other public property without prior written permission from the City; or 
g.  General. That violate any of the terms or conditions of the License Agreement. 
(7)  Conflicts. Provisions of this article shall apply and this section shall prevail if any conflicts arise. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(G)(3); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 14-102-14-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OTHER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-131. - General. 
(a)  Clean site. All oil or gas operations shall be conducted in a reasonable and prudent manner and all oil or gas operations sites shall be maintained in a neat, clean, and orderly manner. Debris, pools of oil, water or other liquids, weeds, brush, trash, or other waste material and all discarded surplus materials, supplies, and refuse shall be removed from the oil or gas operations site no later than every 15 days. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited. No person shall place, deposit, discharge, cause, or permit to be placed, deposited, or discharged, any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances, or any refuse, including wastewater or brine, from any oil or gas operation or the contents of any container used with any oil or gas operation in, into, or upon any public right-of-way, storm drain, ditch or sewer, sanitary, drain or sewer, any body of water, or any private property in the City. 
(c)  Equipment maintenance. All production equipment on the oil or gas operations site shall be painted and maintained, including pumping units, storage tanks, buildings and structures. 
(d)  Flood ordinance. All oil or gas operations shall comply with Chapter 105. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(13)) 
Sec. 14-132. - Locations. 
    No oil or gas operations site shall be located: 
(1)  Within 50 feet of any street, right-of-way, alley, or utility easement; 
(2)  Within 600 feet of cemeteries, parks, retail, business and commercial or public buildings or structures, religious institutions, medical offices, dental offices, places of assembly or residence, unless waived by the retail, business and commercial, and residence property owner and the party entitled to occupy the premises; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any public or private school, child or adult care or group residential facilities, or hospital; 
(4)  In any public park unless authorized by State law; 
(5)  Within any 100-year special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); or 
(6)  In any City streets or alleys. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(1)) 
Sec. 14-133. - Tanks. 
(a)  Location. All tanks shall be on the oil or gas operations site and set back pursuant to the standards of the Commission and the National Fire Protection Association, but in all cases shall be at least 350 feet from any existing public right-of-way, planned public right-of-way as described in the Thoroughfare Plan of the City, or property line, as measured from the tank battery containment berm. City Council may modify the tank setback distance from existing public right-of-way or planned public right-of-way as described in the Thoroughfare Plan to no less than 175 feet if the modified tank setback distance increases the separation distance from any residence or public building. 
(b)  Specifications and height. All tanks and permanent structures shall conform to the American Petroleum Institute (A.P.I.) specifications unless other specifications are approved by the Fire Chief. The top of the tanks shall be no higher than 15 feet above the terrain surrounding the tanks, excluding required netting and support structures. 
(c)  Vapor recovery system. Vapor recovery system equipment is required for tanks or tank batteries that have an estimated rolling annual aggregate emissions rate of 25 tons or greater of total volatile organic hydrocarbons per oil or gas operations site. 
(d)  Vapor recovery efficiency. Vapor recovery equipment must be operated to ensure 95 percent recovery efficiency between the internal and external atmospheres of the tanks. 
(e)  Fire suppression. Fire extinguishers and accessible foam suppression systems for all tanks and flammable fluid retaining vessels are required for all oil or gas operations. 
(f)  Berm capacity. All tanks shall have a berm or dam of sufficient height, strength and distance from the tanks or vessels to ensure that 150 percent of the capacity of the largest tank and/or vessel and adequate freeboard to allow for precipitation can be maintained within the berm or dam. 
(g)  Lightning arrestor. Lightning arrestors and adequate grounding equipment shall be installed for all tanks. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(2)) 
Sec. 14-134. - Slush, sump, sump pits or skim ponds are prohibited. 
(a)  Sump pits prohibited. No person shall own, operate, have possession of, be in control of, or maintain any well site, former well site or property on which a slush, sump or sump pit or skim pond is located. 
(b)  Portable steel tanks. This section shall not apply to portable steel tanks. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(3)) 
Sec. 14-135. - Waste removal. 
(a)  Closed loop system. Rotary mud, drill cuttings, oil or liquid hydrocarbons and all other oil field wastes derived or resulting from, or connected with, the drilling, redrilling, hydraulic fracturing, deepening or re-working of any well shall be contained in a closed loop system and discharged into portable steel tanks. The operator will follow all Department of Transportation (DOT) regulations and placarding for transportation of any waste material. 
(b)  Timing. Unless otherwise directed by the Commission, waste materials shall be removed from the drill site within 30 days after completion of drilling. 
(c)  Drip pans. Drip pans should be provided under equipment and storage containers potentially subject to minor leaks. These drip pans should be monitored on a routine basis to recover and recycle or dispose of accumulated oil and other liquids. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(4)) 
Sec. 14-136. - Noise abatement. 
(a)  Maximum noise. No well will be drilled, re-entered, re-worked, completed, fracked, operated, re-fracked or produced with any pump, engine, compressor or motor-driven machinery of any type that, when considering the ambient sound pressure level in the immediate vicinity of the oil or gas operations site, creates a sound pressure level greater than 60 dB(a) when measured at a distance of 600 feet from that equipment or at the closest fence-line, whichever is the shortest distance. If the ambient sound pressure level exceeds 60 dB(a) the sound level may not exceed the ambient noise level by more than five dB during the daytime and more than three dB during the nighttime. Sound attenuation structures may be considered, constructed and utilized during operations to meet this requirement. 
(b)  Muffled exhaust. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels, used with the drilling of any well or for use on any production equipment, shall not be discharged into the open air unless it is equipped with an exhaust muffler or mufflers, or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to suppress noise and prevent the escape of noxious gases, fumes, or ignited carbon or soot. 
(c)  Electric motors. Motive power for all operations after completion of drilling operations shall be by utility-provided electricity. All electric lines to production facilities shall be located in a manner compatible to those lines already installed in the surrounding area or subdivision. 
(d)  Sound meters. Sound level measurements shall be made with a sound level meter conforming as a minimum to the requirements of American National Standards Institute S1.4-1971 Type 2 or its successor publication and set to an A-weighted response. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(5)) 
Sec. 14-137. - Light orientation. 
    Considering safety, site lighting shall be directed downward and internally to avoid glare and to prevent lighting from shining directly on public roads, adjacent dwelling or buildings, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the drill site or oil or gas operations site. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(6)) 
Sec. 14-138. - Air quality monitoring plan. 
    The operator will submit an air quality monitoring plan that describes the location, techniques, equipment and frequency of measurement the operator will use to ensure all airborne emissions of oil or gas operations and equipment will be measured and comply with applicable airborne emissions limits, applicable law and this division relating to airborne emissions. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(7)) 
Sec. 14-139. - Gas emissions or burning restricted. 
(a)  No venting. No person shall allow, cause or permit gases to be vented into the atmosphere or to be burned by open flame except as required for safety during drilling or completion of drilling. 
(b)  Shielding. Gas shall be burned in such a manner as to direct, contain and shield the flame visually from any building or other structure not used in oil or gas operations within 600 feet of the drill site. 
(c)  Emissions abatement. Gas from oil or gas operations and exhaust emissions from combustion engines will be abated, treated or otherwise limited to the maximum extent practicable and controlled as prescribed by the USEPA and the TCEQ regulations to maintain levels of hydrocarbon based, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and H2S at the perimeter of the oil or gas operations site comparable to levels adjacent to but not on the oil or gas operations site prior to commencement of oil or gas operations. 
(d)  Green completions. Completion of oil wells or gas wells will be by utilization of reduced emissions completions (REC), more commonly known as "Green Completions." 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(8)) 
Sec. 14-140. - Emissions, monitoring and mitigation. 
(a)  Requirement to register. The operator or other person proposing to construct a new facility (a stationary source of air contaminants) that requires a TCEQ permit must register with the City within 30 days of submittal of the TCEQ permit application. 
(b)  Additional information. The Oil and Gas Inspector may require the operator of a facility whose activity causes or may cause emission of an air contaminant to submit additional information to evaluate the air pollution nature or potential of the activity. 
(c)  Extended gas analysis. An extended gas analysis of raw produced gas will be provided to the Oil and Gas Inspector upon initial production and after any recompletion. 
(d)  No open venting. No well may flow or vent directly into the atmosphere without first directing the flow through separation equipment or into a portable tank. 
(e)  Emissions abatement. After hydraulic fracturing, the operator will employ equipment and processes to minimize natural gas and associated vapor release. 
(f)  Pipeline. All salable gas will be directed to the sales line as soon as practicable or shut in. 
(g)  Reduced emissions. All wells that have a sale pipeline will employ reduced emission completion techniques and methods. 
(h)  Hydrogen sulfide. If a gas or oil field is identified as a hydrogen sulfide (H2S) field under RRC, TCEQ, or EPA regulations, or if a well is producing hydrogen sulfide (H2S) gas over applicable Commission, TCEQ, or USEPA standards, the operator shall immediately stabilize and cease any additional oil or gas operations of that well or facility. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(9)) 
Sec. 14-141. - Dry storage. 
(a)  Non-essential equipment. 
(1)  No drilling equipment, re-working equipment, other portable equipment or idle equipment not essential to the everyday operation of the activity located thereon shall be stored on an oil or gas operations site; 
(2)  Lumber, pipes, tubing, and casing shall not be stored on an oil or gas operations site except when drilling or well servicing operations are being conducted; 
(3)  All well servicing equipment, including portable pulling masts and gin poles, shall be removed from the oil or gas operations site within 15 days after completion of a well servicing operation. 
(b)  Blocking traffic. No person, owner, or operator shall store or park any vehicle or item of machinery on any street, right-of-way, driveway, alley, or upon any oil or gas operations site except that equipment for the maintenance of the site or for gathering or transportation of hydrocarbons from the site. The Fire Chief shall determine whether any equipment constitutes a fire hazard. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(10)) 
Sec. 14-142. - Disposal wells prohibited. 
    No disposal wells of any kind or character shall be drilled, completed, re-completed or used within the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(11)) 
Sec. 14-143. - Water wells. 
(a)  Location. No water wells associated with oil or gas operations shall be drilled within 1,000 feet of any other water well registered with the Brazos Valley Groundwater District or the Texas Water Development Board, located within the City limits. Any water well with steel casing shall be equipped with cathodic protection. 
(b)  Baseline water quality. Water well samples shall be collected and analyzed prior to any drilling activity to document baseline water quality data of the well. 
(c)  Pre-drilling water analyses required. Before an oil or gas operator commences drilling of a proposed oil or gas well within the City limits, baseline water quality testing shall be performed as set out in this section. The operator shall perform water analyses on at least one private or public water well in each aquifer with usable quality water as defined in Texas Administrative Code title 16, part 1, chapter 3, rule section 3.30(e)(7)(B)(i) that is within a radius of 1,500 feet from the proposed oil or gas well bore. If an aquifer has multiple water wells within the 1,500-foot radius, the closest water well to the oil or gas well will be the well tested. 
(d)  Post-drilling water analyses required. The operator shall perform water analyses on the same water wells that were tested during the Pre-drilling Water Analyses within 90 days of completing the oil or gas well and one year after the completion of the well. Completing the oil or gas well in this instance is defined as perforating the well or hydraulic fracturing of the well if hydraulic stimulation is done after perforating any oil or gas formation. The water well analyses shall, at a minimum, test for the constituents listed in Subsection (g)(3) of this section. 
(e)  Results delivered to City. The results of the water well analyses shall be delivered to the City Engineer or designee and the water well owner within 30 days of collecting the samples for testing. 
(f)  Water well owner notification. In the case of a substantive negative change using guidelines of the Groundwater Protection Council (GWPC) in a water well quality between the pre- and post-drilling and completion testing, the oil or gas well operator shall immediately notify all property owners with water wells within 2,000 feet of the oil or gas well of the change in water quality. 
(g)  Water analyses requirements. Water analyses and testing shall conform to the following testing requirements: 
(1)  Collection of samples. Water samples must be collected by personnel employed by an independent laboratory certified under the National Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Program for Drinking Water. 
(2)  Laboratory analyses. The water analyses shall be performed by a laboratory certified under the National Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Program for Drinking Water. 
(3)  Testing parameters. Parameters to be tested for include, but are not limited to, barium, boron, chlorides, sodium, total dissolved solids (TDS), strontium, ethane, ethylene, methane, semi-volatiles, total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH), and volatile organic compounds (VOCs). 
(h)  Cross connection control. Any connection to a freshwater source, including, but not limited to, the City public drinking water system, private wells, other surface and/or groundwater sources, shall comply with all cross-connection control requirements. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(12)) 
Sec. 14-144. - Work hours. 
    Site development, other than drilling and completions (including hydraulic fracturing) operations, shall be conducted only between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday. Truck deliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site preparation and other related work conducted on the well site shall be limited to the same work hour restrictions identified above except in cases of fires, blowouts, explosions, and any other emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is necessary to prevent the cessation of drilling, completions (including hydraulic fracturing), or production. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(14)) 
Sec. 14-145. - Safety. 
(a)  Watchman. The operator will keep a watchman or security personnel on-site during the drilling, completion of drilling, hydraulic fracturing or re-working of a well when other workmen are not on the premises. 
(b)  Permanent site signage. Permanent weatherproof signs reading "DANGER NO SMOKING ALLOWED" shall be posted at the entrance of each well site and tank battery. The sign shall include the emergency notification numbers of the Fire Department, the operator's primary corporate 24 hours a day emergency contact phone number, the name and 24 hours a day phone number of the operator's local representative with supervisory authority over the oil or gas drill site and oil or gas operations site, and well and lease identification required by the Commission. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(15)) 
Sec. 14-146. - Emergency Response Plan. 
(a)  Prior to commencement of drilling, oil or gas operations, or any other hydrocarbons production activities, the operator shall submit to the Oil and Gas Inspector finalized copy of the Emergency Response Plan establishing written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion, hydraulic fracturing, or producing of oil and/or gas wells, including an Emergency Evacuation Plan. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the Commission, the TCEQ, Texas Department of Transportation and/or the USEPA. 
(b)  The Emergency Response Plan shall be kept current with any additions, modifications, and/or amendments concerning all construction-related activities, oil and/or natural gas operations and oil and/or natural gas production. Updated plans shall be submitted to the Oil and Gas Inspector within two business days after any additions, modifications, and/or amendments to said Plan. A copy of the Emergency Response Plan shall be kept on-site. Further, a copy of the Emergency Response Plan shall be provided to any potentially affected independent school district for comment by the school district, with a copy of the comments provided to the Oil and Gas Inspector. The Emergency Response Plan shall, at a minimum, provide for: 
(1)  Emergencies. Prompt and effective response to emergencies regarding: 
a.  Leaks or releases that can affect public health, safety, welfare; 
b.  Fire or explosions at or near an oil or gas well; or 
c.  Natural disasters; 
(2)  Notification plan. Effective means to notify and communicate required and pertinent information to local fire, police, and public officials during an emergency; 
(3)  Emergency resources. The availability of personnel, equipment, tools, and materials at the scene of an emergency; 
(4)  Emergency risk reduction. Measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to injury and the probability of accidental death or dismemberment; 
(5)  Shut-down. Emergency shut-down of well and related site; 
(6)  Restoration. The safe restoration of service and operations following an emergency or incident; 
(7)  Post investigation. A follow-up incident investigation to determine the cause of the incident and require the implementation of corrective measures. 
(c)  All fire suppression and prevention equipment required by the operator's Emergency Response Plan shall be provided by the operator at the oil or gas operations site or other location as authorized by the Fire Chief. The operator shall maintain the suppression and prevention equipment at the operator's expense. The City shall have no responsibility and the operator assumes all responsibility for any fire, explosion, leak, venting, upset or other event either by one or more sudden events or unseen accumulation of volatile, toxic, polluting, agents of every kind or character released or produced over time and observed, affecting person or property in the City, whether in the atmosphere, on the surface of or underground land within the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(16)) 
Sec. 14-147. - Fencing, screening and landscaping. 
(a)  Supervision. Fences shall not be required on drill sites during initial drilling, completion or hydraulic fracturing operations if 24-hour on-site supervision is provided. 
(b)  Fencing. Within 30 days after production has been established, all oil or gas operations sites, both urban and rural wells, shall be completely enclosed by a permanent chainlink fence. All gates are to be kept locked when the operator or operator's employees are not within the enclosure. 
(1)  Height. The fence fabric shall be at least six feet in height; 
(2)  Support posts. Support posts shall be set in concrete and shall be "embedded" into the ground to a depth sufficient to maintain the stability of the fence; provided, however, so long as stability of the fence is maintained, temporary fence posts shall not be required to be set in concrete; 
(3)  Galvanized and coated. All chainlink fabric, including gates, posts and hardware, shall be galvanized steel wire coated with green non-flammable vinyl or plastic material; 
(4)  Thickness. The chainlink fence fabric shall have a minimum thickness of 11 gauge; 
(5)  Mesh size. The chainlink fabric shall be two-inch mesh; 
(6)  Posts and rails. Posts and rails shall be standard galvanized, welded pipe, schedule 40 or thicker; provided, however, that non-galvanized drill pipe may be used if it exceeds schedule 40 in thickness; 
(7)  Pipe. All pipe and other ferrous parts, except chainlink fabric and drill pipe, shall be galvanized inside and outside with a plating which contains a minimum of 1.2 ounces of zinc per square foot of surface area; 
(8)  Tension rods. Tension rods shall be three-eighths-inch round steel bolt stock. Adjustable tighteners shall be a turnbuckle or equivalent having a six-inch minimum take-up. Tension bars shall have a minimum thickness of one-fourth-inch by three-fourths-inch; 
(9)  Security arms. All fences shall have security extension arms at the top of such fences and such security extension arms shall be strung with at least two strands of galvanized barbed wire; 
(10)  Color. All fencing shall be of a neutral color compatible with surrounding uses and shall be maintained in a neat, orderly, secure condition. Neutral colors for fencing shall include unobtrusive shades of green; and 
(11)  Knox box. The operator shall provide the City's Fire Chief with a "knox padlock" or "knox box with a key" to access the oil or gas operations site, to be used only in case of an emergency. 
(c)  Landscaping. Within 60 days after completion of drilling or within 60 days after activation of an idle well, any urban oil or gas operations site will be landscaped. Landscaping may be installed inside the perimeter fence and must be served by drip irrigation. 
(1)  General location. Landscaping and irrigation shall be required along all street frontages of the oil or gas operations site with suitable screening shrubs that complement the architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood; 
(2)  Screening shrubs. Screening shrubs shall be installed around the well site and all fences and screen from view the structures sought to be screened. Screening shrubs shall be of the evergreen variety and be planted generally on six-foot centers to ensure coverage and screening of the fenced area at maturity. Screening shrubs shall be a minimum of three feet in height at planting, have the potential to grow to a mature height of a minimum of six feet and must have an installed irrigation system that provides total water coverage to all plant materials; and 
(3)  Berms. The vegetation or berms shall be kept in an attractive state and in good condition by the operator. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(17)) 
Sec. 14-148. - Access and dust control. 
(a)  Private access roads. Before any oil or gas operation begins, all private roads used for access to a drill site or oil or gas operations site shall be surfaced with crushed rock, gravel, or ore, or oiled and maintained to prevent dust and mud. 
(b)  Drill site pads. Pads shall be constructed of crushed rock, gravel or ore in sufficient quantity and compacted to a sufficient degree to support all surface operations and traffic that the operator proposes to conduct on the drill site. 
(c)  Private site drives. All drives shall be at least 30 feet wide unless otherwise agreed to by the surface owner and the City Oil and Gas Inspector. The private drive shall be constructed of compacted road base material finished with two courses of chip seal or concrete. This requirement may be waived at the discretion of the City Oil and Gas Inspector. 
(d)  Driveway aprons. Driveway aprons and culverts shall meet BCS United standards. Turn-outs and turn-ins shall be constructed to ensure that no traffic is impeded by the ingress or egress of the operator's vehicular traffic, and shall meet stopping sight distance by ensuring sight triangles are free from obstacles. 
(e)  Heavy trucks. Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production over 24,000 pounds shall be restricted to such streets designated in the permit or commercial delivery routes designated in this Code wherever capable of being used. 
(f)  Dust control plan. The operator shall conduct a dust control plan that will contain daily dust mitigation measures that, at a minimum, provide for daily watering, chip seal or equivalent best management practices approved by the City Engineer. 
(g)  Water for dust control. Only clean water may be used for dust control and abatement. Produced water, wastewater, and other associated fluids or hydrocarbons shall not be used for dust control and abatement. 
(h)  Road maintenance agreement. A signed road maintenance agreement supplied by the City that provides that the operator provide the required fee to cover the estimated repair costs for any damage to public roads, streets, or highways caused by heavy vehicles for any activity associated with oil or gas operations is required. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(18)) 
Sec. 14-149. - Periodic reporting. 
(a)  Changes. The operator shall notify the Oil and Gas Inspector of any changes to the following information within seven business days after the change occurs: 
(1)  Operator. The name, address, and/or phone number of the operator; 
(2)  Notices. The name, address, and/or phone number of the person designated to receive notices from the City (which person must be a resident of the State that can be served with such notices in person or by registered or certified mail); and 
(3)  Emergency response plan. The operator's Emergency Response Plan, and any other emergency plans. 
(b)  Emergency Contacts. The operator shall notify the Oil and Gas Inspector of any change to the name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the person with supervisory authority over drilling or operations activities within one business day. 
(c)  Requirement to report emergencies. 
(1)  Immediate notice. The operator shall immediately notify the Oil and Gas Inspector and Fire Chief of any incident resulting in product loss from a hydrocarbon storage facility or pipeline facility, blowout, fire, explosion, incident resulting in injury, death, or property damage, or any other significant incidents as defined by the Commission or the TCEQ; 
(2)  Initial summary report. A written report, containing a brief summary of the incident, will be submitted to the Oil and Gas Inspector and to the Fire Chief by 5:00 p.m. on the first business day following the incident; 
(3)  Follow-up detailed report. A follow-up report, signed and dated by the person responsible for the report, shall be submitted to the Oil and Gas Inspector and the Fire Chief within 30 days following the incident. The follow-up incident report shall include the following information: 
a.  Operator. The operator name, phone number, address, and, if possible, email address; 
b.  Description. Description of the incident, including, but not limited to, the time, date, location, and cause of the event; 
c.  Duration. Duration of the incident; that is, when it began and when it terminated to the degree it no longer constituted a hazard to the health, safety, and well-being of persons or property, regardless of the distance or separation from the place of incident; 
d.  Remedy. How the incident was brought under control and/or remedied; 
e.  Investigation results. A full and complete description of the intercompany investigation or other investigation or inquiry made concerning the incident, the findings or results of such inquiry or investigation, and the action taken because of the findings and inquiry concerning the prevention of future hazards; 
f.  Other incident reports or complaints. The operator shall provide the Oil and Gas Inspector and the Fire Chief a copy of any incident reports or written complaints submitted to the Commission or TCEQ within 30 days after the operator has notice of such reports or complaints. This shall include, but not be limited to, notification of any reportable quantity releases of oil, natural gas, and/or associated minerals, chemicals, or solid and/or liquid wastes, under regulatory requirements established by the Commission, and notification to the Fire Chief of any fire and/or equipment strikes by lightning; and 
g.  Annual report of changes. Beginning December 31 after each well is completed, and continuing on December 31 each year thereafter until the operator notifies the Oil and Gas Inspector the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall submit a written report to the Oil and Gas Inspector identifying any changes to the information in the application for the applicable permit that have not been previously reported to the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(H)(19)) 
Sec. 14-150. - Spills and blowouts. 
(a)  Cleanup of spills. 
(1)  Notice. After any leak, spill, or malfunction, the operator shall immediately notify the City Oil and Gas Inspector, City Engineer and Fire Chief, and shall remove or cause to be removed, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, Fire Chief, and consultant, all oil and waste materials from any public or private property affected by such spill, leak, or malfunction; and 
(2)  Soil contamination assessment. The City Oil and Gas Inspector shall have the discretion to require the operator to perform a soil contamination assessment if a leak, spill, or upset of fluids or other materials occurs. 
(b)  Blowouts. 
(1)  Notice. If losing control of any well occurs, the operator shall immediately try to regain control of such activity regardless of any other provisions of this division and shall notify the City Engineer as soon as practicable. 
(2)  Control of well. If and when the City Engineer certifies in writing to the City Manager, that the operator is not taking or cannot regain control of such well, the City Engineer may employ any well control expert, or other contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any other expenses for labor and material which the City Engineer deems necessary to regain control of such oil or gas operation. 
(3)  Lien. The City shall then have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners who have voluntarily joined in the drilling of such well to secure payment of any expenditure made by the City under such action of the City Engineer in gaining control of said well. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(K)) 
Sec. 14-151. - Abandonment. 
(a)  Restoration of site requirements. Abandonment shall be approved by the City Engineer after restoration of the drill site and the subsurface thereof has been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements: 
(1)  Equipment removed. The pump-jack, derrick, all tanks, towers, other surface installations, and all appurtenant equipment is removed from the drill site or oil or gas operations site; 
(2)  Materials removed. All concrete, piping, wood, and other foreign materials regardless of depth, except properly severed and sealed surface casing at a depth of not less than ten feet subsurface, is removed from the drill site or oil or gas operations site; 
(3)  Fill holes. All holes and depressions are filled with clean compatible soil; 
(4)  Waste removed. All oil, waste oil, refuse, or waste material is removed from the drill site or oil or gas operations site; 
(5)  Abandonment marker. A permanent aboveground marker or monument is installed identifying the location of each plugged and abandoned well; and 
(6)  Abandonment fee. The operator pays an abandonment fee in an amount established in Section 2-117. 
(b)  Division compliance. During abandonment, operator shall comply with all sections of this division. 
(c)  Building prohibition. No structures or buildings shall ever be built or constructed over an abandoned well bore. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(N); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 14-152. - Acquisition and transfer of existing operations. 
(a)  Acquisition. Every person who acquires any well, property or site upon which operations which are subject to this article, whether by purchase, transfer, assignment, conveyance, exchange or otherwise, shall, within ten days after acquiring such well, property or site, notify the City Engineer in writing of such acquisition. The notice shall contain: 
(1)  Operator acquiring. The name and address of the person acquiring such well, property or site involving an oil or gas operation; 
(2)  Well name. The name and location of the oil or gas operation; 
(3)  Acquisition date. The date of acquisition; 
(4)  Equipment. A description of the properties and equipment acquired, and the oil or gas operation; and 
(5)  Name and contact information. The name and address, including facsimile and electronic mail address, of an individual designated to receive notice. 
(b)  Transfer. The operator of every well shall notify the City Engineer in writing of the transfer to another operator of such well for any purpose. The notification shall be within ten days after such transfer by sale, assignment, transfer, conveyance or exchange and shall contain: 
(1)  Operator selling. The name and address of the person to whom such oil or gas operation was sold, assigned, or transferred; 
(2)  Relinquished date. The date when possession was relinquished by the former operator; 
(3)  Operator acquiring. The name and address of the person acquiring such well, property or site involving an oil or gas operation; 
(4)  Well name. The name and location of the oil or gas operation; 
(5)  Date. The date of acquisition; 
(6)  Equipment. A description of the properties and equipment acquired, and the oil or gas operations; and 
(7)  Notice. The name, address, phone number, and e-mail address of any individual designated to receive service of notice in compliance with the notice provision requirements. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(P)) 
Sec. 14-153. - Designation of existing operations. 
    A person shall have 30 days after enactment of this article to designate an oil or gas operation by survey description and plat if an application was made and granted under a prior ordinance. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-13(Q)) 
Secs. 14-154-14-174. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER DISCHARGES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-175. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article that occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
    Administrator means the Director of Planning and Development Services and/or designee. 
    Agricultural stormwater runoff means any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands, and other nonpoint source agricultural activities, but not discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 CFR 122.23 or discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40 CFR 122.24. 
    CFR means the Code of Federal Regulations. 
    Clean Water Act (CWA) means The Clean Water Act (formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972), Pub. L. 92500, as amended, Pub. L. 95217, Pub. L. 95576, Pub. L. 6483 and Pub. L. 97117, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Contaminated means containing a harmful quantity of any substance. 
    Contamination means the presence of or entry into a public water supply system, the municipal stormwater drainage system, waters of the State, or waters of the United States of any substance which may be harmful to the public health and/or the quality of the water. 
    Discharge means any addition or introduction of any unpolluted water, pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever into the municipal stormwater drainage system or into waters of the United States. This includes, but is not limited to, household hazardous waste, used motor vehicle fluids, and collected quantities of grass clippings, leaf litter, and animal wastes. 
    Discharger means any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) means the United States Environmental Protection Agency, or any duly authorized official of said Agency. 
    Harmful quantity means the amount of any substance that will cause pollution of waters of the State, the municipal stormwater drainage system, or that will present or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of persons. 
    Illicit connections means any manmade conveyance connecting an illicit discharge directly to a municipal separate storm sewer. 
    Illicit discharge means any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer that is not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to a TPDES permit (other than the TPDES permit for certain discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer), discharges resulting from firefighting activities, and other allowable nonstormwater discharges. 
    Municipal separate stormwater sewer system means the system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the City and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage; also designated as MS4. 
    Municipal separate stormwater system (MS4) permit means a stormwater permit for municipalities to regulate stormwater discharges. 
    Municipal stormwater drainage system operator means the City of College Station. 
    Nonpoint source means any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a point source. 
    Operate means to drive, conduct, work, run, manage, or control a vehicle or machine. 
    Operator means the party or parties that either individually or taken together meet the following two criteria: 
(1)  They have operational control over the site specifications (including the ability to make modifications in specifications); and 
(2)  They have the day to day operational control of those activities at the site necessary to ensure compliance with SWP3 requirements and any permit conditions. 
    Point source means any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. The term "point source" does not include agricultural stormwater discharges and return flows from irrigated agriculture. 
    Pollutant includes, but is not limited to, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, filter backwash, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, toxic materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, soil, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, recreational, agricultural waste, paints, varnishes, solvents, oil and automotive fluids, litter, discarded and abandoned objects, floatables, fecal coliform, pathogens, dissolved and particulate metals, pet wastes, and construction debris discharged into water or into the MS4. 
    Pollution means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water of the State or water of the United States, that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
    Premises means lots, buildings, and any appurtenances situated thereon. 
    Private means property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by a City, County, State, or Federal government agency. 
    Public means property or facilities owned by a City, County, State, or Federal government or agency thereof. 
    Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the municipal stormwater drainage system, the waters of the State or the waters of the United States. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snow melt. 
    Surface water in the State means and includes lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, wetlands, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the State (from the mean high water mark (MHWM) out 10.36 miles into the Gulf), and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the State or subject to the jurisdiction of the State; except that waters in treatment systems which are authorized by State or Federal law, regulations, or permit, and which are created for the purpose of waste treatment are not considered to be water in the State. 
    TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or successor. MS4 interest is delegated to the TCEQ upon authority of the EPA. 
    Uncontaminated means not containing a harmful quantity of any substance. 
    United States Code (USC) is the Federal law containing the Clean Water Act. 
    Vehicle means any form of motorized conveyance that transports people, cargo, or any other objects. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
    Waters of the United States. 
(1)  The term "waters of the United States" means: 
a.  All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; 
b.  All interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; 
c.  All other waters such as intrastate lakes, rivers, streams (including intermittent streams), mudflats, sandflats, wetlands, sloughs, prairie potholes, wet meadows, playa lakes, or natural ponds the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce including any such waters: 
1.  Which are or could be used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreational or other purposes; 
2.  From which fish or shellfish are or could be taken or sold in interstate or foreign commerce; or 
3.  Which are used or could be used for industrial purposes by industries in interstate commerce; 
d.  All impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; 
e.  Tributaries of waters identified in this definition; 
f.  The territorial sea; and 
(2)  Wetlands adjacent to waters (other than waters that are themselves wetlands) identified in this definition; waste treatment systems, including treatment ponds or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of CWA (other than cooling ponds as defined in 40 CFR 423.11(m) which also meet the criteria of this definition) are not waters of the United States. This exclusion applies only to manmade bodies of water, which neither were originally created in waters of the United States (such as disposal are in wetlands) nor resulted from the impoundment of waters of the United States. Waters of the United States do not include prior converted cropland. Notwithstanding the determination of an area's status as prior converted cropland by any Federal agency, for the purpose of the Clean Water Act, the final authority regarding Clean Water Act jurisdiction remains with the EPA. 
    Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(A)(3)) 
Sec. 14-176. - Purpose and objectives. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges into the municipal stormwater drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by Federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal stormwater drainage system in order to comply with requirements of the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit process. 
(b)  The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants into the municipal stormwater drainage system by any person or entity; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections into the municipal stormwater drainage system; and 
(3)  Prevent nonstormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, into the municipal stormwater drainage system. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(A)(1)) 
Sec. 14-177. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
(a)  This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restriction of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(b)  Any reference to this article shall also apply to the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A), and both shall be interpreted and enforced in conjunction with each other, where applicable. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(A)(2)) 
Sec. 14-178. - Violations. 
(a)  Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each violation shall be deemed a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed or continued. Any person found guilty of violating a provision of this article may be punished as provided for in Section 1-7. 
(b)  The owner or operator of any facility, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
(c)  A violation of this article is declared a nuisance and may be enforced 5,000 feet outside the City limits. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(F)(2)) 
State Law reference- Authority to define and prohibit any nuisance within the limits of the city and within 5,000 feet outside the city limits, Texas Local Government Code  217.042. 
Secs. 14-179-14-209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-210. - Enforcement responsibility. 
    The Administrator or designee has the responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this article. The duties include not only the issuance of permits as required by this article, but also the responsibility of ensuring that all facilities conform with this article and with any other applicable State and Federal laws, requirements and regulations of this Code or of the City. The Administrator has the authority to adopt policies and procedures not inconsistent with the terms of this article necessary to implement the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(F)(1)) 
Sec. 14-211. - Notice of violations. 
    If the Administrator determines that there is a violation of this article, notice will be sent to the property owner or operator of record by registered or certified mail, unless deemed an emergency pursuant to Section 14-215. The notice will specify the measures required to come into full compliance with this article and shall specify the time within which the measures must be completed. Failure to comply within the time specified is a violation of this article and subject to additional penalties outlined herein. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(F)(3)) 
Sec. 14-212. - Appeals, interpretation, and variances. 
    Where applicable, any appeals, interpretations or variances of the Administrator's designee shall first be to the Administrator, then to a court of competent jurisdiction. Any appeals, interpretations or variances of the Administrator shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction directly. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(F)(6)) 
Sec. 14-213. - Stop-work orders. 
    The Administrator has the authority to issue stop-work orders for any facility that commits any acts prohibited by this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(F)(5)) 
Sec. 14-214. - Voluntary compliance. 
    The Administrator has the authority to instruct an operator of a facility that commits any acts prohibited by this article to achieve voluntary compliance as determined by the Administrator. The Administrator will provide a reasonable amount of time, specific to the occurrence, to remedy the violation. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(F)(4)) 
Sec. 14-215. - Emergency suspension of service of utility service and municipal stormwater drainage system access. 
(a)  The City may, without prior notice, suspend water service, sanitary sewer service or MS4 discharge access to a person discharging to the MS4, waters of the United States, or publicly owned treatment works when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which: 
(1)  Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the health or welfare of persons; or 
(2)  Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the MS4 or waters of the United States. 
(b)  When the Administrator determines that City-provided water or sanitary sewer service must be suspended pursuant to Subsection (a) of this section, the Administrator will request the Director of Water Services to do so. 
(c)  As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service or MS4 discharge access, the Administrator will notify the violator of the suspension and order the violator to cease the discharge immediately. 
(d)  If the violator fails to comply with an order issued under Subsection (c) of this section, the Administrator may take such actions as the Administrator deems necessary to prevent or minimize harmful discharges to the MS4, waters of the United States, or to persons or wildlife. 
(e)  The City will not reinstate suspended services or MS4 access to the violator until: 
(1)  The violator presents proof, satisfactory to the Administrator and Director of Water Services, that the noncomplying discharge has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected; 
(2)  The violator reimburses the City for all costs the City incurred in suspending and reinstating water service, sanitary sewer connection, and MS4 access; and 
(3)  The violator reimburses the City for all costs of testing, containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the MS4 incurred by the City while responding to, abating, and remediating the discharge or threatened discharge. 
(f)  A violator whose service or access has been suspended or disconnected may appeal the enforcement action to the City Manager's attention, in writing, within ten days of notice of the suspension. The City Manager will render a decision within seven days upon written receipt of the petition. 
(g)  The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this article. Exercise of this remedy is not a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator. 
(h)  A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service, sanitary sewer service, or MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the Administrator. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(C)) 
Sec. 14-216. - Non-emergency suspension of service and municipal stormwater drainage system access. 
(a)  The City may suspend the City-provided water supply, sanitary sewer connection, or MS4 access for any person failing to comply with previous notices to cease discharges to the MS4 in violation of this article. Utilities will be subject to suspension if such measures would abate or reduce the discharge. 
(b)  The Administrator will notify a violator of the proposed suspension of its water supply, sanitary sewer connection or MS4 access. The violator may petition the Administrator for a reconsideration and hearing before the City Manager. 
(c)  The City will not reinstate suspended services or MS4 access to the discharger until: 
(1)  The violator presents proof, satisfactory to the Administrator, that the non-complying discharge has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected; 
(2)  The violator reimburses the City for all costs the City incurred in suspending and reinstating water service, sanitary sewer connection, and MS4 access; and 
(3)  The violator reimburses the City for all costs of testing, containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of any substance unlawfully discharged into the MS4 incurred by the City while responding to, abating, and remediating the discharge or threatened discharge. 
(d)  The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set out in this article. Exercise of this remedy is not a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking other action against a violator. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service, sanitary sewer service, or MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the Administrator. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(D)) 
Secs. 14-217-14-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 14-241. - Discharge to municipal stormwater drainage system prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Discharge to municipal stormwater drainage system prohibited. A person commits an offense if the person discharges or causes to be discharged into the MS4 any release of a harmful quantity of any substance that is not comprised entirely of stormwater. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution, subject to Subsection (b) of this section, that the discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the following: 
a.  A discharge authorized by, and in full compliance with, a TPDES permit (other than the TPDES permit for discharges from the MS4); 
b.  A discharge or flow resulting from firefighting by the Fire Department; 
c.  A discharge or flow from water line flushing or disinfection that contains no harmful quantity of total residual chlorine (TRC) or any other chemical used in line disinfection; 
d.  A discharge or flow from normal lawn watering or landscape irrigation; 
e.  A discharge or flow from a diverted stream flow or natural spring; 
f.  A discharge or flow from uncontaminated pumped groundwater or rising groundwater; 
g.  Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR 35.2005(20)) to the MS4; 
h.  Uncontaminated discharge or flow from a foundation drain, crawl space pump, or footing drain; 
i.  A discharge or flow from a potable water source not containing any harmful substance; 
j.  A discharge or flow from air conditioning condensation that is unmixed with water from a cooling tower, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or any other source of pollutant; 
k.  A discharge or flow from individual residential car washing; 
l.  A discharge or flow from a riparian habitat or wetland; 
m.  A discharge or flow from cold water (or hot water with prior permission of the Administrator) used in street washing or cosmetic cleaning that is not contaminated with any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance; 
n.  Drainage from a private residential swimming pool containing no harmful quantities of chlorine or other chemicals; or 
o.  A discharge or flow of uncontaminated stormwater pumped from an excavation. 
(2)  No exception to enforcement shall be available under Subsection (b) of this section if: 
a.  The discharge or flow in question has been determined to be a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the United States or to the MS4; 
b.  Notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger; and 
c.  The discharge has continued after the expiration of the time given in the notice to cease the discharge. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(B)(1), (2)) 
Sec. 14-242. - Illicit connections prohibited. 
(a)  The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illicit connection to the MS4 is prohibited. 
(b)  Connections that were permissible when originally installed but that are now considered illicit must be brought into compliance within a timeframe designated by the Administrator. 
(c)  A person violates this section if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4 or allows such a connection to continue. 
(d)  Improper connections in violation of this section must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(B)(3)) 
Secs. 14-243-14-262. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONTROL AND CONTAINMENT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 14-263. - Spill or release corrective actions, responsibility, and compensation. 
(a)  Spills or leaks of polluting substances discharged to, or having the potential to be indirectly transported to, the MS4 shall be contained, controlled, collected, and removed promptly. All affected areas shall be restored to their preexisting condition. Any costs of the containment, control, collection, removal, or restoration incurred by the City will be reimbursed to the City by the person associated with the spill or leak. 
(b)  Persons associated with the spill or leak must immediately call 911 to notify emergency personnel of all spills or leaks of polluting substances. Notification does not relieve any person of any costs related to the restoration, loss, damage, or any other responsibility which may be incurred as a result of the spill or leak, nor will the notification relieve any person from other responsibility which may be imposed by State, Federal, or other law. 
(c)  Any person operating a vehicle that causes or results in an accidental discharge or release to the MS4 is responsible for costs of any testing, containment, cleanup, abatement, removal and disposal of contamination to the extent determined by the Administrator. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(E)(1)) 
Sec. 14-264. - Stockpiling, accumulations, and heaps. 
(a)  Stockpiles, accumulations, and heaps comprised of soil, sand, mulch, trash, asphalt, aggregate or any other material deemed a pollutant by local, State, or Federal regulations, which are located within the City limits and present a real or perceived potential of discharging to the MS4, are subject to control measures to prevent introduction into the MS4. 
(b)  The Administrator has the authority to necessitate the use of control measures to mitigate the introduction of pollutants to the MS4. Failure to implement control measures as prescribed by the Administrator will result in enforcement as described in this article. 
(c)  Stockpiles, accumulations, and heaps discovered to be discharging pollutants to the MS4 are subject to enforcement as described in this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-13(E)(2)) 
Chapter 16 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal fire protection, Texas Local Government Code  342.011 et seq.; fire safety, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 791 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Arson reward. 
(a)  Amount authorized. The Mayor of the City is hereby authorized and empowered to offer a reward of not less than $250.00 payable to the person who shall be responsible for the arrest and conviction of any person committing in said City the crime of arson as same is defined by the Penal Code of the State. 
(b)  Procedure for payment. Whenever the Mayor shall be informed that any fire occurring in said City was of an incendiary origin, the Mayor shall call for a report of same by the City Fire Marshal, and if said Fire Marshal shall report that such fire was caused by the commission of the crime of arson, it shall become the duty of said Mayor to offer the reward above described, which reward shall be in the form of a proclamation duly issued by said Mayor under the Mayor's official signature and attested by the seal of the City, and shall be posted up in a conspicuous place, one of which shall be at the City office in accordance with the regulations of the Texas Fire Insurance Department. Upon the information being given by any person who shall cause the arrest and conviction of such persons so guilty of a specific crime of arson for which said reward shall be offered, and after the indictment of said person or persons, the person so giving such information shall be entitled to receive from said City such reward. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-3; Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A(6-3), 4-28-2016) 
State Law reference- Arson, Texas Penal Code  28.02. 
Sec. 16-2. - Emergency and rescue services. 
(a)  The City Council recognizes and supports the practice of College Station Fire Department to bill persons and entities, including insurance companies providing coverage to said persons and entities, for the reasonable costs that are related and incidental to any loss, damage, and wear to College Station Fire Department apparatus, tools, equipment, and materials utilized to provide the emergency services to said persons and entities. 
(b)  Fees shall be collected for services provided within the College Station Fire Department designated response area that includes both inside and outside the City limits. Fees will not exceed the amount expended by the College Station Fire Department. Fire Administration shall collect applicable incident report information that will be forwarded to the College Station Fire Department's authorized agent responsible for collection of any incurred fees. The fees shall be established in Section 2-117. 
(c)  The College Station Fire Department, or its authorized agent, shall submit an invoice to the appropriate insurance company, person, or entity covering or responsible for the particular expenses as related to the emergency services provided. 
(d)  If it can be reliably determined that there is no applicable insurance coverage for the emergency and rescue services provided by the College Station Fire Department, or if the emergency and rescue services were provided as a result of negligent and/or malicious acts or risky behavior on part of the recipient, then the City may hold responsible the person or entity that received said emergency services for the costs. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-4; Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A(6-4), 4-28-2016; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 16-3. - County issuance of burn ban. 
    Upon the issuance of a burn ban by the County the City will assume the burn ban for the same timeframe. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-5; Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A(6-5), 4-28-2016) 
Secs. 16-4-16-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE MARSHAL 

Sec. 16-25. - Investigate all fires. 
    The Fire Marshal shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring within this City by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall begin within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The Fire Marshal shall keep in the Fire Marshal's Office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics, and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-2(B); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A, 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 16-26. - Take testimony and furnish evidence. 
    The Fire Marshal, when in his or her opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if the Fire Marshal shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, the Fire Marshal shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-2(C); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A, 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 16-27. - Summon witnesses. 
    The Fire Marshal shall have the power to summons witnesses before him or her to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the provisions of this article, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper, or document deemed pertinent thereto. The said Fire Marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirm to any persons appearing as witnesses before him or her. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-2(D); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A, 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 16-28. - Unlawful to disobey any lawful order. 
    Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear to testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of said Fire Marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper, or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the Fire Marshal in the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summonsed to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the Fire Marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted; provided, however, that any person so convicted shall have the right of appeal. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-2(E); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A, 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 16-29. - Investigations may be private. 
    All investigations held by or under the direction of the Fire Marshal may be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-2(F); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A, 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 16-30. - May enter buildings where fire has occurred. 
    The Fire Marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance to the duties imposed upon him or her by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-2(G); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A, 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 16-31. - Make periodic inspections and reports, aggrieved persons may appeal. 
    The Fire Marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the City, and it shall be the Fire Marshal's duty to enter upon and make, or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing, and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever the Fire Marshal shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age, or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, the Fire Marshal shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of said building or premises; provided, however, that if said owner or occupant deems himself or herself aggrieved by such order, such person may, within five days, appeal to the Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals, which shall investigate the cause of the complaint and, unless by the Fire Marshal's authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-2(H); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A, 4-28-2016) 
Secs. 16-32-16-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE CODE 

Sec. 16-51. - International Fire Code adopted. 
    The 2018 Edition of the International Fire Code, including Appendix Chapters B through I, all as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted to the same extent as though such Code were copied at length herein, subject, however, to the omissions, additions, supplements, and amendments contained in this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-1(A)(1); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A(6-1), 4-28-2016; Ord. No. 2019-4076 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 16-52. - Amendments to the International Fire Code. 
    The International Fire Code, as referred to in Section 16-51, is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 101 (General) is amended by adding Section 101.6 to read as follows: 
Section 101.6 (Emergency Vehicle Egress). No part of any commercial structure will be located outside the limits of a 150-foot arc from a point where fire apparatus can operate. Fire apparatus will operate on surfaces designed for such and may utilize public right-of-way, approved fire lanes and/or drive access ways to meet this 150-foot limit but in no case shall the truck travel route be measured across grass, wooded or landscaped areas, over curbs, through fences, through ditches or across paved areas which are not designed and maintained as fire lanes. 
(2)  Section 105 (Permits) is amended by adding Section 105.1.1.1 to read as follows: 
Section 105.1.1.1 (Registration of Contractors). It shall be the duty of every individual who makes contracts to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, or demolish any life safety systems to include, but not be limited to, fire sprinkler systems, fire alarm systems, commercial cooking extinguishing systems, underground tanks, underground piping and underground fire supply lines of which are regulated by this code, or cause such work to be done, and every individual making such contracts and subletting the same or any part thereof, to first register with the Building Official, giving full name, residence, name and place of business, and in case of removal from one place to another to have made corresponding change to the Building Official. 
(3)  Section 106.5 (Refunds) is amended by deleting the existing text in its entirety and replacing it with the following: "The City Manager or designee is authorized to establish a refund policy." 
(4)  Section 108.6 is amended by adding after the Fire Code Official "or any member of the Fire Department designated by the Fire Code Official, the Chief of Police, or any member of the Police Department designated by the Chief of Police." 
(5)  Section 108.6.1 is added. 
108.6.1 (Certificate of Occupancy Temporary Suspension). The Fire Code Official or any member of the Fire Department designated by the Fire Code Official, the Chief of Police, or any member of the Police Department designated by the Chief of Police is authorized, in writing, to immediately suspend a Certificate of Occupancy for a twenty-four (24) hour period where it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is Overcrowded, violating any life safety regulation or ordinance or violating any other ordinance adopted by this code. Within one (1) business day after the suspension, a person may submit a written appeal to the City Manager appealing the Certificate of Occupancy Temporary Suspension. The City Manager's decision is final. 
(6)  Section 109 is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(7)  Section 110.4 (Violation Penalties) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Section 109.4 (Violation Penalties). Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the Fire Official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be punished as provided in with Section 1-7. 
(8)  Section 202 (Definitions) is amended by adding "Porte Cocheres ": 
1.  A passageway through a building or screen wall designed to let vehicles pass from the street to an interior courtyard. 
2.  A roofed structure extending from the entrance of a building over an adjacent driveway and sheltering those getting in or out of vehicles" 
(9)  Section 202 (Definitions) is amended by adding "tutorial services" under the definition of "Occupancy Classification Assembly Group A-3" 
(10)  Section 202 (Definitions) is amended by deleting the townhouse definition and replacing it with the following: "Townhouse. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a group of attached units separated by property lines in which each extend from foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides." 
(11)  Section 307.4.2 (Recreational Fires) is amended by adding the following: "This code is to include manufactured and non-manufactured fire pits/boxes." 
(12)  Section 307.4 (Location) is amended by adding Section 307.4.2.1 to read as follows: 
Section 307.4.2.1 Solid fuels are strictly prohibited for recreational fires. 
Exception : One- and two-family dwellings. 
(13)  Section 307.4 (Location) is amended by adding the following: 
307.4.4 (Permanent outdoor fire pits or fire feature devices). Permanently installed outdoor fire pits and similar fire feature devices, manufactured and non-manufactured, shall not be installed within 20 feet of a structure or combustible materials. Exceptions: 
1.  Permanent outdoor fire pits or fire feature devices listed less than 100,000 BTU/hr shall not be installed within 10 feet of combustible materials (vertically and horizontally). 
2.  Permanently installed outdoor fireplaces constructed in accordance with the International Building Code. 
307.4.4.1 (Solid fuels). All solid fuels are strictly prohibited for fire pits and fire feature devices. 
1.  Exception: One- and two- family dwellings. 
307.4.4.2 (Requirements for all fire pits or fire feature devices). Comply with all of the following requirements: 
1.  Flame shall be fully enclosed by an approved permanent means to prevent debris from entering the fire and to prevent occupants from becoming burned. 
2.  Provide an emergency fuel gas supply line shut-off device at least 20 feet from the fire pit device location but not greater than 50 feet. Provide emergency fuel gas shut-off device signage clearly visible from fire pit or fire feature device locations. 
3.  Floor surface shall be a solid continuous non-combustible material without any gaps and all joints sealed. 
4.  Timer device on fuel gas line set to automatically shut-off gas supply and extinguishes flame at a set time agreed upon by the fire code official. 
(14)  Section 308.1.4 (Open-Flamed Cooking Devices) is amended by deleting the section including exceptions in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Section 308.1.4 (Open-Flame Cooking Devices). Charcoal burners, liquefied-petroleum-gas fueled cooking devices, and other open-flamed cooking devices shall not be stored or operated on combustible balconies or within ten feet (3048 mm) of combustible construction. 
Exception : One- and two-family dwellings. 
(15)  Section 501.4 (Timing of Installation) is amended by adding the following text at the end of the section: "There shall be no combustible, job trailers, flammable or ignitable materials placed on a site, lot or subdivision where water lines, fire hydrants and/or all weather access roads capable of supporting emergency vehicles with an imposed load of at least 84,000 pounds as required by this code or other adopted codes or ordinances are completed, accepted and in service." 
(16)  Section 503.2.1 (Dimensions) is amended by replacing "13 feet 6 inches" with "14 feet." 
(17)  Section 503.2.5 (Dead Ends) is amended by replacing "150 feet" with "100 feet." 
(18)  Section 503.3 (Marking) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Section 503.3 (Marking). The owner, manager, or person in charge of any building or property to which fire lanes have been approved or required by engineering shall mark and maintain said fire lanes in the following manner: 
1.  All curbs and curb ends shall be painted RED with four-inch white lettering stating "FIRE LANE - NO PARKING - TOW AWAY ZONE." Wording may not be spaced more than 15 feet apart. 
2.  In areas where fire lanes are required but no continuous curb is available, the following method shall be used, in conjunction with the curb markings, to indicate that the fire lane is continuous: 
a.  From the point the fire lane begins to the point the fire lane ends, including behind all parking spaces which adjoin a fire lane, shall be marked with one continuous eight-inch red stripe painted on the drive surface behind the parking spaces. All curbing adjoining a fire lane must be painted red. Red stripes and curbs will contain the wording "FIRE LANE - NO PARKING-TOW AWAY ZONE," painted in four-inch white letters. ("Figure A" in Ordinance No. 1630 illustrates striping on drive surface behind parking spaces.). Also, a sign 12 inches wide and 18 inches in height shall be mounted in a conspicuous location at each entrance to the property. (See Diagram No. 1 for specifications on colors and lettering.) 
3.  In those cases where curb markings are not possible or where signs would in the Fire Official's opinion work more effectively, the Fire Marshal may require signs in lieu of curb markings. 
4.  The use of the color RED to mark or stripe any curb or parking area (other than fire lanes) is prohibited within the City. 
(19)  Section 503 is amended by adding Sections 503.3.1 (Fire Lane Signs; Tow-Away Zone Signs), 503.3.2 (Destruction of Fire Lane and Tow-Away Signs), 503.3.3 (Abandonment or Closing) and 503.3.4 (Authority Under Emergency Conditions) to read as follows: 
Section 503.3.1 (Fire Lane Signs; Tow-Away Zone Signs). The owner, manager, or person in charge of any building to which fire lanes have been approved by the Planning and Development Services Department shall post and maintain appropriate signs in conspicuous places along such fire lanes stating "No Parking - Fire Lane." Such signs shall be 12 inches wide and 18 inches high, with a companion sign 12 inches wide and six inches high stating "Tow-Away Zone." 
Any "No Parking - Fire Lane" or "Tow-Away Zone" sign shall be painted on a white background with symbols, letters and border in red. Drawings and samples of such signs may be obtained from the Fire Department of the City. Standards for mounting, including, but not limited to, the height above the grade at which such signs are to be mounted, shall be as adopted by the Fire Official of the City. 
Section 503.3.2 (Destruction of Fire Lane or Tow-Away Signs). It is hereby unlawful for any person without lawful authority to attempt or in fact alter, destroy, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any sign designating a fire lane or tow-away zone erected under the terms of this code, or to deface a curb marking in any way. 
Section 503.3.3 (Abandonment or Closing). No owner, manager, or person in charge of any premises served by a required fire lane shall abandon or close such fire lane without written permission of the Fire Official of the City. 
Section 503.3.4 (Authority under Emergency Conditions). The Fire Marshal is hereby authorized to establish fire lanes during any fire, and to exclude all persons other than those authorized to assist in extinguishing the fire or the owner or occupants of the burning property from within such lanes. 
(20)  Section 503.4 (Obstruction of Fire Apparatus Access Roads) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Section 503.4 (Obstruction of Fire Apparatus Access Roads). No person shall park, place, allow, permit, or cause to be parked or placed, any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or similar obstruction within or upon an area designated as a fire lane and marked by an appropriate sign or curb marking. 
(21)  Section 503 (Fire Apparatus Access Roads) is amended by adding Sections 503.4.2 (Obstructing Fire Lanes) and 503.4.3 (Enforcement; Issuance of Citations; Impoundment of Obstructions) to read as follows: 
Section 503.4.2 (Obstructing Fire Lanes). Any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or similar obstruction found parked within an area designated as a fire lane as required by this section is hereby declared a nuisance per se and any such motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or similar obstruction parked or unoccupied in such a manner as to obstruct in whole or in part any such fire lane shall be prima facie evidence that the registered owner unlawfully parked, placed, or permitted to be parked or placed such obstruction within a fire lane. 
The records of the State Department of Transportation or the County Highway License Department showing the name of the person to whom the State highway license or boat or trailer license is issued shall constitute prima facie evidence of ownership by the named persons. 
Section 503.4.3 (Enforcement; Issuance of Citations; Impoundment of Obstructions). The Fire Official or any member of the Fire Department designated by the Fire Official, the Chief of Police, or any member of the Police Department designated by the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to issue parking citations for any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or similar obstruction found parked or unattended in or upon a designated fire lane and may have such obstruction removed by towing it away. Such vehicle or obstruction may be redeemed by payment of the towage and storage charges at the owner's expense. 
No parking citations shall be voided nor shall the violator be relieved of any penalty assessed by a Judge of the Municipal Court for any provision by the redemption of the obstruction from the storage facility. 
(22)  Section 505.1 (Address Identification) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Section 505.1 (Address Identification). An official building number placed pursuant to this section must be at least four inches high, and have at least a one-half inch stroke in the main body of the number, and be composed of a durable material and of a color which provides a contrast to the background. The number shall be mounted a minimum of 36 inches and a maximum of 30 feet in height measured from ground level. Buildings located more than 50 feet from the curb of a street shall have numbers at least five inches in height. For the purpose of this section, durable materials for use in numbering shall include, but not be limited to, wood, plastic, metal, weather-resistant paint, weather-resistant vinyl, or weather-resistant numbers designed for outside use on a glass surface. For single-family residences, the requirement of this section may be met by providing two-inch-high numbers on both sides of a U.S. mailbox located near the curb in front of the house, or a freestanding structure with numbers at least four inches in height. 
(23)  Section 505 (Premises Identification) is amended by adding Sections 505.1.1 (Building Complex Identification), 505.1.2 (Rear Access Identification), 505.1.3 (Alley Premises Identification) and 505.1.4 (Building Complex Diagrams) to read as follows: 
Section 505.1.1 (Building Complex Identification). A building complex composed of multiple structures shall have an official suite/unit number assigned to each building as well as a street address number. If there is sufficient street frontage, each unit or building may be assigned a separate official street address number. The official street address number of each structure as designated by the Building Official must be prominently posted on the building so that it is visible from the nearest public street. Each number designated by the Building Official for each individual suite/unit must be conspicuously posted on the suite/unit. 
Section 505.1.2 (Rear Access Identification). Commercial buildings with rear access shall also display the business name and designated street address and suite/unit number on the rear access door. 
Section 505.1.3 (Alley Premises Identification). Residential structures that provide for rear vehicular access from a dedicated public alley shall conspicuously post the designated numbers that comply with the size requirements above so that it is visible to the alley. 
Section 505.1.4 (Building Complex Diagrams). The owner of a building complex which contains an enclosed shopping mall shall submit to the Fire Official four copies of diagrams acceptable to the Fire Official of the entire complex, indicating the location and number of each business. When a change in a business name or location is made, the owner or manager of the structure shall so advise the Fire Official in writing of the change. 
(24)  Section 505.2 (Street or Road Signs) is amended by adding the following: 
Section 505.2.1. (Street and road signs) shall only be installed on streets or roadways that are approved through the platting process. 
(25)  Section 506.1 is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Section 506.1 Where required: 
Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or fire-fighting purposes, the fire code official is authorized to require a key box to be installed in an approved location. The key box shall be of an approved type listed in accordance with UL 1037, and shall contain keys to gain necessary access as required by the fire code official and the College Station Police Department SWAT Team. The fire code official authorizes the College Station Police Department SWAT Team Leader and Assistant Team Leader to have access to key boxes and a Fire Department master key to aid in life saving activities. College Station SWAT Team will maintain a Fire Department's master key with the same or similar policies or procedures as the Fire Department. 
(26)  Section 507.5.1 (Where Required) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Section 507.5.1 (Where Required). Public fire hydrants of the City standard design shall be installed as part of the water distribution system for subdivisions and/or site developments. The Planning and Development Services Department shall approve the appropriate hydrant locations accessible to firefighting apparatus and within the maximum distances described in the following sections. 
(27)  Section 507.5.2 (Inspection, Testing and Maintenance) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Section 507.5.2 (Inspection, Testing and Maintenance). Public fire hydrants shall be installed in districts zoned for single-family and duplex at such locations that no part of any structure shall be more than 500 feet from a fire hydrant as measured along the right-of-way of a public street as the fire hose is laid off the fire truck. 
(28)  Section 507.5.3 (Private Fire Service Mains and Water Tanks) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Section 507.5.3 (Private Fire Service Mains and Water Tanks). Private fire hydrants shall be installed in districts other than districts zoned single-family and duplex at such locations that no part of any structure, aboveground tanks or fueling station, shall be more than 300 feet from a fire hydrant as measured along the right-of-way of a public street or along an approved fire lane as the fire hose is laid off the fire truck. 
(29)  Section 509.2 (Equipment Access) is amended by adding the following: 
Section 509.2.1 (Fire Sprinkler Riser Access) Access to the fire sprinkler riser must be on the exterior of the structure unless authorized by the Fire Code Official or designee. 
(30)  Table 803.9 (Interior Wall and Ceiling Finish Requirements by Occupancy) is amended by deleting the existing text in footnote "d" and replacing it with the following: 
"Class A interior finish material shall be required in all areas of all assembly occupancies, whether a fire sprinkler system is present or not, except as provided for in notes e and f below." 
(31)  Section 901.4.6.2 (Marking on access doors). Is amended by replacing 2 inches with 4 inches. 
(32)  Section 903.1 (General) is amended by adding the following text at the end of said section: 
"For the purpose of this section, the term "fire area" shall be replaced with "building area." 
(33)  Section 903.2 (Where Required) is amended by adding the following text at the end of the section: 
In addition to the requirements of this section, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all new buildings and structures as follows: 
1.  Where the total building area exceeds 12,000 square feet in area. 
2.  Where the height exceeds two stories, regardless of area. 
(34)  Section 903.2.1.6 (Assembly Occupancies on Roofs) is amended by deleting the exception in its entirety. 
(35)  Section 903.2.3 (Group E) is amended by deleting the exception in its entirety. 
(36)  Section 903.2.4 (Group F-1) is amended by deleting items "2" and "3." 
(37)  Section 903.2.7 (Group M) No. 2 is amended by replacing "three stories above grade" with "two stories in height" and by deleting No. 3 in its entirety. 
(38)  Section 903.2.8 (Group R) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(39)  Section 903.2.9 (Group S-1) is amended by replacing "three stories above grade" with "two stories above grade" in item "2" and by replacing "24,000 square feet" with "12,000 square feet" in item "3." 
(40)  Section 903.2.10 (Group S-2 Enclosed Parking Garage) is amended by deleting the exception in its entirety. 
(41)  Section 903.2.13 (Porte-cocheres). All porte-cocheres shall be protected with fire sprinklers. 
Exception: Porte-cocheres of non-combustible construction or a distance of 10 foot or greater. 
(42)  Section 903.3.1.2.3 (Attics) is amended by deleting sections 3.4 and 4.5 
(43)  Section 903.4 (Sprinkler systems supervision and alarms) is amended by adding the following: 
Exceptions: 
8.  Valves located outside buildings or in a vault that are sealed or locked in the open position. 
(44)  Section 904.3.5 is amended by deleting the section and replacing it with: 
904.3.5 (Monitoring). Where a building fire alarm or sprinkler monitoring system is installed, automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be monitored by the building fire alarm or sprinkler monitoring system. 
(45)  Section 905.1, (General), is amended by adding Section 905.1.1, Safety factor, as follows: 
905.1.1 (Safety factor). All standpipe systems with the exception of manual standpipes shall be designed with a minimum safety factor of 5 PSI or 10% of required pressure (whichever is greater) taken at the source for the hydraulically most demanding system and/or outlet. 
(46)  Section 905.4, (Location of Class I standpipe hose connections), is amended as follows with all other code text to remain as written: 
905.4 (Location of Class I standpipe hose connections). Class I standpipe hose connections shall be provided in all of the following locations: 
1.  In every required interior exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at [the main] an intermediate [floor] landing between stories unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
(47)  Section 906.1 (Where required) is amended by deleting exception 1 and 2 all others remain the same. 
(48)  Section 907.2.1 (Group A) is amended by adding the following section: 
907.2.1.3 Group A-2. An automatic alarm system shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-2 occupancies that have an occupant load of 100 or more. 
(49)  Section 907.2.7.1, (Occupant notification), is repealed in its entirety. 
(50)  Section 907.2.8.2, (Automatic smoke detection system), is hereby amended to read as follows: 
907.2.8.2 (Automatic smoke detection system). An automatic smoke detection system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed throughout all interior corridors serving sleeping units. The automatic smoke detection system requirement is met only by the installation of smoke or beam detectors whenever possible. If environmental conditions do not allow the installation of smoke detectors, fire alarm heat detectors may be used on a limited basis when approved by the fire code official. 
Exception: An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units and where each sleeping unit has a means of egress door opening directly to an exit or to an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit. 
Exception: An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units and where each sleeping unit has a means of egress door opening directly to an exit or to an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit. 
(51)  Section 907.2.12.2, (Fire department communication system), is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(52)  Section 907.2.12.1.2, (Duct smoke detection), is amended to read as follows: 
907.2.12.1.2 (Duct smoke detection). Duct smoke detectors complying with Section 907.3.1 shall be located in accordance with the NFPA 90A: Standard for the Installation of Air-Conditioning and Ventilating Systems or as follows: 
1.  In the main return air and exhaust air plenum of each air-conditioning system having a capacity greater than 2,000 cubic feet per minute (cfm) (0.94 m3/s). Such detectors shall be located in a serviceable area downstream of the last duct inlet. 
2.  At each connection to a vertical duct or riser serving two or more stories from a return air duct or plenum of an air-conditioning system. In Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies, a smoke detector is allowed to be used in each return air riser carrying not more than 5,000 cfm (2.4 m3/s) and serving not more than 10 air-inlet openings. 
(53)  Section 907.2, (Where required) - new buildings and structures, is amended by adding Section 907.2.24, Fire alarm systems for property protection, to read as follows: 
907.2.24 (Fire alarm systems for property protection). Fire alarm systems dedicated solely to the protection of property are permitted to be installed in facilities where a fire alarm system is not required by other sections of this code or the International Building Code provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Any and all automatic detection is installed, located and maintained in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 72 and a documentation cabinet as required by NFPA 72 is provided and installed. 
2.  The installed system is monitored by a supervising station which provides remote and central station service. 
3.  One manual means of activation is installed in an approved location 
4.  Where the fire alarm system control unit is located in an area that is not readily accessible to response personnel, a remote fire alarm system annunciator panel is installed. 
(54)  Section 907.2, (Where Required) - is amended by adding Section 907.2.25, Fire alarm systems for property protection, to read as follows: 
907.2.25 (Group R-4) Fire alarm systems and smoke alarms shall be installed in Group R-4 occupancies as required in Sections 907.2.10.1 through 907.2.10.3. 907.2.10.1 Manual fire alarm system. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group R-4 occupancies. 
Exceptions: 
1.  A manual fire alarm system is not required in buildings not more than two stories in height where all individual sleeping units and contiguous attic and crawl spaces to those units are separated from each other and public or common areas by not less than 1-hour fire partitions and each individual sleeping unit has an exit directly to a public way, egress court or yard. 
2.  Manual fire alarm boxes are not required throughout the building where all of the following conditions are met: 
2.1.  The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. 
2.2.  The notification appliances will activate upon sprinkler water flow. 
2.3.  Not fewer than one manual fire alarm box is installed at an approved location. 
3.  Manual fire alarm boxes in resident or patient sleeping areas shall not be required at exits where located at all nurses' control stations or other constantly attended staff locations, provided such stations are visible and continuously accessible and that the distances of travel required in Section 907.4.2.1 are not exceeded. 
907.2.10.2 Automatic smoke detection system. An automatic smoke detection system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in corridors, waiting areas open to corridors and habitable spaces other than sleeping units and kitchens. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Smoke detection in habitable spaces is not required where the facility is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
2.  An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units and where each sleeping unit has a means of egress door opening directly to an exit or to an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit. 
907.2.10.3 Smoke alarms. Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.2.11. 
(55)  Section 907.3.1, (Duct smoke detectors), is amended to read as follows: 
907.3.1 (Duct smoke detectors). Smoke detectors installed in ducts shall be listed for the air velocity, temperature and humidity present in the duct. Duct smoke detectors shall be connected to the building's fire alarm control unit where a fire alarm system is required by Section 907.2. Activation of a duct smoke detector shall initiate a visible and audible supervisory signal at a Central monitoring station and shall perform the intended fire safety function in accordance with this code, NFPA 90A: Standard for the Installation of Air-Conditioning and Ventilating Systems and the International Mechanical Code. In facilities that are required to be monitored by a supervising station, duct smoke detectors shall report only as a supervisory signal and not as a fire alarm. They shall not be used as a substitute for required open area detection. 2018 International Building-Related Codes 
Exceptions: 
1.  In occupancies not required to be equipped with a fire alarm system, actuation of a smoke detector shall activate a visible and an audible signal in an approved location. Smoke detector trouble conditions shall activate a visible or audible signal in an approved location and shall be identified as air duct detector trouble. 
2.  For fire alarm systems which cannot be programmed for supervisory signals, duct detectors shall be allowed to activate the alarm signal. 
(56)  Section 907.3., (Fire safety functions), is amended by adding 907.3.5, Fire alarm systems - emergency control, as follows: 
907.3.5 (Fire alarm systems - emergency control). At a minimum, the following functions, where provided, shall be activated by the fire alarm system: 
1.  Elevator capture and control in accordance with ASME/ANSI A17.1b, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators. 
2.  Release of automatic door closures and hold open devices. 
3.  Stairwell and/or elevator shaft pressurization. 
4.  Smoke management and/or smoke control systems. 
5.  Initiation of automatic fire extinguishing equipment. 
6.  Emergency lighting control. 
7.  Unlocking of doors. 
8.  Emergency shutoff of gas and fuel supplies that may be hazardous provided the continuation of service is not essential to the preservation of life. 
9.  Emergency shutoff of audio systems for sound reinforcement or entertainment (i.e. music systems, systems for announcement and broadcast which are separate from public address systems) provided that such systems are not used to issue emergency instructions. 
10.  Emergency shutoff of systems used for the creation of displays or special effects (i.e. lighting effects, laser light shows, projection equipment). 
(57)  Section 907.4.2.1, (Location), is amended to add the Exception to read as follows: 
907.4.2.1 (Location). Manual fire alarm boxes shall be located not more than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the entrance to each exit. In buildings not protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, additional manual fire alarm boxes shall be located so that the distance of travel to the nearest box does not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm). 
Exception: Where construction of the building prohibits the proper installation of a pull station (e.g. glass walls, interior brick or rock walls), a pull station shall be allowed to be located in the normal path of egress, where approved by the Fire Marshal or his/her designee. 
(58)  Section 907.5.1, (Presignal feature), is amended to read as follows: 
907.5.1 (Presignal feature and positive alarm sequences). A presignal feature or Positive Alarm Sequence as defined in NFPA 72 shall not be installed unless approved by the fire code official. Request to use a presignal feature or a Positive Alarm Sequence must be submitted in writing to the Fire Marshal and approval granted before installation. Where a presignal feature or Positive Alarm Sequence is provided, a signal shall be annunciated at a constantly attended location approved by the fire code official, so that occupant notification can be activated in 2018 International Building-Related Codes the event of fire or other emergency. When approved by the fire code official, the presignal feature or Positive Alarm Sequence shall be implemented in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 72. 
(59)  Section 907.5.2.1, (Audible alarms), is amended by adding Section 907.5.2.1.3, Testing of audible alarms in occupancies other than Group R, and Section 907.5.2.1.4, Testing of audible alarms in Group R occupancies, as follows: 
907.5.2.1.3 (Testing of audible alarms in occupancies other than Group R). Audibility levels for all occupancies other than Group R shall be in accordance with the public mode requirements of NFPA 72, and shall be tested utilizing the following criteria: 
1.  A UL listed sound pressure level meter, which has been calibrated within the last calendar year, and supplied by the fire alarm system installing contractor, shall be utilized to obtain readings. The sound pressure level meter will be held five feet above floor, pointed in the direction of the audible device. 
2.  All doors within the occupancy, including the bathroom and balcony doors shall be in the closed position. 
3.  Measurements shall be taken in the most remote areas of the occupancy first, including bathrooms and balconies. 
4.  Initial measurements to confirm the average ambient sound level in each area shall be taken. 
5.  The fire alarm system shall be activated and measurements in the tested areas shall be retaken and compared with the requirements. 
907.5.2.1.4 (Testing of audible alarms in Group R occupancies). Audibility levels for all Group R occupancies shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 907.5.2.1.1, and shall be tested utilizing the following criteria: 
1.  A UL listed sound pressure level meter, which has been calibrated within the last calendar year, and supplied by the fire alarm system installing contractor, shall be utilized to obtain readings. The sound pressure level meter will be held five feet above floor, pointed in the direction of the audible device. 
2.  All doors within the occupancy, including the bathroom and balcony doors shall be in the closed position. 
3.  Ambient sound level shall be established with the television set at 50% of maximum volume, showers running, bathroom exhaust systems running, and air conditioning units running. 
4.  Measurements shall be taken in the most remote area of the dwelling or sleeping unit first, including bathrooms and balconies. 
5.  Initial measurements to confirm the ambient sound level in each area shall be taken. 
6.  The fire alarm system shall be activated and measurements in the tested areas shall be retaken and compared with the requirements. 
(60)  Section 907.5.2.2, (Emergency voice/alarm communication systems), is amended to read as follows: 
907.5.2.2 (Emergency voice/alarm communication systems). Emergency voice/alarm communication systems required by this code shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 72. The operation of any automatic fire detector, sprinkler waterflow device or manual fire alarm box shall automatically sound an alert tone followed by voice instructions giving approved information and directions for a general or staged evacuation in accordance with the building's fire safety and evacuation plans required by Section 404 of the International Fire Code. In high-rise buildings, the system shall operate on at least the alarming floor, the floor above and the floor below. If the system is not reset after five minutes, the building shall sound the general evacuation signal 2018 International Building-Related Codes and message in all zones unless an alternative Positive Alarm Sequence has been approved by the Fire Marshal. Speakers shall be provided throughout the building by paging zones. At a minimum, paging zones shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Elevator groups. 
2.  Interior exit stairways. 
3.  Each floor. 
4.  Areas of refuge as defined in Chapter 2. 
Exception: In Group I-1 and I-2 occupancies, the alarm shall sound in a constantly attended area and a general occupant notification shall be broadcast over the overhead page. 
(61)  Section 907.5.2.2.4, (Emergency voice/alarm communication captions), is repealed in its entirety. 
(62)  Section [907.5.2.3, (Visible alarms), is amended by adding a subsection 907.5.2.3.4, Group R-2 sleeping areas, and Section 907.5.2.3.5, Combination devices, to read as follows: 
907.5.2.3.4 (Group R-2 sleeping areas). Living rooms in Group R-2 occupancies shall have audible notification appliances that meet the sleeping area audible requirements of NFPA 72, Chapter 18, Section 18.4.5, and Subsection 18.4.5.1. When such units are required to be equipped with visible notification for the hearing impaired or when such units are designated as accessible in accordance with ICC/ANSI A117.1, combination audible and visible notification appliances that meet both the sleeping area audible requirements of NFPA 72, Chapter 18, Section 18.4.5, Subsection 18.4.5.1 and the effective intensity settings of NFPA 72, Chapter 18.5.5.7.2 shall be installed. 
907.5.2.3.5 (Combination devices). Combination 120 VAC single or multiple-station smoke detectors with an onboard visible notification appliance if utilized to meet the requirements of Section 907.2.11, will not be given credit for meeting the visible alarm notification requirements of Section 907.5.2.3.3 if these devices do not have the capability of supplying backup power for the visible notification appliance portion of the device. Should such devices be utilized to comply with Section 907.2.11, the visible appliance side of the device shall flash in synchronization with the notification appliances required in the unit. 
(63)  Section 907.6.3, (Initiating device identification), is amended to read as follows with exceptions to remain as written: 
907.6.3 (Initiating device identification). The fire alarm system shall identify the specific initiating device address, location, device type, and floor level where applicable and status including indication of normal, alarm, trouble and supervisory status, to the fire alarm panel, annunciator panel and to the supervising station as appropriate. 
(64)  Section 907.5.2.3.1 (Public Use Areas and Common Use Areas) is amended by deleting the exception and adding Section 907.5.2.3.1.1 to read as follows: 
Section 907.5.2.3.1.1 (Employee Work Areas). Where a fire alarm and detection system is required, employee work areas shall be provided with devices that provide audible and visible alarm notification. 
(65)  Section 912.2.1, (Visible location), is amended by adding the following sentence to the end of that section to read as follows: 
912.2.1 (Visible location). Fire department connections shall be located on the street side of buildings or facing approved fire apparatus access roads, fully visible and recognizable from the street, fire apparatus access road or nearest point of fire department vehicle access or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. The fire department connection shall be identified by a sign installed above the connection with the letters "FDC" not less than 6 inches high and mounted at least 3 feet above the FDC to the bottom edge of the sign unless approved by the fire code official and if multiple FDC's a sign identifying the corresponding riser. 
(66)  Section 912.2.2, (Existing buildings), is amended to read as follows: 
912.2.2 (Existing buildings). On existing buildings, wherever the fire department connection is not visible to approaching fire apparatus, the fire department connection shall be indicated by an approved sign mounted on the street front or on the side of the building. Such sign shall have the letters "FDC" not less than 6 inches (152 mm) high and words in letters not less than 2 inches (51 mm) high or an arrow to indicate the location. Signs shall be mounted no lower than 7 feet from grade to the bottom edge of the sign and are subject to the approval of the fire code official. 
(67)  Section 912.2 (Location), is amended to add the following: 
Section 912.2.3 (Distance). Fire department connection shall not be located further than 100 feet from the fire hydrant measured by lay of hose from the engine. 
(68)  Section 912.4.1, (Locking fire department connection caps), is amended to read as follows: 
912.4.1 (Locking fire department connection caps). Locking caps are required on all fire department connections for water-based fire protection systems including but not limited to FDC's and standpipes. 
(69)  Section 912, (Fire Department Connections), is amended by adding Section 912.8, Location and type, as follows: 
912.8 (Location and type). Sprinkler system and standpipe fire department hose connections shall be as follows: 
1.  Any riser 4" in diameter or larger are required to have a five inch "Storz" connection. 
2.  Within 40 feet of a public street, approved fire lane, or access roadway. 
3.  Within 100 feet of an approved fire hydrant measured per hose lay. 
4.  Minimum of two feet above finished grade and a maximum of four feet above finished grade for standard inlets and minimum of 30 inches at lowest point above finished grade and maximum of four feet above finished grade for the five inch "Storz" inlet. 
5.  Freestanding FDCs shall be installed a minimum of one foot and a maximum of seven feet from the gutter face of the curb. 
6.  The Fire Code Official shall approve the location of freestanding fire department connections. Freestanding FDCs must be physically protected against impact per the requirements of Section 312 or other approved means. 
7.  Where provided, the five inch "Storz" inlet shall be installed at a 30 degree angle pointing down. 
8.  Fire department connections for H occupancies shall be freestanding, remote and located as determined by the fire code official. 
9.  Fire department connections for systems protecting fuel storage tanks shall be freestanding, remote and located as determined by the fire code official. 
10.  There shall be no more than one "Storz" connection per riser in any configuration. 
11.  One (1) 2.5 inch inlet is required for all systems designed per NFPA 13R. If the system demand is greater than 250 GPM, two (2) 2.5 inch inlets are required to be installed. No FDC is required for projects designed per NFPA 13D. 
(70)  Section 1004.5.1 (Increased Occupant Load) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(71)  Section 1004.9 (Posting of Occupant Load) is amended by adding the following text to the end of said section: 
"For the purposes of this section, the occupant load shall be the number of occupants computed at the rate of one occupant per unit of area as prescribed in Table 1004.5." 
(72)  Section 1103 (Fire Safety Requirements for Existing Buildings) is amended by deleting this section in its entirety. 
(73)  Section 1103.5.1 (Group A-2) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing it with the following: 
1103.5.1 (Group A-2). A Group A-2 occupancy that is permitted "Alterations - Level 2" according to the International Existing Building Code Chapter 8 and is dedicated predominantly to selling and consuming of alcoholic beverages rather than food and having an occupant load of 100 or more shall be equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with section 903.3.1.1. 
(74)  Section 1107.7 (Fire alarm systems) is amended by adding the following section: 
1107.7.7 (Group A-2). A Group A-2 occupancy that is permitted "Alterations - Level 2" according to the International Existing Building Code Chapter 8 and is dedicated predominantly to selling and consuming of alcoholic beverages rather than food and having an occupant load of 100 or more shall be equipped throughout with an automatic alarm system in accordance with section 907.2.1. 
(75)  Section 2304.1 (Supervision of Dispensing) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Section 2304.1 (Supervision of Dispensing). The dispensing of flammable or combustible liquids into the fuel tank of a vehicle or into an approved container shall be under the supervision of a qualified attendant, except service stations not open to the public. Such stations may be used by commercial, industrial governmental or manufacturing establishments for fueling vehicles in connection with their business." 
(76)  Section 2304.3 (Unattended Self-Service Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(77)  Section 2304.3.1 (General) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(78)  Section 2304.3.2 (Dispensers) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(79)  Section 2304.3.3 (Emergency Controls) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(80)  Section 2304.3.4 (Operating Instructions) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(81)  Section 2304.3.5 (Emergency Procedures) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(82)  Section 2304.3.6 (Communications) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(83)  Section 2304.3.7 (Quantity Limits) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(84)  Section 3106.3.1 (Occupant Load) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(85)  Section 3106.4.2 (Weather monitoring person) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(86)  Section 5706.6.1.2 (Leaving Vehicle Unattended) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Section 5706.6.1.2 (Leaving Vehicle Unattended). At no time while discharging flammable, combustible or ignitable liquids shall the driver or operator be out of sight and reach of the discharge valves. If at any time while discharging flammable, combustible or ignitable liquids, the driver or operator must leave the vehicle for any reason, the driver or operator shall shut down all valves until the driver or operator returns and shall be totally responsible for any and all spillage. When the delivery hose is attached to the vehicle it is presumed to be discharging flammable, combustible or ignitable liquids. 
(87)  Chapter 80 (Referenced Standards) is amended by adding under NFPA, all referenced NFPA will be the most current editions. 
(88)  Appendix D, Section D102.1 (Required access) is amended by replacing 79,000 pounds (34050 kg) with 84,000 pounds (38101.76 kg). 
(89)  Appendix D, Section D102 (Required Access) is amended by adding the following: 
Section D102.2 (Alternative Approved Access). If a product is used other than asphalt or concrete for the access surface it must be approved prior to installation. Once installed an installation certificate with an engineer stamp confirming it was installed according to manufacturer's specification must be submitted. In the case of base material a certificate with an engineer stamp stating that it has been tested and will support the imposing load of a fire apparatus weighing at least 84,000 pounds (38101.76 kg). 
(90)  Appendix D, Section D103.1 (Access road width with hydrant) is amended with replacing "26 feet" with "20 feet". 
(91)  Appendix D, Section D103.2 (Grade) is amended by adding the following: 
Section 103.2.1 (Aerial Access Grade) where aerial access is required the aerial access portion of the road shall not exceed 6 percent in grade. 
(92)  Appendix D, Section D103.4 (Dead Ends) and Table D103.4 are amended by replacing "150 feet" with "100 feet." 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-1(B); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A(6-1), 4-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3947 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2017; Ord. No. 2018-3995 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-22-2018; Ord. No. 2019-4076 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
Secs. 16-53-16-77. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LIFE SAFETY CODE 

Sec. 16-78. - Life Safety Code Handbook adopted. 
    The Life Safety Code Handbook, specifically the 2018 Edition published by the National Fire Protection Association, a copy of which is on file in the Office of the City Secretary, is hereby adopted and designated as the Life Safety Code of the City. Said code is adopted to the same extent as though such code was copied at length herein, subject, however, to the omissions, additions, supplements, and amendments contained in this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-1(A)(2); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A(6-1), 4-28-2016; Ord. No. 2019-4076 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 16-79. - Amendments to NFPA Life Safety Code. 
    The Life Safety Code Handbook is amended in the following respects: 
(1)  Section 24.3.5.1 is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(2)  Section 43.6.4.1 is amended by deleting this section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
    Section 43.6.4.1. In a building with rehabilitation work areas involving over 50 percent of the aggregate building area an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed to the code applicable to new construction for this type of occupancy. 
(3)  Section 43.6.4.2 is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(4)  Section 43.6.4.4 is amended by replacing "up to and including the highest rehabilitation work area floor" with "highest floor." 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-1(C); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A(6-1), 4-28-2016) 
Secs. 16-80-16-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIRE HAZARDS 

Sec. 16-102. - Recovery of penalties. 
    The penalties provided for herein shall be recovered by the City in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures, and punishments for offenses against the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-2(L); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A, 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 16-103. - Violators to be notified before prosecution. 
    No prosecution shall be brought under Sections 16-104 and 16-105 until the order provided for in Section 16-31 is given and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-2(K); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A, 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 16-104. - Unlawful to maintain fire hazards. 
    Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-2(I); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A, 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 16-105. - Owners who maintain hazards guilty of misdemeanor. 
    Any owner or occupant of any building, structure, or other premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or health, or safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure, or premises with any improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health, or property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting, or causing fires; or which shall create conditions dangerous to firefighters or occupants of such building, structure, or premises other than the maintainer thereof, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-2(J); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A, 4-28-2016) 
Chapter 18 - HEALTH 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Sale of unpasteurized milk or milk products prohibited. 
(a)  The retail sale or offer for sale of milk or a milk product which is not Grade "A" pasteurized as defined by State law is prohibited. 
(b)  Proof of the sale or offer for sale of milk or a milk product without a Grade "A" pasteurized label on the container in which it was sold shall constitute prima facie evidence that the milk or milk product was not Grade "A" pasteurized. 
(c)  A person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-7) 
State Law reference- Grading of milk, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 435; local regulation of milk, Texas Health and Safety Code  435.013. 
Secs. 18-2-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOBACCO AND SMOKING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Smoking in public, Texas Penal Code  48.01. 

Sec. 18-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bar means an establishment that is dedicated predominately to the serving of alcohol rather than food. 
    Bar area means an area physically separated from a food serving area dedicated predominately to the serving of alcohol rather than food. 
    Electronic cigarette and/or e-cigarette means any product containing or delivering nicotine or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. The term "electronic cigarette" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any other product name or descriptor. 
    Electronic vaping device shall have the same meaning as the term "electronic cigarette." 
    Hookah bar means a bar in which the on-site sales or rentals of hookah tobacco products and smoking accessories for consumption or use on the premises exceeds 30 percent of gross revenues. 
    Minor means a person younger than 18 years of age. 
    Public meeting means a meeting required to be open to the public under Texas Government Code ch. 551. 
    Public place means an enclosed, indoor area to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The common areas of a retail store, office, grocery store, or other commercial establishments; 
(2)  A restaurant or cafeteria; 
(3)  A public or private or secondary school; 
(4)  A public or private institution of higher education; 
(5)  A hospital or nursing home; 
(6)  An elevator; 
(7)  City and school buses; 
(8)  City buildings, owned or leased by the City and used for City purposes; 
(9)  An enclosed theater, auditorium, movie house, or arena; 
(10)  A courtroom or a jury waiting or deliberation room; or 
(11)  A bar or bar area. 
    Smoke or smoking includes: 
(1)  Carrying or holding a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind or any other lighted smoking equipment or device; 
(2)  Lighting a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind or any other smoking equipment or device; or 
(3)  Emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind or any other smoking equipment or device. 
    Smoking-related medical or scientific research means an enclosed indoor workplace, to the extent that tobacco smoking is an integral part of a medical or scientific research study that has been sanctioned by an accredited university or medical institution. 
    Tobacco specialty shop means any establishment that is dedicated to the sale or rental of tobacco, tobacco-related products and accessories for consumption or use on or off the premises and more than 60 percent of the revenues must come from the sale or rental of tobacco and tobacco-related products. 
    Vaporizing cigarette shall have the same meaning as the term "electronic cigarette." 
    Workplace means an enclosed area in which employees work or have access during the course of their employment. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-9(A)) 
Sec. 18-22. - Owner/operator responsible. 
    No owner, operator, manager or an employee of an establishment shall intentionally or otherwise permit or fail to make a reasonable effort to prevent smoking in a "no smoking" area. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-9(F); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 18-23. - Smoking in public. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person smokes at a public meeting, in a public place, in a workplace or in any other enclosed, indoor area in which "no smoking" signs are conspicuously posted by the person in charge, and the person is not in an area designated as a smoking area under Section 18-24. 
(b)  It is an exception to the application of: 
(1)  Subsection (a) of this section that the person is smoking: 
a.  As an actor or actress in a theatrical performance; 
b.  A tobacco specialty shop; 
c.  At a hookah bar; or 
d.  As required of a participant in a smoking-related medical or scientific research study. 
(2)  Section 18-27 if at the time of the sale, the minor presented the person or business with a facially valid proof of identification showing the minor was at least 18 years of age. 
(c)  Smoking shall be allowed, without any requirement for signage by the person in charge under Section 18-24(a), where smoking is permitted by Subsection (b) of this section. However, smoking is not allowed at any public meeting, in any public place, or in a workplace unless specifically permitted by Subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  A minor commits an offense if the minor violates Section 18-26. 
(e)  A person or business commits an offense if the person or business violates Section 18-27. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-9(B)) 
Sec. 18-24. - Designation of no smoking and smoking areas; signs. 
(a)  Designation of non-smoking areas. The person in charge shall designate the following areas as "non-smoking": 
(1)  Food order areas, cashier areas, check-out lines for stores; 
(2)  City library; 
(3)  Elevators; 
(4)  City and school buses, including associated terminals; 
(5)  Restrooms; 
(6)  Movie theaters, hospitals, and rest home facilities; 
(7)  All other public places including restaurants, cafeterias, bars, bar areas; 
(8)  Workplaces; 
(9)  Within a ten feet radius of bars and bar areas entry ways; and 
(10)  Within a 20 feet radius of the entry ways of all other public places or workplaces. 
(b)  Designation of smoking areas. Smoking areas shall not be designated to cover areas in Subsection (a) of this section. It is not required that any smoking areas be designated. 
(c)  Signs. 
(1)  The person in charge of a public place or workplace shall place signs visible at each entrance of the building to notify persons entering that smoking is prohibited or that smoking is prohibited except in areas designated as smoking areas. 
(2)  The person in charge shall conspicuously post signs in areas designated as a smoking area that smoking is permitted in the area. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-9(C), (D)) 
Sec. 18-25. - Equipment to extinguish smoking material. 
    All public places shall be equipped for extinguishments of smoking materials. Facilities for extinguishments of smoking materials that are located in areas of public places other than designated smoking areas shall be accompanied by clearly visible signs, stating "no smoking." 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-9(E)) 
Sec. 18-26. - Possession and use of electronic cigarettes by minors. 
(a)  The possession, purchase, acquisition, consumption, or use of electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes, electronic vaping devices, or vaporizing cigarettes by minors is prohibited. 
(b)  A minor is prohibited from misrepresenting himself or herself to be 18 years of age or older for the purpose of acquiring or receiving an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette, electronic vaping device, or vaporizing cigarette. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-9(G)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Health and Safety Code  161.252. 
Sec. 18-27. - Solicitation or sale of electronic cigarettes to minors. 
(a)  No person or business shall sell, cause to be sold, give, distribute, or transfer electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes, electronic vaping devices, or vaporizing cigarettes to minors. 
(b)  No person or business shall sell, cause to be sold, give, distribute, or transfer an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette, electronic vaping device, or vaporizing cigarette to another person who intends to deliver or give it to someone who is a minor. 
(c)  No person or business shall solicit or engage minors in the testing, product-sampling or other business-related purpose involving the inhalation or other use of e-cigarettes, regardless of whether a minor is an employee, contractor or volunteer. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-9(H)) 
Secs. 18-28-18-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Food establishments, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 437. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-58. - Penalties; fees; injunctions. 
(a)  The Brazos County Board of Health shall adopt rules to charge fees and setting the fee amount necessary to the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, permit fees, class fees, inspection fees, and re-inspection fees. The Board of Health shall provide an updated fee schedule to the municipality within 30 days of any fee changes that have been approved. 
(b)  Any person who violates any section of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable in accordance with Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(N)) 
Sec. 18-59. - State rules adopted. 
(a)  The City adopts by reference and incorporates into this article 25 T.A.C. 228, also known as the "Texas Food Establishment Rules" as adopted by the Texas Department of State Health Services, Division for Regulatory Services, Environmental and Consumer Safety Section, as the regulations now exist and as hereafter amended. 
(b)  The term "municipality" in the regulations and this article shall be understood to refer to the City and the term "Regulatory Authority" in the said regulations and this article refer to the City or its authorized representative. The authorized representative for enforcement of this section and the regulations is the Brazos County Health District ("BCHD") and the City. 
(c)  One certified copy of the regulations adopted in this article shall be on file in the City Secretary's Office. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(A); Ord. No. 2016-3777, exh. A, 6-9-2016) 
Sec. 18-60. - Service of notices. 
    A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the Regulatory Authority. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(G)) 
Sec. 18-61. - Hearings. 
(a)  A person may request a hearing to contest the Regulatory Authority's denial of an application for a permit or a suspension or revocation of a permit or a hold order, except that a hearing request does not stay the Regulatory Authority's order for the suspension of a permit, revocation or hold order. 
(b)  A person desiring a hearing in response to a denial of an application for permit, a suspension or revocation shall submit a request for a hearing to the municipality within ten calendar days of the date of the notice. 
(c)  A request for hearing shall be in writing and contain the following: 
(1)  A statement that a genuine and material issue of fact exists for which the hearing is requested; 
(2)  A statement of defense, mitigation, denial, or explanation concerning each allegation of fact; 
(3)  A statement indicating whether the presence of witnesses for the Regulatory Authority is required; and 
(4)  The name and address of the respondent's or requester's legal counsel, if any. 
(d)  The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the City Manager or designee at a time and place designated by same. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the City Manager or designee shall make a final finding, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the municipality. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(H)) 
Sec. 18-62. - Plan review. 
(a)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled, and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the Regulatory Authority for review and approval before construction, remodeling, or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the type, model, location and size of proposed fixed equipment of facilities. The Regulatory Authority shall approve the plans and specifications, if they meet the requirements of this article. No food establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted, except in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the Regulatory Authority. 
(b)  Preoperational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are required by Subsection (a) of this section to be submitted to the Regulatory Authority, the Regulatory Authority shall inspect the food establishment prior to its beginning operation to determine compliance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(C)) 
Sec. 18-63. - Inspections. 
(a)  Inspection frequency. Inspections of food establishments shall be performed as often as are necessary for the enforcement of this article based on public health risks posed by the establishment and the establishment's past compliance history. Inspections may also be made where consumer complaints and/or reports of foodborne illness outbreaks warrant a need to perform inspections. 
(b)  Access. Agents of the Regulatory Authority, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any food establishment during normal hours of operation or at any reasonable time, for the purpose of making inspections, to determine compliance with this article. The agents shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishments to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received, or used, or to persons employed. If a person denies access to the Regulatory Authority, the Regulatory Authority shall: 
(1)  Inform the person that: 
a.  The permit holder is required to allow access to the Regulatory Authority as specified under this subsection; 
b.  Access is a condition of the acceptance and retention of a food establishment permit to operate under Section 18-93; and 
c.  If access is denied, an order issued by the appropriate authority allowing access, hereinafter referred to as an inspection order, maybe obtained according to law; and 
(2)  Make a final request for access. 
(c)  Report of inspections. 
(1)  Whenever an inspection of a food establishment is made, the findings shall be recorded in the inspection report form. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this article and shall set forth a weighted point value for each requirement. The rating score of the establishment shall be the total of the weighted point values for all violations, subtracted from 100. A copy of the inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection report form is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according to law. An inspection report form is based on the requirements of this article and is on file in the Regulatory Authority's Office. 
(2)  The most current scored inspection report form must be displayed in a BCHD-supplied holder inside each permitted establishment. The establishment is responsible for duplicate replacement holders (available at BCHD). The encased scored inspection report form must be displayed within ten feet of the establishment's main public entrance or other location agreed upon by the inspector and representative of the establishment, and must be visible at eye level (48 to 66 inches) to patrons of the establishment. Patrons should be advised to direct questions about the report to BCHD. Failure to post the most current scored inspection report in the manner described or facilitating its removal may result in a re-inspection fee. 
(d)  Correction of violations. 
(1)  The inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the violation found, and the correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  If the Regulatory Authority determines an imminent health hazard exists, the establishment shall immediately cease food operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the Regulatory Authority. An imminent health hazard exists under conditions, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Lack of potable water; 
2.  Inadequate refrigeration; 
3.  Sewage backup; 
4.  Lack of sanitation, defined as a score of 69 or below; 
5.  Lack of hot water; 
6.  Extended interruption of electricity or water; 
7.  Misuse of poisonous/toxic chemicals; 
8.  Onset of an apparent food-borne disease outbreak; 
9.  Fire/flood; 
10.  Failure to exclude an infectious employee; 
11.  Other conditions that affect public health. 
b.  All violations of four- or five-point weighted items shall be corrected immediately, or a plan of action agreed upon by the person in charge and the inspector shall be developed and implemented. 
c.  All violations of three-point weighted items shall be corrected immediately; provided, however, in those circumstances where immediate action is not possible, the violation will be remedied prior to the expiration of ten days. 
d.  All other violations require corrective action, within 90 days of the inspection or before the next inspection, whichever comes first. 
e.  In the case of temporary food establishments, all violations shall be corrected immediately. If violations are not corrected immediately, the establishment shall immediately cease food operations, until authorized to resume by the Regulatory Authority. 
(2)  Any violation documented on three consecutive inspections will require a follow-up inspection within five business days and a re-inspection fee determined by the Brazos County Board of Health will be invoiced. If the invoice has not been paid after 30 days, there will a 20 percent additional fee collected, and after 60 days the permit may be suspended. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(D)) 
Sec. 18-64. - Examination and condemnation of food. 
    Food may be examined or samples may be taken for laboratory analysis by the Regulatory Authority as often as necessary for enforcement of this article. The Regulatory Authority may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, place a hold order on any food which it believes is in violation of this article. The Regulatory Authority shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order, stating the specific reasons for placing the food under the hold order with reference to the applicable provisions of the Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER) and the hazard or adverse effect created by the observed condition. The Regulatory Authority shall completely identify the food subject to the hold order by the common name, the label information, a container description, the quantity, Regulatory Authority's tag or identification, and location. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or moved from the establishment. The Regulatory Authority shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. If the Regulatory Authority has reasonable cause to believe that the hold order will be violated, or finds that the hold order is violated, the Regulatory Authority may remove the food that is subject to the order to a place of safe keeping. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within ten days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. A hearing shall be held if so requested; and, on the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this article. The Regulatory Authority may seek an administrative or judicial remedy to achieve compliance with the provisions of this article if a person operating a food establishment or employee fails to comply with a hold order as specified in this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(J)) 
Sec. 18-65. - Procedure when infection is suspected. 
    When the Regulatory Authority has reasonable cause to suspect the possibility of disease transmission from any food establishment employee, it may secure morbidity history of the suspected employee or make any other investigation as may be indicated and shall take appropriate action. The Regulatory Authority may require any or all of the following measures: 
(1)  The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food establishments. 
(2)  The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the Regulatory Authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists. 
(3)  Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease. 
(4)  Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee, of other employees, and of their body discharges. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(K)) 
Sec. 18-66. - Food handler's card. 
    Each person working in a food establishment handling food or dishware shall obtain a valid food handler's card. It is an offense for an employee to begin work or for an employer to hire any person who does not have a food handler's card by the first day of employment. This card is to be issued by the BCHD or a food handler program licensed by the Texas Department of State Health Services. The card shall be valid for such a time as the issuer may designate, but not to exceed four years. The original or a copy of the food handler's card shall be posted or kept on-site by management and made available to the Regulatory Authority. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(L)) 
Sec. 18-67. - Food manager certification. 
(a)  A food establishment shall employ at least one person who is a fulltime, on-site supervisory employee who is responsible for food preparation and service and who has a valid and current food manager certification that is recognized by the Texas Department of State Health Services. Food establishments that serve, sell, or distribute only pre-packaged foods, non-potentially hazardous foods or beverages, or temporary food events are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(b)  If a food establishment cannot meet the requirements of Subsection (a) of this section because of the termination, expiration, or permanent transfer of a certified food manager, the food establishment shall: 
(1)  Hire another employee with a current food manager certification; or 
(2)  Register a current employee for a food manager class within ten days of the termination, expiration, or permanent transfer. The approved course must be successfully completed within 30 days. 
(c)  Non-compliance with this section will result in a follow-up fee to be determined by the Brazos County Board of Health. 
(d)  If it is determined that lack of knowledge is a factor in a permit suspension, the current food manager can be required by the BCHD to retake an approved food manager class. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(M)) 
Secs. 18-68-18-92. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 18-93. - Required. 
    No person shall operate a food establishment who does not have a valid permit issued by the Regulatory Authority. Only a person who complies with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit. It shall be unlawful to interfere with the Regulatory Authority in the performance of his or her duties as described in this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(B)(1)) 
Sec. 18-94. - Issuance. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment shall make written application for a permit on the forms provided by the Regulatory Authority. Prior to approval of an application for a permit, the Regulatory Authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with the requirements of this article. The Regulatory Authority shall issue a permit if its inspection reveals that the proposed food establishment complies with the requirements of this article. A valid permit shall be posted in public view in every food establishment. The applicant shall pay to the Regulatory Authority a fee to be set by the Brazos County Board of Health at the time of renewal, prior to opening a new establishment and when a change of ownership occurs. 
(b)  Permits shall be issued for a period not to exceed one year expiring on December 31 of each year. The application to renew a permit and the accompanying fee must be received by the Regulatory Authority on or before January 7 of the calendar year for which the permit renewal is sought. If such application and fee are not received by the date herein specified, the Regulatory Authority may charge the food establishment up to an additional 20 percent of the fee due and owing as a late penalty for failure to comply with the requirements of Subsection (a) of this section. The charging of such late fee will have no effect on the Regulatory Authority's right to seek criminal penalties permitted by the enforcement provision of this article. Any application and permit fee not received by January 15 may result in immediate closure of the food establishment. 
(c)  If an establishment is found to be operating without a permit, the establishment must immediately close operations until such time as a permit may be issued by the Regulatory Authority. A re-inspection fee, as determined by the Board of Health, may be charged to the establishment. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(B)(2)) 
Sec. 18-95. - Transfer. 
    A permit may not be transferred from one person to another person, from one food establishment to another, or from one type of operation to another if the food operation changes from the type of operation specified in the application and the change in operation is not approved. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(B)(3)) 
Sec. 18-96. - Suspension. 
(a)  The Regulatory Authority may without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the holder of the permit or person in charge or the operation of the food establishment: 
(1)  Does not comply with the requirements of this article; and 
(2)  The operation of the food establishment otherwise constitutes an immediate hazard to public health. 
(b)  Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by Section 18-60. When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Unless otherwise provided in this article, within one calendar year, the first permit suspension will result in a mandatory 24-hour closure. The second permit suspension will result in a 72-hour mandatory closure. After a third permit suspension within a 12-month period the permit will be revoked, and the owner may seek a hearing as set forth in Section 18-61 or apply for a new permit. If granted, the owner must pay the yearly fee plus the re-inspection fee, and pass an opening compliance inspection, meeting all requirements as outlined in this article. 
(c)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and notified of the right to appeal such suspension as provided in Section 18-61. If no written request for the hearing is filed within ten days of the service of notice, the suspension is sustained. The Regulatory Authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(d)  Whenever a food establishment's permit is suspended, a re-inspection fee shall be invoiced. The establishment shall not resume operations until such time as a re-inspection determines that conditions responsible for the suspension no longer exist. 
(e)  Failure to pay any and all permit fees, re-inspection fees, late charges and any other fees owed to the Regulatory Authority when due may result in a permit suspension until such time as all fees and/or late charges have been paid. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(E)) 
Sec. 18-97. - Revocation. 
    The Regulatory Authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing as provided in Section 18-61, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article or for interference in the Regulatory Authority's performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the Regulatory Authority shall notify the holder of the permit or person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice, unless a written request for a hearing is filed as provided in Section 18-61 by the holder of the permit. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(F)) 
Sec. 18-98. - Application after revocation. 
    Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final, the holder of the revoked permit may make written application for a new permit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-5(I)) 
Chapter 20 - HUMAN RIGHTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Fair Housing Code, Texas Property Code ch. 301. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 20-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under Sections 20-22 through 20-26. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
    Family includes a single individual. 
    Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character. 
    Private club includes fraternities and sororities. 
    To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-12(A)) 
Sec. 20-20. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. Each day a violation continues after passage of 75 days from the date of the filing of the initial complaint with the City Attorney shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-12(M)) 
Sec. 20-21. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
    There shall be exempted from the application of this article all transactions involving: 
(1)  Exemptions enumerated. 
a.  The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such units as the owner's residence. 
b.  The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as the person's residence and not more than four such rooms are offered. 
c.  The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided that: 
1.  The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; 
2.  The sale is made without the publication, posting, or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of Section 20-22(3); this shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; 
3.  The owner does not own more than three single-family houses at the time of the sale; and 
4.  The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on the owner's behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family houses at any one time. 
If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period. 
(2)  Religious organizations. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association or society from limiting the sales, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national origin, familial status, or handicap (disability). 
(3)  Private clubs. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging which it owns and operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(4)  Housing accommodations. Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which rooms are leased, subleased, or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen, or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-12(G)) 
Sec. 20-22. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
    Except as exempted by Section 20-25, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap (disability). 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin familial status, or handicap (disability). 
(3)  Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap (disability), or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination. This prohibition against discriminatory advertising applies to single-family and owner-occupied housing that is otherwise exempt from the Fair Housing Act. 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap (disability) that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)  For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status or handicap (disability). 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-12(B)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code  301.022. 
Sec. 20-23. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or residential real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefore for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or to discriminate against any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance because of the race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap (disability) of such person or of any person associated with him or her in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap (disability) of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwellings for which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm, or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making or purchasing of commercial or residential real estate loans, to discriminate in appraising property, refuse to purchase a loan, or set different terms or conditions for purchasing a loan because of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap (disability). 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-12(C)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code  301.026. 
Sec. 20-24. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on account of race, color, sex, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap (disability). 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-12(D)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code  301.027. 
Sec. 20-25. - Additional protection for the disabled. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a landlord to refuse to let a tenant or someone associated with a tenant to make reasonable modifications to dwelling or common areas, at the tenant's expense, or to make reasonable accommodations in rules policies, practices or services if necessary for the disabled person to use the housing which includes the tenant or someone associated with the tenant that have or are regarded as having a physical or mental disability (including hearing, mobility, and visual impairments, chronic alcoholism, chronic mental illness, AIDS, AIDS Related Complex and mental retardation) that substantially limits one or more major life activities. 
(b)  Not replacing more stringent standards in State or local law, new buildings with an elevator and four or more units are required to have public and common areas accessible to persons with disabilities, doors and hallways must be wide enough for wheelchairs, and units must have an accessible route into and through the unit, have accessible light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls, reinforced bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars, and kitchens and bathrooms that can be used by people in wheelchairs. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-12(E)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code  301.025. 
Sec. 20-26. - Housing opportunities for families. 
    It shall be unlawful for a building or community to discriminate against families in which one or more children under 18 live with a parent, a person who has legal custody of the child or children, or the designee of the parent or legal custodian with the parent or custodian's written permission; unless the building or community is determined by the HUD Secretary that it is specifically designed for elderly persons under a Federal, State, or local government program, is occupied solely by persons who are 62 or older, or houses at least one person who is 55 or older in at least 80 percent of the occupied units and adheres to a policy that demonstrates an intent to house persons who are 55 or older. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-12(F)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Property Code  301.004. 
Sec. 20-27. - Unlawful intimidation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage, or otherwise penalize any individual, group, or business because of compliance with the provisions of this article, because of the exercise of rights under this article, or enjoyed the benefits of this article, or because of making a charge, testifying or assisting in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or have made any report to the City Attorney. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-12(K)) 
Secs. 20-28-20-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 20-58. - Complaints. 
(a)  Who may file. Only a person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes he or she will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring, hereinafter referred to as person aggrieved, may file a complaint with the City Attorney. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The City Attorney shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any person upon request. 
(b)  City Attorney may file complaint. If at any time the City Attorney shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any persons have committed or are committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed, the City Attorney may prepare and file a complaint, and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(c)  Deadlines; notifications. All complaints shall be filed within 90 days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing of any complaint, the City Attorney shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named therein who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(d)  Subscribed and sworn. All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-12(H)) 
Sec. 20-59. - Investigation. 
(a)  By City Attorney. Upon the filing of a complaint as herein provided, the City Attorney shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)  City Attorney to effect conciliation. During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaint, the City Attorney shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  When City Attorney may prosecute. Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the City Attorney, but within 30 days of the filing of the complaint with the City Attorney, if the efforts of the City Attorney to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful, and if the City Attorney has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, such violation shall be prosecuted in the Municipal Court of the City. If the City Attorney determines to prosecute, the City Attorney shall institute a complaint and prosecute same to conclusion within 30 days after such determination, or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(d)  Lack of probable cause. If the City Attorney determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged or suspected discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the City Attorney shall take no further action with respect to that alleged or suspected offense. In such case, the person filing the complaint shall be notified by the City Attorney and informed of any alternate action the City Attorney may take. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-12(I)) 
Sec. 20-60. - Education and public information. 
    In order to further the objectives of this article, the City Attorney may conduct educational and public information programs. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-12(L)) 
Sec. 20-61. - Cumulative legal effect. 
    This article is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-12(J)) 
Chapter 22 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Law enforcement officer training, certification, etc., Texas Occupations Code ch. 1701. 

Sec. 22-1. - Police Reserve Force. 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established a Police Reserve Force for the City. 
(b)  Compensation and benefits of Reserve Police Officers. 
(1)  Members of the Police Reserve Force may serve without compensation. Uniforms and uniform compensation may be provided to the Reserve Police Officers at the discretion of the Chief of Police. The uniform compensation shall be based solely upon time served by the member of the Police Reserve while in training for or in the performance of official duties. 
(2)  The City may provide hospital and medical assistance to members of the Police Reserve Force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties, in the same manner as provided by the City for its fulltime Police Officers, and Reserve Officers shall be eligible for death benefits as provided in State law; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize or permit a member of the Police Reserve Force to become eligible for participation in any pension fund created pursuant to State law, to which regular officers may become a member by payroll deductions or otherwise. 
(3)  Reserve Police Officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and shall in no case assume the fulltime duties of regular Police Officers. 
(c)  Minimum standards for Reserve Police Officers. 
(1)  Reserve Police Officers must comply with the minimum training standards established by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education minimum standards established for all Reserve Law Enforcement Officers identical to the standards so established which must be fulfilled before a person appointed as a Reserve Law Enforcement Officer may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a Peace Officer. The Chief of Police shall establish qualifications and standards of training for members of the Police Reserve Force and shall establish rules and regulations governing Reserve Police Officers. 
(2)  The Chief of Police may establish minimum physical, mental, educational, and moral standards as used by the regular Police Department, but in no case shall the standards be less than that established by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-12; altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Police reserve force, Texas Local Government Code  341.012. 
Sec. 22-2. - Neighborhood Watch Program. 
(a)  No neighborhood watch sign may be posted without certification by the City Police Department that the watch group has met the criteria stipulated in the College Station Police Department Policy Manual regarding the Neighborhood Watch Program. 
(b)  Penalty. The posting of a neighborhood watch sign without compliance with the requirements of Subsection (a) of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-22) 
Chapter 24 - LIBRARIES 

Sec. 24-1. - Failure to return library materials. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person intentionally or knowingly or otherwise fails to return library materials to the College Station Branch Library which were loaned to the actor or borrowed in the actor's name. 
(b)  The actor's intent and knowledge shall be presumed if: 
(1)  Pursuant to agreement, the library materials were to be returned on a specified date; 
(2)  Actual notice is given or notice in writing is sent by depositing same in the United States mail stating that the library materials were not returned on the date specified. Said notice when mailed is to be sent to the address shown on the records of the library; and 
(3)  The library material is not returned to the owner within 20 days of receipt of such notice. 
(c)  If notice is sent by mail, in accordance with Subsection (b)(2) of this section, it is presumed that the notice was received no later than five days after it was sent. 
(d)  In prosecution under this section, it is no defense that the actor, though the actual borrower, is no longer in possession of the library materials. 
(e)  Any person who violates this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-25; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 24-2. - Library fines, fees and other charges. 
(a)  Fines. 
(1)  Adult collection. As established in Section 2-117, with a maximum being the replacement cost of the materials (books, paperbacks, phonograph records, cassettes, periodicals and materials from the vertical file). There shall be a five-day grace period for books and paperbacks borrowed from the adult collection. 
(2)  Adult collection of art prints and sculpture. As established in Section 2-117, with a maximum being the cost to replace the item. 
(b)  Charges. 
(1)  Lost materials. Charges for lost or irreparably damaged items include the cost of the item plus a non-refundable service charge established in Section 2-117. 
(2)  Damaged materials. Charges are determined by the cataloging department of the library, based on the amount of time spent and materials used in repairing the item. 
(c)  Fees. 
(1)  Replacement of borrower's card. The initial card for County residents is free of charge. A fee as established in Section 2-117 will be charged to replace a lost card. 
(2)  Non-resident library cards. Library cards will be issued to out-of-County residents for an annual fee as established in Section 2-117; such card is valid for one year from the month of purchase. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-26; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Chapter 26 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General police power, Texas Local Government Code  54.004. 

Sec. 26-1. - Aggressive solicitation. 
(a)  Findings. The City Council finds that: 
(1)  Aggressive solicitation is disturbing and disruptive to residents and businesses. It contributes to the loss of access to and enjoyment of public places, as well as a sense of fear, intimidation, and disorder to the community. 
(2)  Aggressive solicitation includes approaching or following pedestrians, repetitive soliciting despite refusals, the use of abusive or profane language to cause fear or intimidation, unwanted physical contact, or intentional or otherwise blocking of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(3)  The presence of individuals who solicit money from persons at or near banks, automated teller machines or facilities, check cashing businesses, credit access businesses, bus stops, self-service or automated car washes, self-service fuel pumps, parking meters or pay stations and crosswalks is especially troublesome because of the enhanced fear of crime in a place that is confined, difficult to avoid, or where a person might find it necessary to wait. 
(4)  This section is intended to protect citizens from the fear and intimidation accompanying certain kinds of solicitation, and not to limit a constitutionally protected activity. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggressive manner means any of the following: 
(1)  Making any physical contact with or touching another person during the solicitation without the person's consent. 
(2)  Approaching or following the person being solicited, if that conduct is: 
a.  Likely to cause a reasonable person to fear either imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or 
b.  Reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
(3)  Continuing to solicit a person after the person has made a negative response. 
(4)  Blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. 
(5)  Using obscene or abusive language or gestures toward the person being solicited. 
    Automated teller facility means the area comprised of one or more automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space that is made available to banking customers. 
    Automated teller machine means a device, linked to a bank's account records, which is able to carry out banking transactions. 
    Bank means a bank, savings bank, savings and loan association, credit union, trust company, or similar financial institution. 
    Check cashing business means a person in the business of cashing checks, drafts, or money orders for consideration. 
    Credit access business has the meaning given that term by Texas Finance Code  393.601. 
    Parking meter or pay station means a location on a street, parking lot or parking garage where persons pay for parking by either cash or credit to a person or at a machine or other device designed to accept payment. 
    Public area means an outdoor area to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, a sidewalk, street, highway, park, parking lot, alleyway, pedestrian way, or the common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, or shop. 
    Self-service fuel pump means a fuel pump: 
(1)  From which a vehicle may be manually filled with gasoline or other fuel directly by its owner or operator, with or without the aid of an employee or attendant of the premises at which the fuel pump is located, 
(2)  Which is accessible for use by members of the general public. 
    Self-service or automatic car wash means a structure at which a vehicle may be either automatically washed or manually washed or vacuumed by its owner or operator with equipment activated by the cash or credit payment at a machine or other device designed to accept payment, which is accessible for use by members of the general public. 
    Solicit means to request, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication, an immediate donation or transfer of money or another thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, and regardless of whether consideration is offered. 
(c)  Aggressive solicitation prohibited. A person commits an offense if the person solicits: 
(1)  In an aggressive manner in a public area. 
(2)  In a bus or at a bus stop. 
(3)  Within 25 feet of the following areas where the public is considered vulnerable or where solicitation would interfere with the flow of traffic: 
a.  An automated teller facility; 
b.  An automated teller machine; 
c.  The entrance or exit of a bank; 
d.  The entrance or exit of a check cashing business; 
e.  The entrance or exit of a credit access business; 
f.  A self-service or automated carwash or self-service fuel pump; 
g.  A parking meter or parking pay station on a street; 
h.  A public parking garage; 
i.  At a marked crosswalk; or 
j.  The entrance or exit of a restaurant or patio area of a bar or restaurant. 
(d)  Exception. During a permitted street closure event or a permitted City-sponsored special event, it shall not be an offense under Subsection (d) of this section for persons registered with a valid City permit to solicit in such locations when authorized and so defined in the approved street closure or special event permit. 
(e)  Violation and penalty. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-18; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 26-2. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Effective consent means the consent of a person authorized to act, or whom the shooter reasonably believed was so authorized. 
    Firearm means specifically, but not exclusively, any shotgun, pistol, rifle, air rifle, air pistol, BB gun, bow and arrow, or any other mechanism that discharges or ejects any bullet, buckshot, or any other projectile of any size by force of combustion, mechanism, or air. The term "firearm" does not include pitching machines or similar devices that are designed and used only as a substitute for a human action. 
    One ownership means an undivided parcel or tract of land that may be owned by a person, corporation, or other entity, or by a combination thereof, or by a tenant in common. 
(b)  Unlawful to shoot firearms within City. It shall be unlawful to willfully or intentionally or otherwise shoot a firearm within the limits of the City, except as provided hereafter. Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code  229.001, this subsection does not prohibit the discharge of firearms or air guns at a sport shooting range. A person asserting an exception to prosecution under this section shall be required to prove the same as a defense under the provisions of the Texas Penal Code, as amended, and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedures, as amended. 
(c)  Excepted from this provision. The following are excepted from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Shooting a shotgun, air rifle, air pistol, BB gun, or bow and arrow upon a tract of land of ten acres or more under one ownership, with the effective consent of the owner and any tenant residing thereon, and not within 300 feet of any residence or occupied building, provided that the firearm is not discharged in such a manner that it would reasonably be expected to cause any projectile to cross the boundary of the tract onto other premises. Under this subsection, the term "shotgun" shall mean a ten-gauge or smaller shotgun with shot no larger than size seven. 
(2)  Shooting a center fire or rim fire rifle or pistol of any caliber upon a tract of land of 50 acres or more under one ownership, with the effective consent of the owner and any tenant residing thereon, and not within 300 feet of any residence or occupied building, provided that the firearm is not discharged in such a manner that it would reasonably be expected to cause any projectile to cross the boundary of the tract onto other premises. 
(3)  Shooting any firearm in lawful defense of self, a third person, or property, provided that the firearm is not discharged in such a manner as to unreasonably endanger innocent persons. 
(4)  Law Enforcement and Animal Control Officers while in the lawful discharge of their duties. 
(5)  The discharge of firearms or other weapons in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City or in an area annexed by the City after September 1, 1981, if the firearm or other weapon is: 
a.  A shotgun, air rifle or pistol, or BB gun, discharged: 
1.  On a tract of land of ten acres or more and more than 150 feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property; and 
2.  In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract; or 
b.  A center fire or rim fire rifle or pistol of any caliber discharged: 
1.  On a tract of land of 50 acres or more and more than 300 feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property; and 
2.  In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract. 
(d)  Penalty. A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-16; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 26-3. - Fireworks. 
    A violation of this section is declared a nuisance and may be enforced 5,000 feet outside the City limits. A person commits an offense if the person possesses, manufactures, stores, sells, handles, or uses fireworks. Exemption: A supervised public display of fireworks provided that a permit for such fireworks display has been obtained from the State Fire Marshal or his or her designated representative. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-2(A)(9), (C)) 
State Law reference- Fireworks generally, Texas Occupations Code ch. 2154; local regulation of fireworks, Texas Occupations Code  2154.004; confiscation of fireworks, Texas Local Government Code  342.013; authority to define and prohibit any nuisance within the limits of the city and within 5,000 feet outside the city limits, Texas Local Government Code  217.042. 
Sec. 26-4. - Impersonating police. 
(a)  A person other than a member of the College Station Police Department commits an offense if the person wears the uniform of the College Station Police Department, or a uniform so similar as to be mistaken for the uniform or badge of the College Station Police Department. 
(b)  A person other than a member of the College Station Police Department commits an offense if the person drives a vehicle of color so similar as to be mistaken for a patrol vehicle of the College Station Police Department. 
(c)  A violation of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-14) 
State Law reference- Impersonating public servant, Texas Penal Code  37.11; false identification as Peace Officer, Texas Penal Code  37.12. 
Sec. 26-5. - Creating a nuisance. 
(a)  A violation of this section is declared a nuisance and may be enforced 5,000 feet outside the City limits. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person creates or allows any sign, awning, and other similar structure over the streets or sidewalks so situated or constructed as to endanger health, safety, comfort, or repose of any person. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if the person uses property in a way that annoys, injures, or endangers the health, safety, comfort, or repose of any person. 
(d)  A person commits an offense if the person uses property in a way that accumulates manure or rubbish or debris. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if the person makes filthy, littered, or trash-covered cellars, house yards, factory yards, vacant areas in rear of stores, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or premises containing trash, litter, rags, accumulation of empty barrels, boxes, crates, packing cases, lumber or firewood not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin, and other metal not neatly piled, or anything whatsoever in which flies or rats may breed or multiply or which may be a fire danger. 
(f)  A person commits an offense if the person makes any unsightly building, premises, or other structure, or any old, abandoned, or partially destroyed building or structure, or any building or structure commenced and left unfinished, or any abandoned well or excavation not properly protected and which may attract children and endanger them in the course of play. 
(g)  A person commits an offense if the person creates places used or maintained as junkyards, or dumping grounds, or for the wrecking or disassembling of automobiles, trucks, or machinery of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons, which places are kept or maintained so as to essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others. 
(h)  A person commits an offense if the person allows the keeping of any lot or piece of ground where a pool or pond is located that holds unwholesome, impure, stagnated, or offensive water. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-2(A)(1)-(A)(7), (C); altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Authority to define and prohibit any nuisance within the limits of the city and within 5,000 feet outside the city limits, Texas Local Government Code  217.042. 
Sec. 26-6. - Open storage in residential areas. 
(a)  Open storage . The open storage of commodities and materials are prohibited in residential zoned areas. Commodities and materials are defined as, but not limited to, appliances, automotive parts, building materials, firewood, furniture and landscape materials. 
(1)  Exceptions . 
a.  Back or side yards . Commodities and materials may be stored in back or side yards and must be screened by a permanent solid fence and must not be visible from a public right-of-way. 
b.  Firewood . Firewood for personal use may be stored in back or side yards and must be stored in an orderly manner. 
(2)  Exemptions . Exempt from open storage screening requirements are: 
a.  R Rural and E Estate zoning districts; and 
b.  Patio and lawn furniture for residential use. 
(b)  Nuisance . A violation of this section is declared a nuisance and may be enforced 5,000 feet outside the City limits. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-2(A)(8), (C); Ord. No. 2018-4058 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-19-2018) 
State Law reference- Authority to define and prohibit any nuisance within the limits of the city and within 5,000 feet outside the city limits, Texas Local Government Code  217.042. 
Sec. 26-7. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Disorderly Conduct Ordinance of the City of College Station, Texas." 
(b)  Disorderly conduct defined. A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, with an intent to cause public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance, or if with the knowledge that the person is probable to create such public danger, alarm, disorder, or nuisance, the person willfully or otherwise does any of the following acts: 
(1)  Creates a disturbance of the public order by an act of violence or by an act likely to produce violence. 
(2)  Engages in violent, threatening, or tumultuous behavior. 
(3)  Causes an increased danger of harm to persons or property by failing to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a Police Officer, where three or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity. 
(4)  Damages, befouls, or disturbs public property or property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy, or physically offensive condition. 
(c)  Certain acts unlawful. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or pitch any bottle, or other missile or thing capable of inflicting injury into, through, or over any crowd, group, or body of people at any football game, baseball game, performance, exhibition, or any other lawful assembly or meeting. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the audience at any show, theater, public gathering, performance, exhibition, or any other lawful assembly or meeting by boisterous talking, whistling, stomping of feet, or any rude or indecent act or conduct. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for three or more persons to assemble upon the property which is under the control of the City and designated for a specific purpose, with intent to assemble a crowd thereon for purposes other than educational or recreational or use the same for the purpose of preaching, begging, speechmaking, selling or offering for sale any goods, wares, services, merchandise, or other commodities without first having obtained written permission from the City Council. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person, family, or other groups of persons to camp within the corporate limits of the City without first having obtained written permission from the City Council. 
(d)  Penalty; exceptions. 
(1)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section, after being warned by any City Police Officer or by any person in charge of such properties to abate such violation, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to peaceful picketing, public speaking, or other lawful expressions of opinion not in contravention of other laws. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-20; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 26-8. - Noise. 
    A violation of this section is declared a nuisance and may be enforced 5,000 feet outside the City limits. A person commits an offense if the person allows or maintains an unreasonable noise: 
(1)  Daytime noise. 
a.  During the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. that, when measured from the property line of a residence located in residential zoned property, exceeds 63 decibels and would disturb or annoy a person of ordinary sensibilities; or 
b.  During the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. that, when measured from a contiguous interior wall of a residence that is a multiunit residence located in residential zoned property, exceeds 55 decibels and would disturb or annoy a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(2)  Nighttime noise. 
a.  During the hours of 10:01 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. that, when measured from the property line of a residence located in residential zoned property, exceeds 56 decibels and would disturb or annoy a person of ordinary sensibilities; or 
b.  During the hours of 10:01 p.m. to 6:59 a.m. that, when measured from a contiguous interior wall of a residence that is a multiunit residence located in residential zoned property, exceeds 50 decibels and would disturb or annoy a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(3)  Exemptions. 
a.  Necessary construction or property maintenance, including the use of lawnmowers, during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
1.  For a person to perform construction work before 6:00 a.m. or end later than 10:00 p.m. a permit must be sought and obtained from the City Building Official, and if the Building Official concludes that because of the construction operations involved construction at that time is reasonable and necessary. 
2.  Construction work in public rights-of-way or easements by the City or the Texas Department of Transportation. 
b.  Use of properly maintained air conditioning units. 
(4)  Wolf Pen Creek Amphitheater. 
a.  If a user, renter, or any person occupying Wolf Pen Creek Amphitheater makes or allows an unreasonable noise that would disturb or annoy a person of ordinary sensibilities the City will notify that person to lower the noise to a reasonable level. 
b.  If the noise level is not lowered the person may be ordered to cease use of the amphitheater. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-2(A)(10), (C); Ord. No. 2017-3926 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-11-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority to define and prohibit any nuisance within the limits of the city and within 5,000 feet outside the city limits, Texas Local Government Code  217.042. 
Sec. 26-9. - Public urination and defecation. 
(a)  A violation of this section is declared a nuisance and may be enforced 5,000 feet outside the City limits. A person commits an offense if the person urinates or defecates: 
(1)  In or on a public street, alley, sidewalk, yard, park, building, structure, plaza, or right-of-way, or any other public place; 
(2)  In any place that may be seen from a residence or business; or 
(3)  In public or open view. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section if the person is in a restroom using a receptacle designed for urination or defecation. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.)  7-2(A)(11), (C); Ord. No. 2016-3775, exh. A, 6-9-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority to define and prohibit any nuisance within the limits of the city and within 5,000 feet outside the city limits, Texas Local Government Code  217.042. 
Sec. 26-10. - Litter control on public property. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized receptacle means a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in the City. 
    City road or right-of-way means the entire width between the property road lines of a road, street, right-of-way, thoroughfare, bridge or park located in the City, if any part thereof is open to the public for vehicular traffic. This section regulates all roads, streets, rights-of-way, thoroughfares, bridges and parks maintained by the City whether dedicated, purchased or acquired by prescription. 
    Construction materials means all waste, refuse, concrete, rock/brick or materials resulting from construction or demolition projects. 
    Earth materials means substances such as dirt, sand, gravel, mud, clay, wood chips capable of blowing or spilling thereby creating unsightliness and/or creating a hazard for the general public. 
    Garbage means all decayable waste from public and private establishments and restaurants, including vegetable, animal and fish offal, and animal and fish carcasses. The term "garbage" does not include sewage, body wastes or industrial byproducts. 
    Junk means all worn out, worthless and discarded material, including odds and ends, iron or other metal, glass and cordage. 
    Litter means garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
    Park means a park, playground, recreation area, nature area or other public area in the City, or used by the City and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings. 
    Refuse means any garbage, rubbish, paper or other decayable and non-decayable waste, including vegetable matter and animal and fish carcasses. The term "refuse" does not include sewage from a public or private establishment or residence. 
    Rubbish means all non-decayable waste, except ashes, from a public or private establishment or residence. 
    Sanitary landfill means a controlled area of land upon which solid waste materials are disposed of in accordance with the standards, rules, regulations, and orders established by the Texas Department of Health Services. 
(b)  No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the City except in public receptacles or in other authorized receptacles for collection or in the official City sanitary landfill. 
(c)  Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in other authorized receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(d)  No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, on any curb, street or other public place within the City, the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. No person shall, without permission of the City, store, dump or dispose of any litter, construction or earth materials, or other solid waste on any City road, street, right-of-way, thoroughfare, bridge, park or other public place. 
(e)  A person commits an offense if that person, without prior permission of the City, stores, dumps or disposes of junk, garbage, rubbish, refuse or other solid waste on a City road, street, right-of-way, thoroughfare, bridge or park. 
(f)  Possession of glass in areas where prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person in the City, on any right-of-way or street, sidewalk or pedestrian-way in the Northgate Area, as defined below, to possess any glass beverage container. 
(1)  Northgate Area is that area bounded by and included within University Drive to the south; South College Avenue to the east; the City of Bryan to the north; and Wellborn Road to the west. This specifically includes the four boundary streets and their intersections with each other. 
(2)  Exemptions: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, nothing in this section shall prohibit the possession of, including, but not limited to, the following glass containers in the Northgate Area: 
a.  Baby bottles containing products for consumption by babies. 
b.  Possession of glass containers in motor vehicles, buildings not owned or controlled by the City, residential structures, or inside premises located in the Northgate Area. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-4; altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Littering, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 365. 
Sec. 26-11. - Host responsibilities of parties in residential areas. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Host means the owner of the property as listed with the Brazos County Appraisal District and/or those persons listed on the lease for a residence. 
    Party means a planned or unplanned gathering of two or more people at a residence. 
    Residence means a dwelling unit in an apartment, townhouse, duplex or other multifamily residential structure, or a single-family residence in a residential area. The term "residence" includes the entire premises of a residence, including the residence building, garage, carport, driveway and yard, and adjacent common areas, parking areas, sidewalks and streets. 
    Residential area means an area that is within a residential zoning district. 
    Unlawful level of noise means any sound that because of its volume, level, duration or character annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities within the limits of the City. 
(b)  Responsibilities of hosts. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this section for a host to allow or permit the following at a party: 
a.  Violations of the parking regulations as set forth in Chapter 38; 
b.  An unreasonable level of noise; or 
c.  Litter that is not properly disposed of by 10:00 a.m. of the day following the day the party started. 
(2)  It is not a defense to prosecution that security officers who were hired for a party failed to properly fulfill the host's duties under this section. 
(3)  It is prima facie evidence that the host violated this section if a Police or Code Enforcement Officer issues the host a written warning or citation to person's attending the host's party for violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Enforcements of other laws. Nothing in this section affects a Peace Officer's authority to enforce other laws such as disorderly conduct, littering, parking and alcohol-related offenses against persons who violate those laws. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-11) 
Chapter 28 - MUNICIPAL COURT OF RECORD[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts of record, Texas Government Code  30.00001 et seq. 

Sec. 28-1. - Generally. 
(a)  The City Council hereby establishes the College Station Municipal Court as a municipal court of record in order to provide a more efficient disposition of cases arising in the City and in order to more effectively enforce the ordinances of the City, and shall be known as the Municipal Court of Record in the City. 
(b)  The Municipal Court of Record is established pursuant to the authority granted in Texas Government Code chapter 30, subchapter A (Texas Government Code  30.00001 et seq.) and specifically granted all jurisdictional powers set out in Texas Government Code  30.00005, Jurisdiction, and the such Act. The terms set forth therein are hereby adopted governing the operation of said court. 
(c)  The Municipal Court of Record shall be presided over by a Municipal Judge who shall be appointed by the City Council for a term of two years. The Judge must be a citizen of the United States and of the State. 
(d)  The Municipal Judge shall be the presiding judge of the Municipal Court of Record in the City. Associate Municipal Judges may be appointed as provided by Section 28 of the City Charter. Associate Municipal Judges shall meet the same qualifications as the Municipal Judge. 
(e)  The City Manager or designee shall appoint a Clerk of the Municipal Court of Record who shall perform duties in accordance with State law, the City Charter and City ordinances. During proceedings of the Court, the Clerk and other Court personnel shall serve at the direction of the Municipal Judge. At all other times, they shall serve at the direction and supervision of the City Manager who shall have the authority to remove the Court Clerk or the Court personnel according to rules set forth in the City's personnel policies. 
(f)  The City Manager or designee shall retain a Court reporter who must meet the qualifications provided by law for official Court reporters. The Court reporter or Court staff may use written notes, transcribing equipment, video or audio recording equipment, or a combination of those methods to record the proceedings of the Court. The record shall be kept for a 20-day period beginning the day after the last day of the Court proceeding, trial or denial of motion for new trial, whichever occurs last. The Court reporter is not required to be present during proceedings of the Municipal Court of Record, provided that proceedings that are required to be recorded are recorded by a good quality electronic recording device. 
(g)  The Municipal Judge shall supervise and control the operation and clerical functions of the Administrative Department of the Municipal Court, including the Court's personnel, during the proceedings or docket of the Court. 
(h)  The Municipal Judge shall supervise the selection of persons for jury service. 
(i)  In the event of an appeal, the appellant shall pay a transcript preparation fee in the amount established in Section 2-117. The transcript preparation fee does not include the fee for an actual transcript of the proceedings. The Clerk shall note the payment of the fee on the docket of the Court. If the case is reversed on appeal, the fee shall be refunded to the appellant. In addition to the transcript preparation fee, the fee for the actual transcript of the proceedings and statement of facts must be paid by the appellant, pursuant to Texas Government Code  30.00014 and 30.00019. 
(j)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the City Council that the phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this chapter are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any Court of competent jurisdiction such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this chapter, except for the provisions for appointment and direction and control by the City Manager of the Clerk of the Municipal Court of Records, in Subsections (e) and (g) of this section. Should these provisions be declared invalid, the Court shall immediately revert back to a Municipal Court as it currently exists, with the Clerk of the Municipal Court being appointed by the City Manager and this entire chapter shall be of no force and effect. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-31; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 28-2. - City Marshal. 
(a)  Establishment. There is hereby created the position of City Marshal, which position may be occupied by one or more persons as provided for by the annual City budget and approved by Council. The City Marshal shall meet all qualifications necessary to be certified as a Peace Officer by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officers Standards and Education (TCLEOSE). 
(b)  Duties. The City Marshal shall report directly to the Municipal Court Administrator, who is authorized to hire, terminate, and otherwise supervise the City Marshal; provided, however, that, at the direction of either the Municipal Court Administrator or the Municipal Judge, the City Marshal shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Execute warrants of arrest, subpoenas, and other legal process issuing out of the City's Municipal Court; and 
(2)  Perform other duties as assigned by the Municipal Court Administrator or the Municipal Judge. 
(c)  Authority. The City Marshal shall serve as a Peace Officer and have full police authority in the exercise of assigned duties. However, they shall not be assigned the duties that are presently assigned to the Police Department of the City. The City Marshal is not a member of the City's Police Department but is a paid Law Enforcement Officer for the purpose of qualifying for survivor's assistance benefits under the provisions of Texas Government Code ch. 615. 
(d)  Oath. Each City Marshal shall be required to take an oath of office before entering upon the discharge of official duties. The oath shall be subscribed by the person taking it and shall be filed and preserved in the Office of the City Secretary. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-7) 
State Law reference- Other court personnel authorized, Texas Government Code  30.00009. 
Sec. 28-3. - Juvenile Case Manager. 
(a)  Creation. The Municipal Court Administrator is authorized to create the position of Juvenile Case Manager and staff the position pursuant to Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. 45.056. 
(b)  Fund. 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subsection (b), shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Convicted shall have the meaning as defined in Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. (e). 
    Fee means the Juvenile Case Manager fee established under this section. 
    Fund means the Juvenile Case Manager fund established under this section. 
(2)  Establishment. Pursuant to Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.0174, a Juvenile Case Manager fund is established, which will be a separate fund in the City Treasury to be administered by or under the direction of the City Council. 
(3)  Juvenile Case Manager fee. Each defendant convicted of a fine-only misdemeanor offense in the Municipal Court shall pay a Juvenile Case Manager fee established in Section 2-117 as a cost of Court in addition to any other fines, penalties, or Court costs required by City ordinance or State or Federal law. A separate fee must be paid for each separate conviction of a fine-only misdemeanor offense. 
(4)  Waiver of fee for financial hardship. The Municipal Judge may waive the Juvenile Case Manager fee in the case of financial hardship. 
(5)  Use of collected fee only for certain expenses. The Municipal Clerk shall collect the fee and pay it to the City Treasury for deposit in the fund. The fund may be used only to finance the salary, benefits, training, travel expenses, office supplies, and other necessary expenses relating to the position of a Juvenile Case Manager employee under Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. 45.056. 
(c)  Juvenile Case Manager Code of Ethics. 
(1)  Preamble. The goal of the Juvenile Case Manager is to assist the Court in administering the Court's juvenile docket and in supervising its Court orders in juvenile cases. The mission of the Juvenile Case Manager is to assist judges in providing juveniles the resources to shape their futures, connect with the community, and become law abiding citizens. When applying this Code of Ethics, keep foremost in mind that the City is guided at all times by the values of integrity, excellence, compassion, and respect for the dignity of every person. 
(2)  Standards. 
a.  Confidentiality. A Juvenile Case Manager shall not disclose to any unauthorized person any confidential information acquired in the course of employment. A Juvenile Case Manager shall not violate the confidentiality of juvenile clients, unless it is to seek consultation services from within the case management program, school campus, or the juvenile has threatened to harm himself or herself or others, or to provide details of any criminal activity or enterprise. 
b.  Conflicts of interest. A Juvenile Case Manager shall be alert to and avoid conflicts of interest that interfere with the exercise of professional discretion and impartial judgment. In order to maintain the community's trust in the judicial system, a Juvenile Case Manager should avoid soliciting or accepting improper gifts, gratuities, or loans, and should avoid engaging in business relationships that give rise to an appearance of impropriety. 
c.  Competence. A Juvenile Case Manager shall endeavor at all times to perform official duties properly and with courtesy and diligence. A Juvenile Case Manager shall fulfill his or her duty and represent himself or herself only within the boundaries of their education, training, license, certification, consultation received, supervised experience, or other relevant professional experience. 
d.  Respect for the law. A Juvenile Case Manager shall abide by all Federal, State, County, and Municipal laws, guidelines, ordinances and rules. A Juvenile Case Manager shall be familiar with the Texas Code of Judicial Conduct and the basic standards to which members of the judiciary are held. 
e.  Abuse of position. A Juvenile Case Manager shall not use or attempt to use his or her official position to secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for himself or herself, or any other person. A Juvenile Case Manager shall always maintain an appropriate relationship with juveniles coming under the jurisdiction of the Court. A Juvenile Case Manager shall not discriminate against any person on the basis of age, sex, creed, sexual preference, disability, or national origin. 
(3)  Enforcement. Any alleged violation of applicable ethical standards shall be subject to investigation and discipline by the City's designated non-judicial department or supervisor. 
(d)  Juvenile Case Manager training standards. The Juvenile Case Manager shall adhere to the pre-service and in-service training standards promulgated by the Texas Municipal Court Education Center and shall receive training in at least the following areas: 
(1)  The role of the Juvenile Case Manager; 
(2)  Case planning and management; 
(3)  Applicable procedural and substantive law; 
(4)  Courtroom proceedings and presentation; 
(5)  Services to at-risk youth under Texas Family Code ch. 264, subch. D (Texas Family Code  264.301 et seq.); 
(6)  Local programs and services for juveniles and methods by which juveniles may access those programs and services; and 
(7)  Detecting and preventing abuse, exploitation, and neglect of juveniles. 
(e)  Annual review. Annual review of the Juvenile Case Manager shall be performed jointly by the Municipal Court Administrator and Presiding Judge to ensure implementation of the rules adopted in this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-9; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 28-4. - Municipal Court building security fund. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Convicted shall have the meaning as defined in Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.017(c). 
    Fee means the Municipal Court building security fee established under this section. 
    Fund means the Municipal Court building security fund established under this section. 
    Security devices and security services shall have the meaning as described in Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.017(d). 
(b)  Pursuant to Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.017(c), there is hereby established the Municipal Court Building Security fund, which will be a separate fund in the City Treasury to be administered by or under the direction of the City Council. 
(c)  Each defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the Municipal Court shall pay a Municipal Court building security fee established in Section 2-117 as a cost of Court, in addition to any other fines, penalties, or Court costs required by City ordinance or State or Federal law. A separate fee must be paid for each separate conviction of a misdemeanor offense. 
(d)  The municipal clerk shall collect the fee and pay it to the City Treasury for deposit in the fund. The fund may be used only to finance security personnel, security devices and security services for any building housing a Municipal Court of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-8) 
Sec. 28-5. - Municipal Court technology fund. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Convicted shall have the meaning as defined in Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.0172(b). 
    Fee means the Municipal Court technology fee established under this section. 
    Fund means the Municipal Court technology fund established under this section. 
    Technological enhancements means all devices and services described in Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.0172(d). 
(b)  Pursuant to Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.0172, there is hereby established the Municipal Court technology fund, which will be a separate fund in the City Treasury to be administered by or under the direction of the City Council. 
(c)  Each defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the Municipal Court of Record shall pay a Municipal Court technology fee established in Section 2-117 in addition to any other fines, penalties, or Court costs required by City ordinance or State or Federal law. A separate fee must be paid for each separate conviction of a misdemeanor offense. 
(d)  The Municipal Clerk shall collect the fee and pay it to the City Treasury for deposit in the fund. The fund may be used only to finance the purchase of or to maintain technological enhancements for any Municipal Court of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-10; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 28-6. - Municipal Court child safety fund. 
(a)  Established. Pursuant to Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. 102.014(b), a Child Safety Fund is established. 
(b)  Authorization for fund. For every violation of an ordinance, regulation, or order regulating the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles as allowed by Texas Transportation Code  542.202 or ch. 682 in the Municipal Court as a cost of Court, the amount established in Section 2-117 shall be assessed in addition to any other fines, penalties, or Court costs and shall be collected in the same manner that other fines in the case are collected. 
(c)  Use of money collected. The money collected under this section in a Municipal Court case must be used for a school crossing guard program if the City operates one. If the City does not operate a school crossing guard program or if the money received from Court costs from Municipal Court cases exceeds the amount necessary to fund the school crossing guard program, the City may: 
(1)  Deposit the additional money in an interest-bearing account; 
(2)  Expend the additional money for programs designed to enhance child safety, health, or nutrition, including child abuse prevention and intervention and drug and alcohol abuse prevention; or 
(3)  Expend the additional money for programs designed to enhance public safety and security. 
(d)  Records of money collected. The municipal clerk shall keep separate records of money collected under this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-12; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 28-7. - Municipal Court special expense fee. 
(a)  Special expense fee. Pursuant to Texas Code of Criminal Procedure art. 45.203(c), a special expense fee is established. 
(b)  Authorization for fee. Such fee shall be the maximum authorized by such article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-13; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Chapter 30 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of sanitation, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 342; general authority to define and abate nuisances, Texas Local Government Code  217.042; authority to define and prohibit any nuisance within the limits of the city and within 5,000 feet outside the city limits, Texas Local Government Code  217.042. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOT CLEARING 

Sec. 30-19. - Violation declared nuisance; enforcement. 
    A violation of this article is declared a nuisance and may be enforced 5,000 feet outside the City limits. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-1(G)) 
State Law reference- Authority to define and prohibit any nuisance within the limits of the city and within 5,000 feet outside the city limits, Texas Local Government Code  217.042. 
Sec. 30-20. - Work or improvements done by the City and notice requirements. 
(a)  If the owner of property in the City does not comply with this article within seven days of notice of a violation, the City may: 
(1)  Do the work or make the improvements required; and 
(2)  Pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property. 
(b)  The notice must be given: 
(1)  Personally, to the owner in writing; 
(2)  By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or 
(3)  If personal service cannot be obtained: 
a.  By publication at least once; 
b.  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
c.  By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. 
(c)  If the City mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with Subsection (b) of this section and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(d)  In a notice provided under this section, the City may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the property, or by personally delivering the notice, that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the City without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the City has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the City without notice may take any action permitted by Subsection (a) of this section and assess its expenses as provided by Texas Health and Safety Code  342.007. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-1(E)) 
Sec. 30-21. - Stagnant water prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or occupies any house, building, establishment, lot, or yard in the City to permit or allow holes, places, or containers where water may accumulate and become stagnant. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-1(A)) 
State Law reference- Municipal power concerning stagnant water and other unsanitary conditions, Texas Health and Safety Code  342.004. 
Sec. 30-22. - Accumulation of trash, carrion, and filth prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or occupies any house, building, establishment, lot, or yard in the City to permit or allow any trash, rubbish, carrion, filth, or other impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain thereon or therein. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-1(B)) 
State Law reference- Municipal power concerning filth, carrion, and other unwholesome matter, Texas Health and Safety Code  342.003. 
Sec. 30-23. - Weeds and other unsightly vegetation prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, claiming, occupying, or having supervision or control of any real property within the City to permit weeds, brush, or any objectionable or unsightly vegetation to grow due to lack of vegetation management upon any such real property. It shall be the duty of such person to keep the area from the line of the person's property to the curb line adjacent to it free and clear of matter referred to above. Objectionable or unsightly vegetation includes all weeds and grasses that exceed 12 inches in height. 
(b)  Exemptions: 
(1)  State highway rights-of-way. 
(2)  Agricultural areas, agricultural meaning crop production and/or grazing. 
(3)  Heavily wooded areas filled with uncultivated underbrush. 
(4)  The cultivation of concentrated wildflowers from March 1 until June 15 of each year in areas where grasses and weeds do not exceed 18 inches in height. 
(5)  Areas that are zoned R Rural or E Estate. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-1(C)) 
State Law reference- Authority to require the owner of real property to keep the property free from weeds, Texas Local Government Code  342.004. 
Sec. 30-24. - View of traffic obstructed by trees, shrubs, and vegetation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to allow any vegetation including, but not limited to, trees, shrubs, bushes, plants, grass, weeds, or any other type of vegetation to grow at or near any intersections, roads, sidewalks or rights-of-way obstructing or interfering with the view or travel of any pedestrian, cyclist or motor vehicle operator. 
(b)  The City Manager or designee is authorized to remove any vegetation violating this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  7-1(D); Ord. No. 2018-4056 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-19-2018) 
Chapter 32 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to acquire and maintain parks, museums and historic sites, Texas Local Government Code ch. 331; authority for parks, recreational facilities and airports, Texas Government Code  1508.001 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1-32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC CONDUCT IN PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 32-19. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall be in force in all park and recreation areas, including playgrounds, golf courses, and swimming pools, of the City located within or without the corporate limits of said City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(intro. )) 
Sec. 32-20. - Condition of use. 
    Compliance with rules and regulations of this article is a condition of the use of the public parks and recreation areas of the City, and all Police Officers shall have the right and power to arrest any person who may violate any of the rules, regulations, orders, or requirements of any ordinance or general law relating to the maintenance of the park and recreation areas of the City located within or without the corporate limits of said City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(Q)) 
Sec. 32-21. - Payment of fee. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use or enter upon any swimming pool, golf course or other park or recreation facilities for which a fee is charged, without first having paid said fee. Payment of said fee shall entitle the person to use the facilities for the sole purpose for which the facility is intended or designated. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(B)) 
Sec. 32-22. - Responsibility for damages and services. 
    The person, group, organization or entity reserving the use of a park facility shall be responsible for all damages to City property and for the cost of any unreasonable wear and tear of park facilities or services, emergency or public safety services including police and fire, provided to, at or dispatched to the City park or City park facility as a result of such person's, group's or the organization's misuse, improper or unlawful use of the park facility. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(F)(13)) 
Sec. 32-23. - Restricted areas and curfew. 
(a)  Restricted areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain in a park or recreation area which is designated as restricted or is closed for the season. Restricted areas will be designated by posted signs. 
(b)  Curfews. Except for designated camping areas and exempt events, no person shall enter or remain in any park during the hours the park is closed. Events approved in advance by the Director as exempt from curfew restrictions will be designated by the Director of Parks and Recreation for the City. All neighborhood City Parks will be closed between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. daily. All community parks (Central, Bee Creek, Thomas and Southwood) will be closed between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. daily. Closing hours will be posted at all parks. 
(c)  Penalty. Anyone violating this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(I)) 
Sec. 32-24. - Flowers, shrubs, trees, and artificial improvements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to mark any park property, or to handle, cut, or pluck, any flower, shrub, or tree, or to deface, mark, injure, damage, or destroy any natural or artificial improvement in any park or recreation area. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(A); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 32-25. - Dogs. 
    Except as provided in Texas Human Resources Code  121.003, ensuring accessibility to disabled persons, or any designated "leash free" area, it shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of any dog to keep or permit the same in or about any park or recreation area unless such dog is kept under restraint at all times by means of a leash.;hn0; (Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(J); altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. 2018-4061 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-13-2018) 
Sec. 32-26. - Other animals. 
    Except as provided in Texas Human Resources Code  229.001, it shall be unlawful for any person to tether or pasture, or allow or cause to be tethered or pastured, any cow, horse, mule, fowl, or domestic animal in or upon any park or recreation area. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(K); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 32-27. - Wildlife. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to frighten, annoy, or injure, or attempt to frighten, annoy, or injure any wild or native animal or bird in any park or recreation area. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(C)) 
Sec. 32-28. - Disposal of litter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit paper, glass, metal, litter, or trash of any description on any lawn, driveway, path, or other place in any park and recreation area except in receptacles provided therefor. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(D)) 
Sec. 32-29. - Advertising. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to display any advertising matter by signs or to distribute advertising matter of any character within any parkways, medians, parks, golf courses, swimming pools, or other recreation areas of the City without permission of the Parks and Recreation Department. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(E)) 
Sec. 32-30. - Practicing golf. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to practice golf in any portion of a park or recreation area not designated for that purpose; provided, however, that the practice of golf with knit or plastic balls may be permitted in any open area not specifically designed or designated for some other specialized activity. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(G)) 
Sec. 32-31. - Washing vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wash a vehicle in any park or recreation area not designated for that purpose. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(L)) 
Sec. 32-32. - Kites and model airplanes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fly a kite or propel or guide a model airplane in any park or recreation area traversed by high voltage transmission lines. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(M)) 
Sec. 32-33. - Firearms and air guns. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or about his or her person or discharge any air guns, within or across any park or recreation area not designated for that purpose. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol, or firearms of any kind, within or across any park or recreation area not designated for that purpose. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(N)) 
Sec. 32-34. - Wading, swimming, fishing, or boating. 
    It shall be unlawful for any persons to wade, swim, fish, or boat within any park or recreation area not so designed. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(O)) 
Sec. 32-35. - Traffic regulations. 
(a)  Access. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or propel any vehicle in, over, or through any park or recreation area except along and upon park drives, streets, or boulevards or other areas designated for driving purposes. 
(b)  Speeds. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any park drive, boulevard, street, or other vehicular thoroughfare at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(P)) 
Sec. 32-36. - Glass containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess glass beverage containers in any portion of a park or recreation area. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(H)) 
Secs. 32-37-32-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE PERMITS 

Sec. 32-61. - Required. 
    In addition to meeting any other provision of this Code, a permit from the Director of Parks and Recreation or designee, hereinafter referred to as "Director," is required prior to sponsoring, holding or conducting the following uses in a City park or City park facility: 
(1)  Any organized sport activity including sports leagues and associations, tournament play, and activities related thereto including concessions, rallies, award ceremonies, etc.; 
(2)  Any exhibit, music event, play, motion picture or similar form of entertainment; 
(3)  Any assembly or parade; 
(4)  Any use of amplified sound equipment; 
(5)  Any sale of food, drinks, or other goods; 
(6)  Any sale of services, including boot camps, tennis lessons, day care, etc.; 
(7)  Any park use during times when the City park or City park facility is normally closed to the public; 
(8)  Cutting or removal of any trees. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(F)(1)) 
Sec. 32-62. - Application procedure. 
    A person required to get a permit hereunder must make application with the Director. The application shall contain the following, to wit: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number and email address of the person or organization applying for the permit and, if an organization, its officers; 
(2)  The exact nature of the use or activity for which the permit is being sought; 
(3)  The days and hours for which the permit is desired; 
(4)  The part and the portion of the park or park facility desired to be used to carry out the proposed use or activity; 
(5)  An estimate of the anticipated attendance; 
(6)  Payment of a fee, if any, as may from time to time be established by Section 2-117; and 
(7)  Any other information that the Director determines to be reasonably necessary. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(F)(3); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 32-63. - Time of application. 
    Application shall be made to the City filed with the Director for consideration not less than two days nor more than 365 days before the date of the proposed use of the City park or City park facility. Emergency requests for permits may be submitted and considered at the Director's discretion. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(F)(4)) 
Sec. 32-64. - Criteria for granting. 
    A permit shall be issued unless the Director finds: 
(1)  That the proposed activity or use will unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public use and enjoyment of the City park or City park facility; 
(2)  That the proposed activity or use detrimentally affects the public health, safety or welfare; 
(3)  That the facilities desired have been reserved for another activity or use at the day and hour requested in the application; 
(4)  That false or misleading information is contained in the application or required information is omitted; 
(5)  That the proposed use conflicts with a City-sponsored event or program; or 
(6)  That the event would violate any Federal, State or Municipal law. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(F)(5)) 
Sec. 32-65. - Granting. 
    The Director will make a decision on the permit application as promptly as possible after the applicant has provided all the information required by the application, including in the form and manner required, but in no case later than ten business days after the date a complete application is submitted. The Director shall apprise an applicant in writing of approval of such application or of the reasons for refusing a permit or any conditions which are required for the issuance of the permit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(F)(8)) 
Sec. 32-66. - Conditions authorized. 
    The Director may impose reasonable conditions or restrictions on the granting of a permit, including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Restrictions on fires, fireworks, amplified sound, dancing, sports, use of animals, equipment or vehicles, the number of persons to be present, the location of any bandstand or stage, or any other use which appears likely to create a risk of unreasonable harm to the use and enjoyment of the park or park facility; 
(2)  A requirement that the applicant post a reasonable deposit or security for the repair of any damage to park property or the cost of cleanup, or both; 
(3)  A requirement that the applicant pay a reasonable fee to defray the cost of furnishing adequate security forces by the City at the proposed use or activity; and 
(4)  A requirement that the permittee furnish additional sanitary and refuse facilities that might be reasonably necessary, based on the use or activity for which the permit is being sought. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(F)(6)) 
Sec. 32-67. - Abide by applicable rules. 
    A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all other applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in the permit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(F)(11)) 
Sec. 32-68. - Indemnification of City. 
    The permittee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers, agents and employees from any and all actions, claims, costs, damages and expenses, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees and court costs, arising out of the permittee's use of the City park or City park facility. Furthermore, such indemnification shall apply with respect to all acts or omissions of the permittee and the permittee's participants, students, spectators, invitees, licensees, relatives, friends and their respective invitees or licensees associated therewith. The person to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury to persons or property whatsoever by reason of the negligence of the person to whom such permit is issued and person's agents, officers or employees. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(F)(12)) 
Sec. 32-69. - Transfer. 
    Permits shall not be transferable without the written consent of the Director. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(F)(7)) 
Sec. 32-70. - Display. 
    Permits required by this division shall be posted in the area where the activity is conducted or produced and exhibited upon demand of any Law Enforcement Officer of the City or any authorized park employee of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(F)(2)) 
Sec. 32-71. - Revocation. 
    The Director shall have the authority to revoke a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule, ordinance, State or Federal law or upon the violation of any condition or restriction under which the permit was issued. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(F)(9)) 
Sec. 32-72. - Appeals. 
    Any person dissatisfied with a decision of the Director in failing to grant a permit or to revoke a permit shall have the right to appeal in writing within ten days of the date of the Director's written decision. Such appeal shall be presented by the applicant in writing to the City Manager, who shall consider the matter under the standards established in this division. The City Manager shall sustain or overrule the Director's decision within 14 days of the date of receipt of the written appeal from the applicant. The City Manager's decision on such appeal shall be final. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-14(F)(10)) 
Chapter 34 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal streets, alleys, etc., Texas Transportation Code ch. 311 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Lease of City fiber optic cable facilities; authority. 
(a)  Authority to develop and negotiate lease of City-owned fiber optic cable or City-owned conduit (referred to hereafter as "fiber optic cable facilities") is as follows: 
(1)  The City may lease to private entities to the extent permitted by State law those fiber optic cable facilities that have been installed for purpose of use as a conduit for fiber optic cable only where such fiber optic cable facilities: 
a.  Are determined by the City Manager to be surplus to the immediate and foreseeable needs of the City; and 
b.  Are not included in the City's electric transmission cost of service (TCOS). 
(2)  The City Manager or designee is authorized to negotiate the lease of fiber optic cable facilities. 
(3)  The City Manager will adopt procedures for administering the City's lease of fiber optic cable facilities. 
(4)  The City Manager will determine the availability of fiber optic cable facilities for lease. 
(b)  The City Council and individual Council Members, either individually or as employees of a private entity, are prohibited from leasing fiber optic cable facilities. 
(c)  The City Manager will issue a report on the status of lease agreements for fiber optic cable facilities to the City Council on at least an annual basis. 
(d)  Other provisions. Lease of fiber optic cable facilities under this section does not relieve the lessee from complying with the provisions of all other ordinances, including Article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-13) 
Sec. 34-2. - Encroachments upon easements. 
(a)  City Council to grant license; findings to be made. The City Council, upon good cause shown, may grant a license to encroach into an easement when it is in the opinion of the City Council that undue hardship would result from requiring remedial steps to be taken to restore the easement to its former status. The City Council may consider the proposed use of the property involved, existing uses of land in the neighborhood, the utilities located in the easement, the purpose of the easement, and the probable effect of the encroachment upon the immediate preservation of the order, public health, safety, convenience and welfare of the community. In order for a license to be granted, the City Council must find all of the following: 
(1)  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the property involved such that the strict enforcement of encroachment policies would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the property. 
(2)  That the license is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of the substantial property right of the applicant. 
(3)  That the utilization of the easement area for the access to and the operation of utilities, including drainage, will not be impaired. 
(4)  That the granting of the license will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or injurious to another party in the area. The findings, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the minutes of the meeting at which the license is considered. Licenses will not be routinely granted. When a license is granted, it will be granted if order will be preserved and the public health, safety and welfare will not be affected. Pecuniary hardship of the applicant, standing alone, will not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
(b)  Submittal of information. The City Engineer shall specify the information that is required to be submitted with the application. 
(c)  Application fee. An application for a license to encroach shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee as established in Section 2-117. 
(d)  License may be contingent upon remedial action. If the City Council so requires, a license may be granted subject to the licensee's completion of all remedial action necessary to accommodate the encroachment so the City may utilize the area so encroached. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-4; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-3. - Underground electric utility service. 
(a)  Electric service installation. 
(1)  All new electric utility service shall be installed underground in all building plots. All lateral electric and service lines supplying electric utility service shall be placed underground. 
(2)  All upgraded electric utility service shall be installed underground in all building plots wherever such is sound and practical from an engineering standpoint as reasonably determined by the City. 
(3)  Overhead feeder lines may be placed within dedicated easements in building plots when determined by the City to be necessary and appropriate, pursuant to the following criteria: 
a.  Along the perimeter of the platted building plots. 
b.  Adjacent to or within the right-of-way of thoroughfares identified on the current Thoroughfare Plan of the City and approved for the location of overhead utilities. 
c.  Within alleys or other areas identified for the location of aerial utility service on the approved building plot plat. 
(4)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any structure on the building plot, the builder shall dedicate easements upon forms approved by the City for the installation of utilities, including electric. All liens and other ownership interests shall be subordinated to the easement use. 
(5)  Where the electric service is placed underground, all street lighting and site lighting equipment shall be placed underground except for the poles on which the lights are to be affixed. 
(6)  The Builder shall be responsible for furnishing and installing, and the expenses related thereto, of conduit, transformer pads, pull boxes, and any other civil work required for the installation of all on-site underground development feeder, lateral and service lines utilized to provide electric utility service to the building plot. The specifications for the conduit shall be approved by the Electrical Department prior to installation. The installation of the conduit shall be inspected and approved by the Electrical Department at the time of installation. 
(7)  Where electric service is placed underground, all auxiliary equipment for such service, including, but not limited to, transformers, junction enclosures and switching devices, shall be pad-mounted on grade or shall be placed underground. 
(8)  Temporary utility service may be provided via overhead line extension. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Builder means any person, firm or corporation who applies for or is issued a permit by the Building Official to erect, construct, enlarge, install, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing or fire protection system located within the municipal corporation; or a permit or permission to develop property. 
    Building plot means all of the land within a project, whether one or more lots, developed according to a common plan or design for similar or compatible uses, which singularly or in phases is treated as such for site plan review purposes. The determination of the boundaries of a building plot shall be made as the first step in the site plan or project review, unless such determination has previously been made at the time of plat approval. For development, not subject to site plan review, the building plot or premises shall be the exterior boundary of any included lots, in the event that the structure is built upon more than one lot. 
    Feeder line means any line, wire, or cable and appurtenances which distributes, transmits, or delivers an electric utility service from a source to a general area or to multiple developments, and not to a specific end user. 
    Lateral line means any line, wire, or cable and appurtenances used to distribute, transmit, or deliver electric utility service from a feeder line to two or more sites or end users of the electric utility service within a specific development. 
    Lot means the physical and undivided tract or parcel of land as shown on a duly recorded plat. 
    Plot plan means a plan showing the use of land, including locations of buildings, drives, sidewalks, parking areas, drainage facilities and other facilities to be constructed, and anything else in accordance with Sections 10 and 11 of the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A) of the City. 
    Service line means any line, wire, or cable and appurtenances used to distribute, transmit, or deliver an electric utility service from a source of supply, feeder line, or lateral line directly to an end user. 
    Upgraded electric utility service means any increase in electric service capacity or any relocation of the electric service entrance. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-5; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-4. - Guidelines for consideration of requests for directional signs in public rights-of-way. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application with the City Manager, the City Manager shall review and may authorize the placing of directional signs advertising special events. Qualified special events will be evaluated based upon benefit to the community. 
(b)  Any application shall be processed for a fee established in Section 2-117 and shall be filed within the Office of the City Manager. The City Manager shall review the application based upon the criteria in Subsection (a) of this section. In the event the City Manager denies the application, the applicant may appeal the decision to the City Council. Upon receipt of written notice of an appeal from the applicant, the City Secretary shall place the application on the next available Council agenda. 
(c)  Upon the approval of an application, the City Manager shall issue a permit which shall authorize the location of no more than 50 directional signs in the rights-of-way of City streets. 
(d)  A permit shall be valid for a period of three days. Removal of all signs shall be required within 24 hours of the expiration of the permit. A bond or cash deposit in the amount of $100.00 shall be required to ensure removal of the signs. In the event that the City Manager determines that all signs have not been removed within 24 hours of the expiration of the permit, the City Manager shall notify the Public Works Department to remove the signs, and the City Manager shall apply the funds to the reimbursement of the City for the removal of the signs. 
(e)  No directional sign shall be located: 
(1)  In the sight distance triangle of intersections as it is defined in the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
(2)  Within ten feet of any curb or roadway in the event that there is no curb. 
(3)  On any State highway or roadway without a permit from the State Department of Transportation. 
(f)  All signs should be constructed of paper or cardboard material and no sign shall be greater in size than three feet by three feet. 
(g)  This section does not regulate the placement of political signs. 
(h)  Penalty. A person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-24; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-5. - Moving of houses or other buildings across City streets. 
(a)  Permit required. No houses, garages, or other buildings shall be moved across the streets or along the streets of the City, unless there shall be a permit issued by said City for the moving. 
(b)  Terms. Said permit will designate the streets to be used and the time which the moving will be done. 
(c)  Deposit required. Before any permit will be issued, a deposit of $100.00 shall be made with the City Secretary. Such fee will be held by the City until the structure is completely moved, and then such damage to City streets, bridges, and City utility lines will be repaired by the City and the costs charged to the deposit. The balance of the deposit remaining after repairs are made will be refunded to the owner. 
(d)  Penalty. A violation of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-11) 
Secs. 34-6-34-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREET, SIDEWALK, RIGHT-OF-WAY AND DRIVEWAY CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 

Sec. 34-29. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bikeway means a trail, path, part of a highway shoulder, or any other means specifically marked and assigned for bicycle use. Bikeway facilities are further classified as bike paths, lanes, and routes. 
    Corner means the point of intersection of the lines of two street curbs extended into the street intersection. 
    Cul-de-sac means a street having only one outlet to another street and terminating on the other end in a vehicular turnaround. 
    Curb return means that portion of a curb which is constructed on a curve, to connect normal street curbs at a street intersection, or at driveway approaches connecting the street curb to the driveway approach. 
    Driveway means a place on private property for vehicular traffic. 
    Driveway approach means an area or facility between the street and private property intended to provide access for vehicles from the street to private property. A driveway approach must provide access to something definite on private property, such as a parking area, a driveway, or a door at least eight feet in width, intended and used for entrance of vehicles. 
    Extraterritorial jurisdiction (within the terms of the Texas Local Government Code) means the unincorporated area, not a part of any other City, which is contiguous to the corporate limits of the City, the outer boundaries of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of the City, outward for such distances as may be stipulated in the Texas Local Government Code, in which area, the City may enjoin the violations of this street regulations article. 
    Major streets means and includes major and minor arterial and major collector streets. 
    Minor streets means and include residential, minor, collector, and rural streets. 
    Parking means parallel parking (parallel to traffic lanes). 
    Principal streets includes all major streets and minor collector streets as designated on the thoroughfare and transportation improvement plan. 
    Right-of-way (in this case) refers to rights-of-way for streets and alleys, which includes pavement, sidewalks, bikeways, utilities, and other public use. 
    Shall is always mandatory. 
    Sidewalk means a paved way for pedestrian traffic. 
    Street means a way for vehicular traffic or parking, whether designated as a highway, arterial street, collector street, or local street. 
    Street, collector, means a street that collects traffic from local streets and connects with minor and major arterials. This includes minor and major collectors. 
    Street, local, means a street that provides vehicular access to abutting property. 
    Street, major arterial, means a street that collects traffic from the collector and minor arterial system and connects with the freeway system. 
    Street, minor arterial, means a street that collects traffic from the collector system and connects with the major arterial system. 
    Street width means the distance as measured from back of curb to the back of curb. In the case where there is no curb, the term "street width" shall mean the distance between the edges of pavement. 
    Thoroughfare plan means a plan adopted with the comprehensive plan establishing the location, classification, and contexts for certain principal traffic ways within the corporate limits of the City; and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(B); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-30. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who violates or fails to comply with the requirements of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as may be necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(H)(2)) 
Sec. 34-31. - Scope and purpose. 
(a)  This article shall govern all streets, sidewalks, and driveways within the corporate limits of the City, including both the subdivided and unsubdivided portion of the City, and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City as established by the Texas Local Government Code. 
(b)  The regulation of streets and the associated utilities affects the welfare of the entire community in many important aspects. These regulations are deemed to be the minimum requirements as adopted by the City Council for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(A)) 
State Law reference- Extraterritorial jurisdiction, Texas Local Government Code  42.021. 
Sec. 34-32. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The City Engineer is designated as the administrative official of the City, to administer the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If the City Engineer shall find or if any person files with the City Engineer a complaint in writing alleging that any of the provisions of this article are being violated, the City Engineer shall immediately investigate and, when necessary, give written notice to the person responsible to cease such violations, forthwith. 
(c)  Notice may be delivered in person or by certified mail to the violator or to any person in charge of the property where the violation is occurring. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(H)(1)) 
Sec. 34-33. - Unusual conditions. 
    The City Engineer is hereby authorized to grant, in writing, variances from the strict application of the principles of this article; provided that the City Engineer first determines that the following conditions are present: 
(1)  The exception or variance desired arises from peculiar conditions not ordinarily existing in similar districts in the City, or due to the nature of the business or operation on the abutting property. 
(2)  That the exception or variance desired is not against the public interest, particularly safety, convenience, and general welfare. 
(3)  That the granting of the permit for the exception or variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or tenants. 
(4)  That the strict application of the terms of this article will not cause unnecessary hardship on the property owner or tenant. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(G)) 
Sec. 34-34. - Streets. 
(a)  Paving and repaving of existing streets. 
(1)  In the established and platted parts of the City, priority in minor street construction will be determined and established from time to time by the City Council, based upon recommendations by the City staff. 
(2)  Where the owners of more than 50 percent of the abutting lots along any existing minor street or way shall request paving or repaving of same by petition presented to the City Council showing the signatures of each of the record owners of such lots, the City staff shall review the proposed project and present its conclusions concerning same to the City Council within 45 days. The Council shall give priority to such projects where feasible, consistent with the needs of the public for safe and adequate streets and public ways and the financial circumstances pertinent to the project. 
(3)  Paving or repaving of existing streets shall be in accordance with plans and specifications reviewed and approved by the City Engineer or designee. 
(4)  The City Council may require the execution of a mechanic's and materialmen's lien contract, approved by the City Attorney, from the owners of at least 90 percent of the abutting lot owners to cover the estimated portions of the construction cost for each such lot, prior to the approval of any proposed paving or repaving. 
(b)  Planting on street right-of-way. 
(1)  Unpaved areas. There will be no restrictions on planting and care of grass on unpaved areas, and no permit shall be required. 
(2)  Obstructions. It shall be unlawful to plant flowers, shrubs, or trees to obstruct the view of or access to fire hydrants, mail boxes, traffic control devices, police or fire call boxes. 
(3)  Permit requirements. Other plantings will be permitted only if an application, together with a plan of planting, has been filed with the City Engineer and the City Engineer in turn has issued a permit for such planting. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(C)) 
Sec. 34-35. - Priority in sidewalk construction. 
    In the established and platted part of the City, priority in sidewalk construction will be established by the City Council, based on recommendations of the City Manager and City Engineer. Lengths shall be one block or more. First consideration will be given to major streets, second consideration to minor streets; however, no consideration will be given until petitioned by property owners representing a percentage of the front footage of the property as established by policy of the City Council, and funds are available. The Council may, however, at its discretion, when a situation warrants, arrange for construction without a signed petition. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(D)) 
Sec. 34-36. - Driveways. 
(a)  Interference. No driveway approach shall interfere with municipal facilities such as street light or traffic signal poles, signs, fire hydrants, cross walks, bus loading zones, utility poles, fire alarm supports, drainage structures, or other necessary street structures. The City Engineer is authorized to order and effect the removal or reconstruction of any driveway approach which is constructed in conflict with street structures. The cost of reconstructing or relocating such driveway approaches shall be at the expense of the abutting property owner. 
(b)  Permits. 
(1)  Any plans submitted for building approval which include or involve driveway approaches shall be referred to the City Engineer or designee for approval before a building permit is issued. 
(2)  A written driveway permit for a new development shall not be issued or required. Approval of driveway location and design for new properties and other developments on a building plan or site plan shall be considered the permit for driveway installation. 
(3)  Any property owner desiring a new driveway approach or an improvement to an existing driveway at an existing residential or other property shall make application for a driveway permit, in writing, and designating the contractor who will do the work, to the City Engineer or the building supervisor, accompanied by a sketch or drawing showing clearly the driveway, parking area, or doorway to be connected and the location of the nearest existing driveways on the same and opposite sides of the roadway. The City Engineer will prescribe the construction procedure to be followed. (See the Building Code for contractor's bond and permit requirement, for work on public property.) 
(4)  A permit or building/site plan approval as per the procedure of either Subsection (b)(2) or (3) of this section shall be required for the location of all driveways which provide for access to property. Driveway permits will also be required for any significant structure change, land use change, or property boundary change. 
(5)  The driveway permit fee is established in Section 2-117, which shall be of an amount to cover the cost of licensing and maintaining records. 
(6)  All permits granted for the use of public property under the terms of this section shall be revocable at the will of the City Council. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(E); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 34-37-34-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RIGHT-OF-WAY USE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Awning means an overhead structure made of canvas or fabric that is stretched over a wood or metal frame that extends beyond the exterior wall face and is removable. This definition does not include copy or logo. 
    Bench means a seating area that is placed for the convenience of pedestrians and is located in proximity to mass transit stops or businesses. 
    Bicycle rack means a structure designed and used for the temporary storage of bicycles. 
    Facade means an architectural treatment on the face of a building along either the front, side, or rear of a building along the right-of-way frontage. This definition does not include copy. 
    Landscaping, permanent, means canopy and non-canopy trees and shrubs as established in Section 11.2 of the City Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
    Landscaping, temporary, means perennial and flowering plants, dwarf shrubs and ground cover. 
    Northgate Area means the area bounded by Nagel Street, University Drive, Wellborn Road and the City limits. 
    Permit holder or permittee means the person owning the underlying fee title to any real property upon which any public street within the City corporate limits is situated, or any association or other entity acting with a lease or other express written permission of the fee title owner, to make use of the property, and who has been lawfully issued a right-of-way improvements permit by the City Engineer. 
    Private utilities means utilities that have been extended to serve an entity but have not been accepted by the City. 
    Public street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way which is held by the City in fee or by easement or dedication when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel; provided the term "public street" shall not include any designated State or Federal highway or road or any designated County road. 
    Right-of-way improvements permit means a permit issued by the City Engineer to a person who qualifies for said permit under the terms of this article authorizing the construction, installation and maintenance of improvements in rights-of-way dedicated to the City. 
    Roadway means that portion of a public street which is improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the curb, berm, or shoulder. In the event that a public street includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" means each such roadway separately. 
    Setback line is as defined in Section 3-7 of the City Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a public street which is between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines and is improved and designed for or is ordinarily used for pedestrian travel. 
    Sidewalk cafe means an outdoor dining area located on a sidewalk and containing movable tables, chairs, planters, or related appurtenances. 
    Structure means any building or portion thereof, and any obstruction that extends above natural ground grade. Excluded from this definition are wooden fences under eight feet in overall height and masonry fences under three feet in overall height. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(1); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-62. - Penalty for violations. 
    Violations of this article shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(9)) 
Sec. 34-63. - General authorization. 
    The City Council acting by and through its official designated in Section 34-64 may permit any person owning the underlying fee title to any real property upon which any public street within its corporate limits is situated, or any association or other entity acting with a lease or other express written permission of the fee title owner, to make use of the property, notwithstanding its being part of a public street, for any one or more of the following improvements or facilities: 
(1)  The establishment or maintenance, or both, of trees and decorative landscaping, including landscaping lighting, watering systems, and other appurtenances for the maintenance thereof; 
(2)  The establishment or maintenance, or both, of sidewalk cafes, provided that a sidewalk cafe may not be enclosed by fixed walls and shall be open to the air, except that it may have a canopy; provided further that a sidewalk cafe must be abutting and contiguous to a restaurant in which food preparation, sanitation, and related services for the sidewalk cafe will be performed; 
(3)  The establishment or maintenance, or both, of ornamental gates, columns, or other ornamental works of wood, iron, masonry, earth, or other materials denoting the entrance to a neighborhood or a platted and recorded subdivision, provided that such improvements may display the name of the subdivision or neighborhood but shall not contain any commercial advertising or other signage; 
(4)  The establishment or maintenance, or both, of any supportive or decorative columns, arches, or other structural or decorative feature of any building which is 50 or more years old at the time of filing an application for a permit hereunder and of unusual architectural design, character, or significance or of historical value; or 
(5)  The establishment or maintenance, or both, of transit bus shelters, drinking fountains, benches, and other related amenities for the convenience of the public in the use of the public streets for pedestrian or vehicular transportation. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(2)) 
Sec. 34-64. - Designation of City official authorized to make findings. 
    The City Engineer is hereby designated by the City Council to make the findings required by law contained in Section 34-65 prior to the issuance of a permit authorizing the establishment or maintenance of the improvements or facilities specified in Section 34-63. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(3)) 
Sec. 34-65. - Findings required. 
(a)  The establishment or maintenance of the improvements or facilities may not be implemented without a finding by the City Engineer that: 
(1)  The improvement or facility will not be located on, extend onto, nor intrude upon any portion of the roadway; 
(2)  The improvement or facility will not be located on, extend onto, nor intrude upon any portion of the sidewalk which is needed for pedestrian use; 
(3)  The design and location of the improvement or facilities includes all reasonable planning to minimize potential harm, injury, or interference to the public in the use of the public street or sidewalk; 
(4)  The improvement or facility will not create any hazardous condition or obstruction of vehicular or pedestrian travel upon the public street or sidewalk. 
(b)  Appeal. An applicant may appeal the decision of the City Engineer to the City Council within ten days of the denial or issuance of the permit. Failure to appeal the action shall constitute a contractual acceptance of all conditions imposed, and a waiver of all complaints, defects, or potential invalidity, whether under State or Federal law. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(4)) 
Sec. 34-66. - Construction of facilities. 
    Construction and installation of improvements must comply with all provisions of this article as well as with the streetscape standards as adopted by the City Council and established in the Streetscape Study issued in December 1992, and as amended from time to time. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(5)(g)) 
Sec. 34-67. - Maintenance. 
    All improvements shall be maintained by the person designated by the permit holder in the permit application. The improvements shall be maintained in a reasonably safe, secure and sanitary manner and the site shall be free of rubbish, weeds, filth or other offensive items. All dead plantings shall be removed and replaced annually. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(5)(f)) 
Sec. 34-68. - Removal. 
    The City or any utility company or other person authorized by the City may remove all or any part of any facility for which a permit has been issued without liability therefore in the event of a lawful need for the site or for access thereto. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(6)) 
Sec. 34-69. - Inspection. 
    Inspections of improvements shall be requested in accordance with the International Building Code as amended by this Code. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(5)(e); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 34-70-34-96. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 34-97. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install or construct, or cause to be installed or constructed, the amenities, improvements or facilities established in Section 34-63 within the public streets or rights-of-way for within the corporate limits of the City without first obtaining a permit issued by the City Engineer authorizing such improvements or facilities. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(5)(a)) 
Sec. 34-98. - Exemptions. 
    The City may establish or maintain, with its funds, materials, equipment, and personnel, any of the improvements or facilities described and shall not be required to issue a permit for any such improvement or facility established or maintained by the City; provided, however, that the City shall remove its improvement or facility placed by it upon any public street if there is a lawful need for the site or for access to the site by a utility company. This section does not require a political subdivision of this State to obtain a permit to establish or maintain an improvement or facility authorized by other law. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(8)) 
Sec. 34-99. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a permit authorizing the use of the public right-of-way for the installation of improvements or facilities within the City limits shall file an application with the Planning and Development Services Department on a form provided by that Department. The applicant must include the following information with the application form: 
(1)  A facility layout plan which includes the identity, and location of, and gives the dimensions of the right-of-way and the pavement edge or curb. 
(2)  The applicant must locate all existing traffic signs, meter boxes, light poles, manholes, overhead electrical lines, fire hydrants, valves, and electrical transformers contained within the right-of-way. The diagram must include dimensions of the right-of-way and locate the facilities from the right-of-way or back of the curb. The size and material of the facilities must be specified. 
(3)  All proposed signage must be located, including its dimensions. 
(4)  An erosion control plan must be submitted with the application. If there are waterway alterations proposed, a drainage report and drainage plan must be submitted. If improvements are proposed that will alter the drainage patterns in the area, a drainage report and drainage plan will be required. 
(5)  The applicant must state whether there will be any waterway alterations with a drainage report (if applicable). 
(6)  Elevation drawings of signage that include the description of material. 
(7)  The location and type of plantings. All plantings must be detailed by using both the scientific as well as common names. 
(8)  Describe all work to be performed, including, but not limited to, any electrical work, landscaping, irrigation systems, drainage work, waterway alterations, demolition, fencing (whether wood or masonry), signs, facades, awnings, cafe, canopy, benches, and bike racks. 
(9)  The cost, where applicable, of the proposed relocation of any public facilities associated with the work. 
(10)  The total square footage of the site. 
(11)  Designate the party responsible for maintenance. 
(12)  An estimate of the future relocation of improvements. 
(13)  Where applicable, the applicant must submit the following plans: electrical, landscaping, plumbing, sealed structural details with anchoring, attachment and material description and/or any sealed irrigation plans. 
(14)  Identify all contractors and subcontractors, including, but not limited to, the master electrician, irrigator, landscape architect or company, master plumber, design engineer and/or structural engineer. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(5)(d); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-100. - Fee. 
    The applicant or permit holder shall pay a fee established in Section 2-117 for the right-of-way improvements permit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(5)(b); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-101. - Term. 
    The permit shall be granted and allowed to remain in force on condition that: 
(1)  The applicant complies with the regulations established by the City Council and contained in Section 34-102 for the protection of the public and utility companies and other persons or firms having the right to use the public street at the site of the applicant's proposed facility; 
(2)  The site is properly maintained; and 
(3)  The applicant owns or is legally authorized by the fee simple owner of land to use the land for the establishment and maintenance of the improvements authorized by permit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(5)(c)) 
Sec. 34-102. - Conditions. 
    The regulations that govern the issuance and continuing validity of the permit are as follows: 
(1)  Permittee must comply with the construction, maintenance, operation, and inspection requirements as detailed in this article. 
(2)  Permittee must provide indemnity agreements by abutting fee owners, which agreements shall be covenants running with the title of the abutting land; provided, however, that permanent and temporary landscaping, including landscaping lighting and watering systems, shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(3)  The applicant or permittee must provide traffic and safety studies at the applicant's or permittee's own expense if, and whenever, required by the City Engineer. 
(4)  This permit may be terminated at the discretion of the City. 
(5)  All facilities or improvements shall comply with the clearance required from structures to utility lines as provided in the International Building Code or any other applicable code as adopted or as amended by this Code. 
(6)  All facilities or improvements must comply with all applicable City codes and ordinances in existence at the time of construction, unless specifically prohibited by said codes or ordinances. 
(7)  All site work, demolition and construction must comply with the International Building Code as amended by this Code. 
(8)  All drainage and waterway work must comply with Chapter 105 and associated Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications. 
(9)  If an identification sign is requested, a minimum of 250 landscaping points must be provided per sign. The sign may not exceed 150 square feet per sign face as measured by an imaginary rectangle of vertical and horizontal lines that contain all extremities of the copy and logo. The sign height cannot exceed 15 feet. 
(10)  All facilities and improvements must ensure that there is adequate sight clearance for traffic and pedestrian safety. 
(11)  The permittee shall provide a cash or surety bond in a sum sufficient to cover the costs of removal of its facilities or improvements by the City or any public utility upon terms and in an amount which is approved by the City Engineer. The bond or surety shall be submitted to the City Engineer upon approval of the permit but prior to its issuance and prior to the commencement of construction of any proposed improvements. 
(12)  The costs of any relocation of public or private utility facilities and improvements within the public streets which may be associated with the installation of any perimeters, authorized facilities and improvements shall be borne by the permittee. 
(13)  The City is prohibited from using any of its funds or employees for installation or maintenance with respect to a facility operated by permit except for inspection or removal purposes. 
(14)  If irrigation and/or electrical lines are to be extended across a paved roadway, the applicant must pay a one-time fee in the amount established in Section 2-117. The extension area is equivalent to three times the yard length to be installed under the roadway. The fee will be waived if the applicant installs sleeves under the pavement and places the irrigation and/or electrical in the sleeves. 
(15)  Permittee must notify the City Engineer of any change of information contained in the application or permit. 
(16)  Permittee or fee simple owner must notify the City Engineer of any change in fee simple ownership of the property, expiration or renewal of lease or revocation or renewal of license agreement by fee simple owner. 
(17)  The permit is valid only to whom it is issued and may not be assigned or transferred. 
(18)  Permittee may not modify the improvements authorized by permit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-3(F)(7); altered in 2017 Recodification) 
Secs. 34-103-34-132. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY USE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Management of public right-of-way used by telecommunication provider, Texas Local Government Code ch. 283. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-133. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means the owner who submits an application to the City for a permit authorized under the terms and conditions set forth in this article. An application is not considered administratively complete if it is not signed by and submitted by the owner or the owner's authorized representative or if it does not contain all of the information required by the application or this article or if the required fee has not been submitted with the application. 
    Easement means and includes any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the City for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. 
    Facilities means all the plant and equipment including all tangible and intangible real and personal property, without limitation, and any and all means and instrumentality in any manner owned, operated, leased, licensed, used, controlled, furnished, or supplied for, by, or in connection with its business. 
    Franchise means the user fee or charge that the City requires as payment for using its streets, rights-of-way, public ways, and easements in order to construct, maintain, and operate a private utility system, and includes fees for permits or licenses. 
    Invalid permit. A permit will not be considered valid if it contains information that is incorrect at the time it was submitted or if it is executed by an unauthorized representative or if the applicant has made any misrepresentation of material fact in the application. 
    Owner means the person who owns the facilities located in the City's right-of-way. 
    Permit means the document issued by the City to the owner of the facilities that authorizes the use of the right-of-way by the owner to install and maintain its facilities. 
    Permittee means the owner. 
    Right-of-way means the surface of, and the space above and below, a public street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive, or other easement now or hereafter held by the City (including any street, as defined, which is acquired by eminent domain) for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way now or hereafter held by the City or in which the City has an interest (including any easements or rights-of-way acquired by eminent domain) which shall, with their proper use and meaning, entitle the City and a utility to use thereof for the purpose of installing facilities, and other property as may ordinarily be necessary and pertinent to a utility system. 
    User means a person who uses the City's rights-of-way to install its facilities. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(D); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-134. - Penalties. 
(a)  Civil penalties may be imposed for the violation of any provision of this article, as follows: 
(1)  If applicable, default and revocation of any or all permits granted to allow work in the right-of-way, subject to the procedural guidelines noted in this article and any agreement which applies to the right-of-way user, and further subject to any limitations imposed by Federal or State law. 
(2)  In imposing the penalties and the amount, the City may weigh all applicable factors, such as damages caused by the violation, economic benefit to the violator, reasons for the violation, the seriousness of the violation, and all other factors. 
(b)  Monetary civil penalties may be imposed in the manner prescribed by either local or State law. 
(c)  In addition, the City Council may order specific performance of any actions required by this article or required by a franchise, license or permit, including the permit authorizing work to be performed in the rights-of-way, or any other agreement or authorization. 
(d)  Prior to initiation of enforcement litigation, the user shall be given the opportunity to correct the violation within the timeframe specified by the City. 
(e)  Any person who willfully and intentionally or otherwise violates this article shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(B), (C); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-135. - Interpretation. 
(a)  This article shall be construed in accordance with the City's Charter and Code to the extent that such Charter and Code are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State. 
(b)  This article shall be governed by the laws of the State. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(A)) 
Sec. 34-136. - Compliance. 
    No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or operation of facilities within the right-of-way in the City except as provided by the ordinances of the City and the directives of the City. All construction activity in City rights-of-way will be in accordance with this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(E)) 
Sec. 34-137. - Construction standards. 
(a)  The city must be notified 24 hours in advance that construction is ready to proceed by either the right-of-way user, their contractor or representative. At the time of notification, the right-of-way user will inform the City of the number (or other information) assigned from the one-call system. 
(b)  All construction shall be in conformance with all applicable City codes, local, State and Federal laws. 
(c)  Three feet by three feet information signs identifying the name of the company doing the work, telephone number and permittee's identity and telephone number shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur prior to the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring. An informational sign will be posted in the public right-of-way 100 feet before the construction location commences and each 100 feet thereafter, unless other posting arrangements are approved or required by the City. 
(d)  Erosion control measures (e.g., silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades must be in place before work begins. The contractor will contain and prevent all soil from migrating off-site by use of water suppression, vehicle cleaning areas, silt fences, hay bales, etc. 
(e)  The contractor will maintain base material on streets under construction and on detours as required to maintain sufficient moisture content in the surface layer for dust control. The contractor will be responsible for cleaning mud and dust from roadways on a daily basis. 
(f)  Lane closures on major thoroughfares will be limited after 8:30 a.m. and before 4:00 p.m. unless the City grants prior written approval. Arrow boards will be required on lane closures, with all barricades, advance warning signs and 36-inch reflector cones placed according to the specifications of the City. 
(g)  Permittee is responsible for the quality of the workmanship and any damage caused by its contractors or subcontractors. A designated representative of the permittee will be available to the City at all times during construction. 
(h)  Permittee shall be responsible for stormwater management erosion control that complies with City, State and Federal regulations and guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, silt fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open holes, and high erosion areas will require wire-backed silt fencing. Upon request, the permittee may be required to furnish documentation submitted or received from Federal or State government. 
(i)  Permittee, contractor or subcontractor will notify the City immediately of any damage to other utilities, either City or privately owned. 
(j)  It is the City's policy not to cut streets or sidewalks; however, when a street or sidewalk cut is necessary, prior written approval must be obtained from the City and all requirements of the City shall be followed. Repair of all street and sidewalk removals must be made promptly to avoid safety hazards to vehicle and pedestrian traffic. 
(k)  Installation of facilities must not interfere with City utilities, in particular, gravity dependent facilities. 
(l)  New facilities must be installed to a depth approved by the City. 
(m)  All directional boring shall have locator-place bore marks and depths while bore is in progress. Locator shall place mark at each stem with paint dot and depth at least every other stem. 
(n)  The working hours in the rights-of-way are 7:00 a.m. to 30 minutes before sunset, Monday through Friday. Work that must be performed after 30 minutes before sunset Monday through Friday must be approved in advance. Any work performed on Saturday must be pre-approved 24 hours in advance by the City. Directional boring is permitted only Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 30 minutes before sunset, unless approved in advance. No work will be done, except for emergencies, on City holidays. 
(o)  People working in the right-of-way are responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected utilities or others with facilities in the right-of-way prior to any excavation. Use of the Geographic Information System or the plans of record, or both, does not satisfy this requirement. 
(p)  Permittee will be responsible for verifying the location, both horizontal and vertical, of all facilities. When required by the City, the permittee shall verify locations by pot holing, hand digging or other method approved by the City prior to any excavation or boring with the exception of work involving lane closures, as discussed above. 
(q)  Placement of all manholes and/or hand holes must be approved in advance by the City. Handholes or manholes will not be located in sidewalks, unless approved by the City. 
(r)  Locate flags shall not be removed from a location while facilities are being constructed. 
(s)  Construction which requires pumping of water or mud shall be contained in accordance with City ordinances, Federal and State law. 
(t)  All construction of electric utility facilities must be in compliance with National Electrical Safety Code (NESC) standards. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(G)) 
Sec. 34-138. - Plans of record. 
(a)  Right-of-way and public utility easement users will provide the City with "plans of record" (also called "as built" plans) within 90 days of completion of facilities in the right-of-way and/or public utility easement. Users who have existing facilities in the right-of-way and public utility easements as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived who have not provided a copy of the plans of record shall provide one-fourth of the information concerning facilities in City right-of-way within one year after the passage of the ordinance and one-fourth each six months thereafter. The plans shall be provided to the City with as much detail and accuracy as required by the City. Plans that do not meet these requirements are incomplete and shall not be considered submitted to the City under this article. All the requirements specified for the plans submitted for the initial permit shall be submitted and updated in the plans of record. The detail and accuracy will concern issues such as location and any other health, safety and welfare concerns required to be included by the City. The detail will not include matters such as capacity of lines, customers, or competitively sensitive details. Submittal of plans of record shall be in digital format. 
(b)  This requirement, or portions of this requirement, may be waived by the City for good cause. 
(c)  Plans of record for electric utilities shall be submitted to and maintained by College Station Utilities. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(H)) 
Sec. 34-139. - Relocation of facilities required; abandonment. 
    Whenever the City widens, or straightens, installs or relocates public streets, alleys, easements, bikeways, sidewalks, thoroughfares, highways, public ways, water lines, electric lines, fiber optic or sewer lines, the user shall relocate, at its own expense (unless otherwise provided otherwise by State law or a franchise in effect on August 26, 1999, until that franchise expires or is otherwise terminated), its facilities and other appurtenances in order to accommodate the installation, relocation, widening, or changing of the grade of same including if necessary relocating such poles, wire cables, anchors, manholes, conduits, or other facilities or appurtenances to a sufficient distance from the edge of the pavement to permit a reasonable work area for machinery and individuals engaged in installing, relocating, widening, or changing the grade of any public street, sidewalk, bikeway, alley, public thoroughfare, highway or public way. Additionally, the user must relocate at its sole expense any facilities erected or maintained if said relocation is deemed necessary by the City Council or its designated representative for traffic safety purposes or the accommodation of other necessary utilities owned and/or operated by the City, including traffic signals. Whenever, by reason of changes in the grade of a thoroughfare or in the location or manner of constructing a water pipe, gas pipe sewer or other aboveground or underground structure, it is deemed necessary by the City to remove, alter, change, adapt or conform the underground or aboveground facilities of the user, the user shall make the change promptly but not later than 90 days from the date that notice is sent to owner, unless a different schedule was approved by the City without claim for reimbursement or damages against the City. If the owner fails to move its facilities after 90 days or the approved schedule, whichever is applicable, as same may be extended from time to time, the facilities shall be deemed abandoned and the City may remove the facilities without liability therefore and charge the cost of removal to owner. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(I)) 
Sec. 34-140. - Improperly installed facilities. 
(a)  Any person doing work in the City right-of-way shall install, repair, upgrade and maintain facilities in a good and workmanlike manner, and in accordance with the standards and specifications established herein as well as all applicable industry standards, and local, State, administrative and Federal laws, rules, regulations and guidelines. 
(b)  Facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if: 
(1)  The installation, repairs, upgrade or maintenance endangers property or people; 
(2)  The facilities do not meet the applicable City codes; 
(3)  The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices; 
(4)  The facilities are not located in the proper place at the time of construction in accordance with the directions provided by the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(J)) 
Sec. 34-141. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Users of the right-of-way shall restore property affected by construction of facilities to a condition that is equal to or better than the condition of the property prior to the performance of the work. Restoration must be approved by the City. 
(b)  Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the City. The restoration shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Replacing all ground cover with the type of ground cover damaged during work or better, either by sodding or seeding, as directed by the City; 
(2)  Installation of all manholes and handholes, as required; 
(3)  Backfilling all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes shall be filled in daily, unless other safety requirements are approved by the City; 
(4)  Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines; 
(5)  Restoration of excavation-sites to City specifications; 
(6)  Restoration of all landscaping, and sprinkler systems. 
a.  All locate flags shall be removed during the cleanup process by the permittee or the permittee's contractor at the completion of the work. 
b.  Restoration must be made promptly, as specified by approved City schedules and to the satisfaction of the City. If restoration is not performed promptly, all work-in-progress, except that related to the problem, including all work previously permitted but incomplete, may be halted and a hold may be placed on any permits in progress but not approved until all restoration is complete. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(K)) 
Sec. 34-142. - Right-of-way and easement abandonment. 
(a)  Criteria. 
(1)  The City Council, at the request of one or more underlying fee simple or abutting property owners, or upon the City's own initiative, may, after holding a public hearing, abandon an easement or right-of-way only upon affirmative findings regarding the following criteria: 
a.  That the abandonment will not result in property that does not have access to public roadways or utilities. 
b.  That there is no current public need or use for the easement or right-of-way. 
c.  That there is no anticipated future public need or use for the easement or right-of-way. 
d.  That all public utilities have access to serve current and future customers. 
(2)  In order to make the affirmative findings listed above, the City Council may consider, but is not limited to, the following: the proposed use of the property involved, existing uses of land in the neighborhood, the utilities or roadways located in the easement or right-of-way, the purpose of the easement or right of-way, and the probable effect of the abandonment upon the immediate preservation of the order, public health, safety, convenience and welfare of the community. 
(b)  Procedure to request abandonment. 
(1)  The City Council may consider a request to abandon an easement or right-of-way to the underlying fee simple or abutting property owner only after such property owner submits to the City: 
a.  A completed application to abandon submitted upon forms provided by the City, reviewed and accepted by the City as complete; 
b.  The City Council shall consider the request for abandonment after public notice is provided and a public hearing is held. Requirements for public notice and a public hearing shall be the same as those public notice and public hearing requirements for zoning map amendments (rezonings) under the City Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
(2)  If the City Council grants the request to abandon, the ordinance abandoning the easement or right-of-way will be filed in the official records of the County. 
(c)  City not required. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the City Council to abandon an easement or right-of-way or to give any person a vested right to compel the City to abandon an easement or right-of-way. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(N)) 
Secs. 34-143-34-167. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGISTRATION AND CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 34-168. - Registration. 
    In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, all users of the right-of-way who are telecommunications providers will register with the City and pay annual blanket right-of-way fees pursuant to Texas Local Government Code ch. 283 or users who hold a valid franchise with the City are exempt from the payment of registration fees under this section. Registration and permits will be issued in the name of the person who owns the facilities. Registration must be renewed every five years. For utilities with a current franchise or license, the franchise or license will be evidence of renewal. If a registration is not renewed, and subject to 60-day notification to the owner, the facilities of the user will be deemed to have been abandoned. When any information provided for the registration changes, the user will inform the City of the change no more than 30 days after the date the change is made. Registration shall include: 
(1)  The name of the user of the right-of-way; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of people who will be the contact person for the user; 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of any contractor or subcontractor, if known, who will be working in the right-of-way on behalf of the user; 
(4)  The name and telephone number of an emergency contact who shall be available 24 hours a day; 
(5)  Proof of insurance and bonds. 
a.  An applicant must provide acceptable proof of liability insurance in the total amount of $5,000,000.00 ($2,000,000.00 primary plus $3,000,000.00 umbrella), if requested by the owner of the facilities, or other provisions as acceptable to the Risk Manager or designee. The City Manager or designee may waive or reduce the bonding requirements in a nondiscriminatory, competitively neutral manner, taking into consideration both that the person has furnished the City with documentation sufficient in the sole discretion of the Risk Manager or designee to evidence adequate financial resources substantially greater than the bonding requirements, has a Standard & Poor's A bond rating or better or a Moody's A bond rating or better, and has demonstrated in prior right-of-way construction activity, prompt resolution of any claims and substantial compliance with all required applicable building codes and ordinances. 
b.  The coverage must be on an "occurrence" basis and must include coverage for personal injury, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, underground explosion and collapse hazards. 
c.  Each policy must include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the City in writing not fewer than 30 days before canceling, failing to renew, or reducing policy limits. 
d.  The applicant shall file the required original certificate of insurance prior to any commencement of work. The certificate shall state the policy number; name of the insurance company; name and address of the agent or authorized representative of the insurance company; name, address and telephone number of insured; policy expiration date; and specific coverage amounts. 
e.  The applicant shall file an annual surety bond which will be valid each year construction will occur through one full year after the completion of the construction from a surety company authorized to do business in the State in the amount of the estimated amount of the cost to restore the right-of-way for the work anticipated to be done in that year, in the event the applicant leaves a job site in the right-of-way unfinished, incomplete or unsafe or other provisions as acceptable to the City Engineer or designee. 
f.  The above requirements may be met by utilities with a current franchise or license if their current franchise or license adequately provides for insurance or bonds or provides an indemnity in favor of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(F)(1); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 34-169-34-189. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Construction Permits 

Sec. 34-190. - Generally. 
(a)  A construction permit is not required for construction of new or replacement electric facilities, or upgrading existing electric facilities, when the constructed or upgraded facilities share existing aerial facilities owned by the City. 
(1)  No person shall perform any construction or installation of facilities in the right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, except as provided herein. The permit will be in the name of the person who will own the facilities to be constructed. The permit must be completed and signed by a representative of the owner of the facilities to be constructed. 
a.  The phrase "construction or installation of facilities" does not include the installation of facilities necessary to initiate service to a customer's property, or repair or maintenance of existing facilities unless such repair or maintenance requires the breaking of pavement; the closure of a nonresidential traffic lane; excavation; or boring. 
b.  Emergency responses related to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit; however, the City shall be notified in writing within two business days of any construction related to an emergency response, including a reasonably detailed description of the work performed in the right-of-way and an updated map in a format prescribed by the City of any facilities that were relocated, if applicable. 
c.  Emergency response permits are required only if a permit is required pursuant to the applicable provisions herein. 
(2)  The permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of facilities, dates and times work is to take place and any other conditions established by the City. 
(3)  The person requesting a permit will provide the City with documentation in the format specified by the City describing: 
a.  The proposed, approximate location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the applicant's plan for right-of-way construction. 
b.  Engineering plans which will be on a scale of one inch equals 50 feet unless otherwise approved by the City. 
c.  Detail of the location of all right-of-way and utility easements that the applicant plans to use. 
d.  Detail of all existing City utilities in relationship to applicant's proposed route. 
e.  Detail of what facilities the applicant proposes to install, such as pipe size, number of interducts, valves, etc. 
f.  Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt or concrete in streets (include City standard construction details). 
g.  Drawings of any bores, trenches, handholes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, etc., including depth located in public right-of-way. 
h.  Handholes and/or manholes typical of types of manholes and/or handholes applicant plans to use or access. 
i.  Complete legend of drawings submitted by applicant unless otherwise approved by the City. 
j.  Four sets of engineering plans must be submitted with permit application. 
k.  The name, address and phone numbers of the contractor or subcontractor who will perform the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of an individual employed by the contractor who will be available at all times during construction. Such information shall be required prior to the commencement of any work. 
l.  The construction and installation methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-of-way, and the dates and times work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the City. 
m.  A statement that the requirements of Section 34-168(5) are met. 
(4)  All construction and installation in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the facilities and any approved plans and specifications made in connection with it. The City shall be provided access to the worksite and to such further information as may be reasonably required to ensure compliance with the permit. 
(5)  A copy of the construction permit and approved engineering plans shall be maintained at the construction-site and made available for inspection by the City at all times when construction or installation work is occurring. 
(6)  All construction or installation work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the construction permit. If the work cannot be completed within the specified time periods, the permittee may request an extension from the City. Extension requests are to be made at the same location where permits are issued. The City will use its best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for extension as soon as possible. 
(7)  A copy of any permit or approval issued by Federal or State authorities for work in Federal or State rights-of-way located in the City, if requested by the City. 
(8)  A request for a permit must be submitted at least ten working days before the proposed commencement of work in the request, unless waived by the City in writing. 
(9)  Requests for permits will be approved or disapproved by the City within five business days of receiving all the necessary information. The City will use best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for permit as soon as possible. The City will provide a reason to the permittee should the permit be disapproved. 
(10)  The City or the applicant can request a pre-construction meeting with the permittee and their construction contractor. 
(11)  Permit applications are required for construction of new, replacement facilities or upgrading of the company's existing facilities in the right-of-way or public utility easement either aerial or underground. 
(b)  Registration and construction permits are as follows: 
(1)  The registration fee established in Section 2-117 will apply to those right-of-way users who do not pay annual blanket right-of-way fees. 
(2)  The construction permit fee established in Section 2-117 will apply to those right-of-way users who do not pay annual blanket right-of-way fees. 
(c)  Registration and construction permits are not required when a current franchise provides for a process that adequately replaces or meets the requirements of registration and permitting in this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(F)(2); altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Fee authorized, Texas Local Government Code  283.006. 
Sec. 34-191. - Revocation or denial of permit. 
    If any of the provisions of this subdivision are not followed, a permit may be revoked by the City. If a person has not complied with the terms and conditions of this subdivision in work done pursuant to a prior permit, new permits may be denied or additional terms and conditions required. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(L)) 
Sec. 34-192. - Appeal from denial or revocation of permit. 
    Appeal from denial or revocation of a permit or from the decision of the City staff shall be to the City Council. Appeals shall be filed with the City Secretary within 15 days from the date of the decision being appealed. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-2(M)) 
Secs. 34-193-34-222. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PARADES AND MOTORCADES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-223. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Motorcade means any organized procession of vehicles, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley that would need to disregard normal traffic control devices to proceed but would not require the closing of the street, sidewalk, or alley to other traffic. 
    Neighborhood parade means a parade that is organized by a residential subdivision's homeowner's association, neighborhood group or resident of the subdivision, and that takes place wholly within the subdivision. 
    Parade means any march or procession consisting of people, animals or vehicles, or a combination thereof, including athletic events, upon any public street, sidewalk or alley which does not comply with normal or usual traffic regulations or controls, and requires closing any part of the roadway to normal traffic. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-3(A)) 
Sec. 34-224. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-3(M)(2)) 
Sec. 34-225. - Motorcades. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a motorcade in or upon any public street, sidewalk or alley in the City, or knowingly or otherwise participate in any motorcade without an escort provided by Peace Officers or Federal Law Enforcement Officers. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-3(B)(2); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-226. - Interference with parade or motorcade. 
    No person shall knowingly or otherwise join or participate in any motorcade or parade conducted under permit from the City Manager or designee in violation of any of the terms of said permit, nor knowingly or otherwise join or participate in any permitted parade or motorcade without the consent and over the objection of the permittee, nor in any manner interfere with its progress or orderly conduct. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-3(D); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 34-227-34-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 34-246. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade or motorcade in or upon any public street, sidewalk or alley in the City, or knowingly or otherwise participate in any such parade unless and until a permit to conduct such parade or motorcade has been obtained from the City Manager or designee. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage and participate in, aid, form, or start any parade or motorcade unless a parade or motorcade permit shall have been obtained as herein provided and it shall be unlawful for any person participating in any parade or motorcade for which a permit hereunder has been issued, to fail to comply with all directions and conditions of such permit and all applicable laws and ordinances. A neighborhood parade as defined in Section 34-223 shall be required to register with the Police Department but shall not be subject to an application. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-3(B)(1), (M)(1), (N); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-247. - Application. 
    Any person who wants to conduct a parade or motorcade shall apply to the Building Official for a permit at least 30 days in advance of the date of the proposed parade or motorcade. The City Manager or designee may consider any application for a permit to conduct a parade or motorcade which is filed less than 30 days prior to the date such parade or motorcade is to be conducted. The application for such permit shall be made in writing on a form approved by the City Manager or designee in order that adequate arrangements may be made for the proper policing of the parade or motorcade. The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the applicant, the sponsoring organization, the parade or motorcade chairperson, and the address and phone number. 
(2)  The purpose of the parade or motorcade, the date when it is proposed to be conducted, the proposed location of the assembly area, the proposed location of the disbanding area, the proposed route to be traveled, and the approximate time when the parade or motorcade is proposed to assemble, start and terminate. 
(3)  A description of the number of individual participants, floats, marching units, vehicles, and bands. 
(4)  A description of any sound amplification equipment to be used. 
(5)  A description of the provisions made for cleanup. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-3(E); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-248. - Fee. 
    Upon submission of an application, an application fee shall be paid. The application fee shall be established in Section 2-117. This application fee will not apply to applicants conducting lawful expressions of opinion protected under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-3(K); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-249. - Issuance or denial of permit. 
(a)  Standards for issuance. The City Manager or designee shall issue a parade or motorcade permit conditioned upon the applicant's written agreement to comply with the terms of such permit unless the City Manager or designee finds that: 
(1)  The time, route, and size of the parade or motorcade will disrupt to an unreasonable extent the movement of other traffic. 
(2)  The parade or motorcade is of a size or nature that it requires the diversion of so great a number of Police Officers of the City to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto that allowing the parade or motorcade would deny reasonable police protection to the City. 
(3)  Such parade or motorcade will interfere with another parade or motorcade for which a permit has been issued. 
(4)  The materials used in the construction of floats used in any parade fail to meet fire safety requirements. 
(5)  Provision cannot be made to allow free movement of equipment from one part of the City to another. 
(6)  Applicant intends to use open flames or torches. 
(7)  Any float has a height greater than 15 feet. 
(b)  Standards for denial. The City Manager or designee shall deny any application for a parade or motorcade permit notifying the applicant of such denial where the City Manager or designee: 
(1)  Makes a finding contrary to the findings required to be made for the issuance of a permit. 
(2)  Finds the information contained in the application to be false or non-existent in any material detail. 
(3)  Finds the applicant refuses to agree to abide by or comply with all conditions of the permit. 
(4)  The City Manager or designee cannot make changes to the application that would allow the parade or motorcade to be executed in a reasonable fashion. 
(c)  Other requirements. 
(1)  The attendance of such Police Officers as the City Manager or designee may deem necessary for the controlling of persons in the assembly and to prevent overcrowding and for such other control as may be necessary to render such parade or motorcade safe for the public is required. When the presence of City Police Officers is deemed necessary, every applicant shall pay to the City revenue for the services of such personnel, which revenue shall be determined by the City Manager or designee and paid into the general fund. 
(2)  If the City Manager or designee determines that the attendance of any fire apparatus or equipment is necessary at or in the vicinity of such parade for fire protection, the City Manager or designee shall so notify the applicant before approval of the application. Every applicant shall, when the presence of City fire equipment is necessary, pay to the City revenue for the use of such equipment and/or personnel, which revenue shall be determined by the City Manager or designee and paid into the general fund. 
(3)  If the City Manager or designee determines that the attendance of personnel or equipment is necessary at or in the vicinity of such parade or motorcade, the City Manager or designee shall so notify the applicant before approval of the application. Every applicant shall, when the presence of City traffic equipment and personnel is deemed necessary, pay to the City revenue for this use of such equipment and/or personnel, which revenue shall be determined by the City Manager or designee and paid into the general fund. 
(4)  This section will not apply to applicants conducting lawful expressions of opinion protected under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-3(F); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-250. - Parade or motorcade for commercial purpose prohibited. 
    No permit shall be issued authorizing the conducting of a parade or motorcade which the City Manager or designee finds is proposed to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods, wares, or merchandise and is designed to be held purely for profit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-3(C); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-251. - Contract. 
    The applicant, in tendering an application and receiving a license, agrees and contracts with the City that the applicant will comply with all of the terms of the permit for the purpose of maintaining and ensuring the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-3(L)) 
Sec. 34-252. - Denial/appellate review. 
(a)  Upon denial by the City Manager or designee of an application made pursuant to Section 34-249, the applicant may appeal from the determination of the City Manager or designee within five days thereafter to the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal for hearing by the City Manager. Upon such appeal, the City Manager may reverse, affirm, or modify in any regard the determination of the City Manager or designee. Such hearing shall be had within ten days of receipt of the notice. The City Manager shall issue a decision within five days of the hearing. Should the decision appealed have been made by the City Manager, the request for an appeal shall be deemed a request to re-review the decision. 
(b)  In the event an application is not filed within the required time as specified in Section 34-249(c), the applicant may request a waiver of such requirement by the City Manager; and the City Manager, upon finding unusual circumstances, and in the exercise of sound discretion, may waive such requirement. 
(c)  The City Manager may certify any question for Council review. Council shall have authority to review costs and waive any assessed cost. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-3(H); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-253. - Contents of permit. 
(a)  In each permit, the City Manager or designee shall specify: 
(1)  The assembly area and time therefor. 
(2)  The starting time. 
(3)  The minimum and maximum speeds. 
(4)  The route of the parade or motorcade. 
(5)  What portions of streets to be traversed may be occupied by such parade or motorcade. 
(6)  The maximum number of units and the maximum and minimum intervals of space to be maintained between the units of such parade or motorcade. 
(7)  The maximum length of such parade or motorcade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(8)  The disbanding area and disbanding time. 
(9)  The number of persons required to monitor the parade or motorcade. 
(10)  The number and type of vehicles, if any. 
(11)  The material and the maximum size of any sign, banner, placard or carrying device therefor. 
(12)  The cleanup requirements. 
(13)  The permittee shall advise all participants in the parade or motorcade, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of the permit prior to the commencement of such parade or motorcade. 
(14)  The amplification of sound permitted to be emitted from sound trucks or bullhorns shall be fixed and not variable. 
(15)  That the parade or motorcade continue to move at a fixed rate of speed and that any willful delay or willful stopping of said parade or motorcade, except when reasonably required for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade or motorcade, shall constitute a violation of the permit. 
(16)  Such other requirements as are found by the City Manager or designee to be reasonably necessary for the protection of persons or property. 
(b)  All conditions of the permit shall be complied with so far as reasonably practicable. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-3(G); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 34-254. - Revocation of a permit. 
    Any permit for a parade or motorcade issued pursuant to this division may be summarily revoked by the City Manager or designee any time when, by reason of disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the City Manager or designee determines that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation. Notice of such action revoking a permit shall be delivered in writing to the permittee by personal service or by certified mail. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-3(J); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 34-255-34-277. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WIRELESS FACILITIES 

Sec. 34-278. - Wireless facilities. 
(a)  Applicability . A network provider seeking to site, install, collocate, maintain, repair, relocate, replace, and remove wireless facilities in the public right-of-way must comply with the provisions of State and Federal law and with Chapter 3 of the Code of Ordinances, City of College Station, Texas, as amended, and the City's Pole Attachment Specifications approved by the City, as they currently exist or may hereafter be amended, except where in conflict with Chapter 284. 
(b)  Permit application . A network provider must submit an application for a permit, as that term is defined in the rights-of-way maintenance ordinance, prior to installing a network node, node support pole, or transport facility in the public rights-of-way and prior to any excavating or closing sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way in association with any routine maintenance, replacement, repair, or upgrading work. The application for such a permit must include the following: 
(1)  Detailed drawings, with calculations to show strict conformity to the size limitations as set forth in Chapter 284, including, but not limited to Chapter 284, Section 284.002, size of a Micro Network Node, Section 284.003, size of network nodes, and Section 284.103, maximum pole height, and with the requirements of this section, the rights-of-way maintenance ordinance, and the pole attachment specifications; 
(2)  An analysis showing that the proposed wireless facility(ies) will not cause any interference with City public safety radio systems, utility supervisory control and data acquisition systems (SCADA), electric automation systems, metering networks, traffic signal light systems, or other City utility or safety communications components in accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.304, or interfere with motorists' sight distance at an intersection as defined by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) in the "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets"; 
(3)  A proposal to camouflage or conceal the network node consistent with the requirements of this section; 
(4)  Disclose whether the location is any of the following: 
a.  Within a municipal park or within a residential area zoned R Rural, E Estate, RS Restricted Suburban, GS General Suburban, T Townhome, D Duplex, or MF Multi-family, as described in the City's Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) and Code of Ordinances; 
b.  Within a design district with decorative poles or in an area of the City zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district or design district as set forth in Section 5.8 of the City's Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) and Code of Ordinances; 
c.  Within an area that has undergrounding requirements as set forth in the City's Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) and Code of Ordinances; 
d.  Within 300 feet of a historic site or structure or Historic Landmark recognized by the City, State or Federal Government (see, for example, and not limited to V.T.C.A. Texas Government Code  442.001(3), and 16 U.S.C.  470), as of the date of the submission of the permit. 
(5)  Copies of Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) issued permits for any facilities to be located in TxDOT rights-of-way. 
(c)  Fees . 
(1)  In lieu of the fees provided in this section, a network provider must pay fees for permit applications and use of the public rights-of-way as provided in Chapter 284. Because City requires the payment of a fee for similar types of commercial development inside the City's territorial jurisdiction, other than a type for which application or permit fees are not allowed by law, the City is eligible to charge an applications fee for deployments under this section. Unless there is a change in law, the fees shall be assessed consistently with Chapter 284, as it currently exists or may hereafter be amended, which currently are based on the number of poles and or network nodes contained in an application at the following rates, which rates are subject to adjustment as provided in Chapter 284: 
a.  Permit and application fees . 
1.  Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per application, up to five network nodes per application; 
2.  Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per application for the first five network nodes, then an additional $250.00 for each additional network node per application; and 
3.  One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per application for each pole. 
b.  Rent from network providers . 
1.  Nodes : The Annual Network Node site rental rate as set in Chapter 284, Section 284.053, shall be $250.00 per Network Node site, per year, with automatic annual CPI adjustments as provided for in Chapter 284, Section 284.054. 
i.  Automatic annual adjustments : The annual Network Node site rental rate shall be automatically adjusted one-half the annual change to the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for Texas, as published by the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics as published in February for the preceding 12 months. 
2.  Poles : Chapter 284, Section 284.053 does not provide a separate rate for poles and therefore the rental rate is the same rental rate as for network nodes. 
3.  Transport facility : The Annual Transport Facility rental rate as set in Chapter 284, Section 284.055., shall be $28.00 per month for each Network Node site, unless an equal or greater annual amount is paid the City, e.g., under Chapter 283, Texas Local Government Code or Chapter 66, Texas Utility Code. 
(2)  Adoption of the fees in this section shall not be seen as a finding by the City that the fees are greater than or equal to the actual, direct, and reasonable costs the City determines are incurred in granting or processing an application that are reasonably related in time to the time and the costs incurred granting or processing an application. 
(d)  Prohibited and restricted locations of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment . A network provider is prohibited or restricted from locating micro network nodes, network nodes, node support poles and related ground equipment, except with a separate City agreement or subject to concealment conditions, as follows: 
(1)  Municipal parks and residential areas . In accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.104(a), a network provider may not install a node support pole in a public right-of-way without the City's discretionary, nondiscriminatory, and written consent if the public right-of-way is in a municipal park or is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: 
a.  Not more than 50 feet wide of paved street surface, being the area measured as the shortest distance between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area measured as the shortest distance between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb; and 
b.  Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
c.  In accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.104(b), a network provider installing a network node or node support pole in a public right-of-way described in this subdivision must comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities. 
(2)  Historic districts and design districts . In accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.105, a network provider must obtain advance written approval from the City before collocating network nodes or installing node support poles in a design district with decorative poles or in an area of the City zoned or otherwise designated as a design district or historic district. 
a.  As a condition for approval of network nodes or node support poles in design districts with decorative poles or in a historic district, the City shall require reasonable design or concealment measures for the network nodes or node support poles. Therefore, any request for installations in a design district with decorative poles or in a historic district, must be accompanied with proposed concealment measures in the permit applications. 
b.  A network provider must explore the feasibility of using camouflage measures to improve the aesthetics of the network nodes, node support poles, or related ground equipment, or any portion of the nodes, poles, or equipment, to minimize the impact to the aesthetics in design districts or in a historic district. 
c.  Network providers must comply with and observe all applicable City, State, and Federal historic preservation laws and requirements. 
d.  The City Council may designate an area as a historic district or a design district under Chapter 284, Section 284.105 at any time. 
e.  Currently designated historic districts are the following: 
1.  Historic District Number 1 includes all areas designated by a Historic Preservation Overlay District and further described in Appendix A (the UDO), as amended. 
f.  Currently designated design districts are the following: 
1.  Design District Number 1 is the area designated as the WPC zoning district and known as the Wolf Pen Creek Development Corridor and is further described in Section 5.8 of the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO), as amended. 
2.  Design District Number 2 is the area designated as the NG zoning district and all "NG" subdistricts and known as the Northgate Districts and is further described in Section 5.8 of the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO), as amended. 
3.  Design District Number 3 is the area designated as the KO zoning district and known as the Krenek Tap Corridor Overlay District and is further described in Section 5.10 of the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO), as amended. 
g.  The failure to designate an area in this section shall not mean that such an area is not within a defined district, if so designated by the City Council. Future areas may be designated as one of these districts at any time. Such a designation does not require amendment of this ordinance. 
(3)  Compliance with undergrounding requirements . In accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.107, a network provider shall comply with nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, including Section 34-3, municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, State law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use approval. 
a.  The City may designate areas from time to time as underground requirement areas in accordance with filed plats, and or conversions of overhead to underground areas, as may be allowed by law. 
b.  Currently designated underground requirement areas are all areas subject to the requirements of Section 34-3. 
c.  The failure to designate an area in this section shall not mean that such an area is not within an underground requirement area, if so designated by the City Council. Future areas may be designated as an underground requirement area at any time. Such a designation does not require amendment of this section. 
d.  Exceptions . The City by its discretionary consent and agreement may grant exception to the prohibited and restricted locations and sizes, but only in a non-exclusive, and non-discriminatory manner, as allowed or required by Chapter 284, Section 284.109 and Section 284.110. 
(e)  Preferred and discouraged locations of micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment . 
(1)  The following locations are least preferable locations for network nodes: 
a.  Historic landmarks . A network provider is discouraged from installing a network node or node support pole within 300 feet of a historic site or structure or historic landmark recognized by the City, State or Federal Government (see, for example, and not limited to V.T.C.A. Texas Government Code  442.001(3), and 16 U.S.C.  470), as of the date of the submission of the permit. 
b.  Residential areas and parks . A network provider is discouraged from installing a Network Node on an existing pole in a public right-of-way without written consent from the City Council if the public right-of-way is located in or adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is adjacent to a municipal park or single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
1.  In accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.104(b), a network provider installing a network node or a node support pole in a public right-of-way must comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the area that apply to those facilities. 
c.  Historic districts and design districts . A network provider is discouraged from installing a network node or a node support pole in the public right-of-way in any area designated by the City as a design district or in an area of the City zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district unless such a network node or a new node support pole is camouflaged. 
(2)  The following locations are most preferable locations for network nodes: 
a.  Industrial areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district or design district. 
b.  Highway rights-of-way areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district or design district. 
c.  Retail and commercial areas if not adjacent to a municipal park, residential area, historic district or design district. 
(3)  The following constitute the City's order of preference regarding network node attachment to existing facilities and new node support poles: 
a.  Existing telephone or communications lines between existing utility poles . Micro network nodes shall only be lashed onto existing telephone or communications lines between existing utility poles (electric poles or telephones poles), with notice to the pole owner as required by the Federal Pole Attachment Act, and not placed on utility poles, node support poles or service poles. 
b.  Existing utility poles (electric poles or telephones poles), shall be the preferred support facility for network nodes and related ground equipment. 
c.  Municipal service poles . 
1.  Non-decorative street lights with a height of more than 20 feet. 
2.  Traffic signal structures when such installation will not interfere with the integrity of the facility and will not interfere with the safety of public, and in accordance with an agreement as allowed by Chapter 284, Section 284.056 and Section 284.101(a)(3), and (b), or interfere with motorists' visibility of the traffic signals or sight distance at the intersection. 
3.  Street signage shall be a low priority use for attachment of a Network Node. 
4.  Other municipal service pole use is discouraged. 
d.  New node support poles shall be the least preferred type of allowed facility for attachment of network nodes. 
e.  Ground equipment must be minimal and the least intrusive and must not interfere with motorists' visibility of the traffic signals or sight distance at the intersection. 
(f)  Guidelines on placement, generally-Penalty . 
(1)  General prohibitions . In accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.102, a network provider must construct and maintain network nodes and node support poles in a manner that does not: 
a.  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
b.  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
c.  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
d.  Violate or conflict with the City's right-of-way maintenance ordinance or this section. 
e.  Violate the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq.); 
f.  Interfere with City public safety radio systems, utility supervisory control and data acquisition systems (SCADA), electric automation systems, metering networks, traffic signal light systems, or other City utility or safety communications components. 
Failure to comply with this subdivision is a violation of the City's Code and shall be subject to all remedies available under law and subject to application of the penalties outlined in penalty Subdivision of this section. 
(2)  General requirements . A network provider must construct and maintain network nodes, node support poles, ground equipment and related equipment in a manner that complies with the following: 
a.  Size and height limits . Network providers shall comply strictly with the limitations as set forth in Chapter 284, including but not limited to Chapter 284, Section 284.002, size of a Micro Network Node, Section 284.003, size of network nodes, and Section 284.103, maximum pole height. 
b.  State and Federal rights-of-way permit . If the project lies within a highway right-of-way, network provider must provide evidence of a permit from the State or Federal Government. 
c.  Non-interference . Wireless facilities must be installed in a manner that does not cause any interference with public safety radio systems, utility supervisory control and data acquisition systems (SCADA), electric automation systems, metering networks, traffic signal light systems, or other City utility or safety communications components. Network nodes shall not be allowed on city's public safety radio infrastructure, utility SCADA infrastructure, electronic automation system infrastructure, and metering network infrastructure. 
(3)  Underground requirement areas . 
a.  In accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.107, a network provider shall, in relation to installation for which the City approved a permit application pursuant to this section, comply with applicable nondiscriminatory undergrounding requirements, including municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, State law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use approval. 
b.  If a location is designated by the City to be an underground requirement area, then a network provider's permit for the location of the micro network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment at such location will be revoked 90 days after the designation and the network provider must remove all equipment located under the revoked permit at such location in accordance with the City's Code of Ordinances or as otherwise reasonably allowed by the City for the transition of other overhead facilities. 
(g)  Penalty for improperly located network nodes, node support poles and related ground equipment . 
(1)  Failure to comply with the guidelines for placement contained in this section shall be subject to all remedies available under law and subject to application of the penalties outlined in the following subsections. 
(2)  Improperly located network nodes, node support poles and related ground equipment shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the public right-of-way, or otherwise be inconsistent with the requirements of this section. If any network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment is installed in a manner that is not in accordance with the plans approved by the City or impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply or otherwise with this section or renders the public right-of-way non-compliant with applicable laws, including the American Disabilities Act, then network provider shall promptly remove the network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment. 
(3)  Notice to remove unauthorized facilities and relocate and penalty . After 30 days' notice to remove network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment that is located in the incorrect permitted location, if not relocated, the network provider shall be subject to a penalty of $500.00 per day penalty until the network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment is relocated to the correct area within the permitted Location, regardless of whether or not the network provider's contractor, subcontractor, or vendor installed the network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment in strict conformity with the City's right-of-way maintenance ordinance, and other applicable ordnances concerning improperly located facilities in the public right-of-way. 
(h)  Guidelines on placement-Specific requirements . 
(1)  Network Node facilities placement . 
a.  Right-of-way . Network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment must be placed, as much as possible, within two feet of the outer edge of the public right-of-way line to minimize any obstruction, impediment, or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way. 
b.  Height above ground . Network Node attachments to a pole must be installed at least eight feet above the ground in accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.108, and if a Network Node attachment is projecting toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the attachment shall be installed no less than 16 feet above the ground. 
c.  Protrusions . In accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.003(a)(1)(C), Section 284.003 (a)(2)(C) and Section 284.003-(a)(3)(B) no protrusion from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole shall be more than two feet. 
d.  Limit on number of network nodes per pole . There shall be no more than one network node on any one pole, unless otherwise approved in writing by the City Engineer. 
(2)  New node support poles . 
a.  New node support poles spacing . New node support poles shall be a minimum of 300 feet from a utility pole or another node support pole to minimize the hazard of poles adjacent to road ways and to minimize the effect on property values and aesthetics on the area, unless otherwise approved in writing by the City Engineer. 
b.  Height of node support poles or modified utility pole . In accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.103 a node support pole or modified utility pole may not exceed the lesser of: 
1.  Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole located within 500 linear feet of the new pole in the same public right-of-way; or 
2.  Fifty-five feet above ground level. 
(3)  Ground equipment. 
a.  Ground equipment near street corners and intersections . Ground equipment should be minimal and the least intrusive. In accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.102(1), to minimize any obstruction, impediment, or hindrance to the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way, and in order to maximize the line of sight required to add to safe travel of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and in order to maximize that line of sight at street corners and intersections and to minimize hazards at those locations, ground equipment may not be installed within 250 feet of a street corner or a street intersection, unless otherwise approved in writing by the City Engineer. 
b.  Ground equipment near municipal parks . For the safety of municipal park patrons, particularly small children, and to allow full line of sights near municipal park property, the network provider shall not install ground equipment in a public right-of-way that is within a park or within 250 feet of the boundary line of a park, unless otherwise approved in writing by the City Engineer. 
(4)  Municipal service poles . 
a.  Installations on a service pole must be in accordance with an agreement as allowed by Chapter 284, Section 284.056 and Section 284.101(a)(3), and (b). 
b.  Required industry standard pole load analysis . Installations on all service poles shall have an industry standard pole load analysis completed and submitted to the City with each permit application indicating that the service pole to which the Network Node is to be attached will safely support the load, in accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.108. 
c.  Height of attachments . All attachments on all service poles shall be at least eight feet above grade, in accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.108(a)(1)-(2), and if a Network Node attachment is projecting toward the street, for the safety and protection of the public and vehicular traffic, the attachment shall be installed no less than 16 feet above the ground. 
d.  Installations on traffic signal pole . Installations on all traffic signal structures must not interfere with the integrity of the facility in any way that may compromise the safety of the public and must be in accordance with an agreement as allowed by Chapter 284, Section 284.056 and Section 284.101(a)(3) and (b). Installation of Network Node facilities on any traffic signal structures must comply with the following: 
1.  Be encased in a separate conduit than the traffic light electronics; 
2.  Have a separate electric power connection than the traffic signal structure; and 
3.  Have a separate access point than the traffic signal structure. 
4.  Not be mounted on or attached to a traffic signal cabinet. 
e.  Installations on street signage . Installations on all street signage structures must not interfere with the integrity of the facility in any way that may compromise the safety of the public. Installation of Network Node facilities on any street signage structures that has electrics shall comply with the following: 
1.  Be encased in a separate conduit than any City signage electronics; 
2.  Have a separate electric power connection than the signage structure; 
3.  Have a separate access point than the signage structure. 
(i)  General aesthetic requirements . Wireless facilities must comply with the following aesthetic requirements: 
(1)  Concealment . 
a.  Network nodes and node support poles located in design districts with decorative poles and in historic districts pursuant to Chapter 284, Section 284.105 must be concealed consistent with the requirements of the district. 
b.  All new node support poles must be camouflaged, except those located in an area zoned or predominantly industrial area. 
c.  All new node support poles must comply with the City's Pole Attachment Specifications to the extent those specifications are consistent with Chapter 284. 
(2)  New node support pole spacing . New node support poles shall be a minimum of 300 feet from a utility pole or another node support pole to minimize the hazard of poles adjacent to road ways and to minimize the effect on property values and aesthetics on the area, unless otherwise approved in writing by the City Engineer. 
(3)  Allowed colors . Colors in historic districts and design districts must be in strict accordance with the City's right-of-way maintenance ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(j)  Electrical supply . 
(1)  A network provider must obtain any required electrical power service to the Micro Network Node, Network Node facilities, node support poles and ground equipment. The City shall not be liable to the network provider for any stoppages or shortages of electrical power furnished to the micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles or ground equipment, including without limitation, stoppages or shortages caused by any act, omission, or requirement of the public utility serving the structure or the act or omission of any other tenant or network provider of the structure, or for any other cause beyond the control of the City. 
(2)  Network provider shall not allow, install, permit, use, or facilitate the presence or use of generators or back-up generators in the public right-of-way in accordance with Chapter 284, Section 284.002(12)(B)(1). 
(k)  Insurance, indemnity, bonding, and security deposits . 
(1)  To the extent consistent with Chapter 284, a network provider must provide insurance, bonds and security deposits in strict accordance with the requirements of Chapter 3, any other applicable ordinances, and with the requirements of any agreement applicable to the wireless facility. In the event of a conflict, the requirement most protective of the City's interests prevails. 
(2)  The indemnification provisions of Chapter 284, Section 284.302, as provided for in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code Ch. 283,  283.057(a) and (b) apply to a network provider accessing a public right-of-way under this chapter. "Municipality" shall mean the "City". "Certificated telecommunications provider" shall be expanded to mean and also include a "network provider". "Parties" shall mean the City and the network provider. 
(l)  Installation and inspections . 
(1)  A network provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install micro network node, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment in a good and workmanlike manner in strict accordance with the City's right-of-way maintenance ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, policies, and agreements, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(2)  The City Engineer or designee, may perform inspections of any micro network node, network node, node support pole or related ground equipment located in the public right-of-way allowed in accordance with the City's right-of-way maintenance ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, policies, and agreements, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(m)  Relocation . Except as provided in State and Federal law, a network provider, within 90 days following written notice from the City, shall relocate or adjust network nodes in a public right-of-way without cost to the City in the management and maintenance of the public right-of-way and shall comply with the relocation requirements in the Code of Ordinances. 
(n)  Emergency removal, removal, replacement, maintenance, and repair . 
(1)  A network provider must provide the City with seven days' advanced notice of any maintenance work conducted within the public right-of-way and of any work to replace or upgrade a network node or pole, to install, place, maintain, operate, or replace micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles. 
(2)  A network provider must comply strictly with the requirements of the right-of-way maintenance ordinance and other applicable ordinances, when installing, replacing, maintaining, repairing, upgrading, removing, relocating or operating micro network nodes, network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284, Section 284.107, and except as provided in existing State and Federal law. 
(3)  The City retains the right and privilege to disconnect or move any network node, node support pole, or associated ground equipment located within the public right-of-way of the City, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the City shall notify the network provider and allow the network provider an opportunity to move its own facilities prior to the City disconnecting or removing a facility and shall notify the network provider after disconnecting or removing a network node or node support pole. 
(o)  Abandonment . Licensee shall remove micro network nodes, network nodes, node support poles, and related ground equipment when such facilities are abandoned or are obsolete, regardless of whether it receives notice from the City. Unless the City sends notice that removal must be completed immediately to ensure public health, safety, and welfare, the removal must be completed within the earlier of 90 days of it being abandoned or within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the City. A micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment is presumed abandoned if such facilities are not operated for 120 consecutive calendar days. When Licensee removes or abandons permanent structures in the public right-of-way, the licensee shall notify the City Engineer in writing of such removal or abandonment and shall file with the City Engineer the location and description of the micro network nodes, network nodes, node support poles, and related ground equipment removed or abandoned. The City Engineer may require the licensee to complete additional remedial measures necessary for public safety, health, and welfare, and the integrity of the public right-of-way. 
(p)  General provisions . 
(1)  A network provider's as-built maps and records shall be in strict accordance with the City's right-of-way maintenance ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(2)  Ownership of Network Node and related equipment shall be in strict accordance with Chapter 284, the City's right-of-way maintenance ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(3)  Tree maintenance shall be in strict accordance with the City's right-of-way maintenance ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(4)  Signage shall be in strict accordance with the City's right-of-way maintenance ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(5)  Graffiti abatement shall be in strict accordance with the City's right-of-way maintenance ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(6)  Network provider shall restore and repair the public right-of-way from any damage to the public right-of-way, or any facilities located within the public right-of-way, and the property of any third party resulting from network provider's activities in or near the right-of-way (or any other of network provider's activities hereunder) in strict accordance with the City's right-of-way maintenance ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(7)  Network provider shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of network provider's employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, sub-network provider's and subcontractors in connection with the installations of any micro network node, network node, node support pole and related ground equipment, as if such acts or omissions were network provider's acts or omissions in strict accordance with the City's right-of-way maintenance ordinance, and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not consistent with Chapter 284. 
(q)  Definitions . 
    Abandon and its derivatives means the facilities installed in the right-of-way (including by way of example but not limited to: poles, wires, conduit, manholes, handholes, cuts, network nodes and node support poles, or portion thereof) that have been left by network provider (or other responsible party) in an unused or non-functioning condition for more than 120 consecutive calendar days unless, after notice from the City to network provider, network provider has established to the reasonable satisfaction of the City that the applicable facilities, or portion thereof, is still in active use. 
    Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
    Applicable codes means: (a) uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes as adopted by the City and adopted by a recognized national code organization; and (b) any local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with Chapter 284. 
    Chapter 284 means Chapter 284 of Subtitle A. Title 9 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
    City Engineer means the City Engineer or their designee. 
    Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
    Concealment or Camouflaged means any wireless facility or pole that is covered, blended, painted, disguised, camouflaged or otherwise concealed such that the wireless facility blends into the surrounding environment and is visually unobtrusive as allowed as a condition for City advance approval under Chapter 284, Section 284.105 in historic or design districts. A concealed or camouflaged wireless facility or pole also includes any wireless facility or pole conforming to the surrounding area in which the wireless facility or pole is located and may include, but is not limited to hidden beneath a faade, blended with surrounding area design, painted to match the supporting area, or disguised with artificial tree branches or other City-approved materials. 
    Decorative pole means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to nondiscriminatory municipal codes. 
    Design district means an area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal code, and for which the City maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis. 
    Easement means and shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the City for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of utilities. 
    Highway right-of-way means right-of-way adjacent to a State or Federal highway. 
    Historic district means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, State, or Federal law. 
    Law means common law or a Federal, State, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
    Local means within the corporate boundaries of the City of College Station, Texas. 
    Location means the City-approved and lawfully permitted location for the Network Node. 
    Macro tower means a guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by Chapter 284, Section 284.103 and that supports or is capable of supporting antennas. 
    Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
    Municipal park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the City as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
    Municipally owned utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by a municipally owned utility, as defined by V.T.C.A. Texas Utilities code  11.003, and located in a public right-of-way. 
    Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term includes: (a) equipment associated with wireless communications; (b) a radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; (c) coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation; and (d) a distributed antenna system or DAS. The term does not include: (a) an electric generator; (b) a pole; or (c) a macro tower. Small cell shall be included as a type of "Network Node." 
    Network provider means: (a) a wireless service provider; or (b) a person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: (1) network nodes; or (2) node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. Provider has the same meaning as "network provider." 
    Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
    Pole means a service pole, municipally owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
    Right-of-way has the same meaning as is set forth in the right-of-way maintenance ordinance. 
    Right-of-way maintenance ordinance means [Chapter 34, Article IV] of the Code of Ordinances, City of College Station, Texas, as amended and recodified, and any other ordinances regulating access, use, or maintenance of the right-of-way, as amended and recodified. 
    Service pole means a pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned or operated by the City and located in a public right-of-way, including: (a) a pole that supports traffic control functions; (b) a structure for signage; (c) a pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and (d) a pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network nodes. 
    Street , as used in this section, includes only the paved portion and sub-grade of the public right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. A "Street" is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire public right-of-way, while a public right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements, a "Street" does not. A "street" does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later. 
    Traffic signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
    Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
    Underground requirement area means an area where poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead or above ground structures have been removed and buried or have been approved for burial underground pursuant to municipal ordinances, zoning regulations, State law, plats, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way. 
    User means a person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a public street or public right-of-way, depending on the context. 
    Utility pole means a pole that provides: (a) electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or (b) services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by V.T.C.A. Texas Utilities Code  51.002. 
    Wireless facilities mean "micro network nodes," "network nodes," and "node support poles" as defined in Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
    Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
    Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2017-3916 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2017) 
Chapter 36 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 36-1. - Residential Homestead Ad Valorem Tax exemption. 
    All qualified residence homesteads within the taxing jurisdiction of the City shall be entitled to a residence homestead exemption in an amount equal to the greater of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or five percent of the appraised value of the residence homestead for the tax year 2018 and each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 2018-4020 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2018) 
Secs. 36-2-36-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Hotel occupancy tax authorized, Texas Tax Code ch. 351. 

Sec. 36-16. - Sales tax. 
(a)  Local sales tax adopted. A local sales tax of one percent was adopted by the voters of the City as the result of an election held on February 3, 1968. 
(b)  Local sales tax retained on gas and electricity. The City, by majority vote of the City Council, hereby votes to retain the taxes authorized by the Local Sales and Use Tax Act (Texas Tax Code ch. 321) on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease, or rental of and the use, storage, or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use, as authorized by Texas Tax Code  321.105. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-7) 
Editor's note- The above election was authorized by Ordinance No. 552 of December 15, 1967. 
Sec. 36-17. - Homestead tax exemptions for the elderly. 
    $30,000.00 of the assessed value of residence homesteads of persons 65 years of age or over is hereby exempted from all ad valorem taxes levied by the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-9; altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Exemption authorized, Texas Tax Code  11.13. 
Sec. 36-18. - Occupation tax. 
(a)  Amount, payment of. There is hereby levied and there shall be collected from every person, firm, association or corporation pursuing any occupation taxed by the of the State, an annual occupation tax equal in each instance to the amount allowed by State law, which said taxes shall be paid annually in advance except where otherwise provided by State law, in which event the same may be paid as is provided by State law. 
(b)  Unlawful to operate without paying applicable tax. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association, or corporation to engage in an occupation subject to aforesaid tax without having paid the same to the City Secretary or other authorized official. Violators will be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-10) 
State Law reference- Occupation taxes authorized, Texas Tax Code  302.101. 
Sec. 36-19. - Hotel occupancy tax, definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consideration means the cost of the room, sleeping space, bed, or other facility in such hotel and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room, sleeping space, bed, or other facility for occupancy. 
    Hotel means any building, trailer, or other facility, in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term "hotel" shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodginghouses, inns, roominghouses, or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but the term "hotel" shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums, or nursing homes. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room, sleeping space, bed, or other facility in a hotel for any purpose. 
    Occupant means anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room, sleeping space, bed, or other facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room, sleeping space, or other facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
    Person means any individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel. 
    Quarterly period means the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February, and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May, and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August, and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November, and December. 
    Tax Collector means the Tax Assessor-Collector of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-11(A)) 
Sec. 36-20. - Levy of tax; rate; exceptions. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(c)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon the United States or an officer or employee of the United States when traveling on or otherwise engaged in the course of official duties for the United States. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-11(B)) 
Sec. 36-21. - Collection. 
    Every person owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in Section 36-5 for the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-11(C)) 
Sec. 36-22. - Reports and payments. 
    On the last business day of the month following the month of collection, every person required hereby to collect the tax imposed by this chapter shall file a report with the City; said report shall show the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding month, the amount of tax collected on the City's behalf on such occupancies, the number of persons exempt from the hotel/motel tax during the month, and any other information on a form promulgated by the Tax Collector. Such person shall also pay over the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. At the time of the quarterly report and payment of the State Hotel Occupancy Tax, there shall also be furnished to the City Tax Collector a copy of such quarterly report. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-11(D); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 36-23. - Rules and regulations. 
    The Tax Collector shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this chapter and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-11(E)) 
Sec. 36-24. - Penalties. 
(a)  Failure to file or filing false report. If any person required by the provisions of this chapter to collect the tax imposed herein, or make reports as required herein, and pay to the Tax Collector the tax imposed herein, shall fail to collect such tax, file such report, or pay such tax, or if any such person shall file a false report, such person shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7, and shall pay to the Tax Collector the tax due, together with a penalty for each 30 days that the same is not timely filed or paid. 
(b)  Tax assessments. If the operators of any hotel shall fail to file a report for any period as required by this chapter, or shall fail to pay the tax for any period as required by this chapter, then the Tax Assessor is hereby authorized to make an assessment of the tax for such period. The tax assessed, together with any penalties provided by this chapter, shall be a prior and superior lien on all property of the hotel. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  1-11(F); altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Hotel tax authorized, Texas Tax Code ch. 351. 
Chapter 38 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Adoption of Uniform Act. 
    The City Council hereby adopts Texas Transportation Code title 8 (Texas Transportation Code ch. 501 et seq.) and all other State motor vehicle laws, and re-ordains that such Act and laws shall be in full force and effect upon all streets, roads, alleys, and thoroughfares within the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-1) 
Sec. 38-2. - Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted. 
    All traffic control devices including signs, signals, and markings on pavement and curbs used for the purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the City shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for streets and highways, which is published by the State Department of Transportation. All traffic control devices so erected shall be official traffic control devices of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-2(A); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 38-3. - Ratification of existing traffic control devices. 
    All traffic control signs, signals, devices, and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this Code and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified, and declared to be official traffic control devices; provided such traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or State law. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-2(H)) 
Sec. 38-4. - Automated traffic signal enforcement. 
    This section, automated traffic signal enforcement, in its entirety, has been repealed and the use of cameras for red light violations is hereby banned in the City by Ordinance No. 3217 on December 10, 2009. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-11) 
Sec. 38-5. - Through streets. 
    The City hereby designates certain streets as through streets. The designated through streets for the City are described in Section 38-1001. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-2(B); altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate through streets, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(9). 
Sec. 38-6. - Four-way stop intersections. 
    The City hereby designates certain intersections to be controlled by four-way stop signs. The designated four-way stop intersections for the City are described in Section 38-1002. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-2(C); Ord. No. 2016-3805, exh. A(10-2), 9-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate stop intersections, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(8). 
Sec. 38-7. - Intersections controlled by stop signs. 
    The City hereby designates certain intersections to be controlled by stop signs. The designated intersections for the City to be controlled by stop signs are described in Section 38-1003. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-2(D); altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate stop intersections, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(8). 
Sec. 38-8. - Intersections controlled by yield signs. 
    The City hereby designates certain intersections to be controlled by yield signs. The designated intersections for the City to be controlled by yield signs are described in Section 38-1004. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-2(E)) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate yield intersections, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(8). 
Sec. 38-9. - School zones. 
    The City hereby designates certain locations in the City as school zones during specified times. The designated school zones are described in Section 38-1005. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-2(F); Ord. No. 2016-3815, exh. A(10-2), 10-13-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3914 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate school crossings, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(11). 
Sec. 38-10. - Bike lanes and bike prohibitions. 
(a)  The City may designate certain City streets as having bike lanes. The City may prohibit bicycle travel on other City streets. The designated bike lanes and bicycle prohibitions for the City are controlled using devices within the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(b)  The designated bike lanes and bicycle prohibitions are established in Section 38-1006. 
(c)  Bike lane violations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, park, stop or stand any motor vehicle in any bike lanes designated in Section 38-1006 unless parking is allowed as designated in Section 38-44. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on any street prohibited under Section 38-1006. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-2(G)) 
Sec. 38-11. - One-way streets and alleyways. 
    The City hereby designates certain portions of streets and alleyways to be one-way. The designated one-way streets and alleyways for the City are described in Section 38-1007. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-2(J); Ord. No. 2016-3786, exh. A(10-2), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3893 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate one-way streets, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(11). 
Sec. 38-12. - Intersections controlled by no right turn or no left turn signs. 
    The City hereby designates certain intersections to be controlled by "No Right Turn" or "No Left Turn" signs. The designated no right turn and no left turn locations for the City are described in Section 38-1008. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-2(K); Ord. No. 2016-3782, exh. A(10-2), 7-14-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3912 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3913 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate prohibit turns, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(7). 
Sec. 38-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2019-4071 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted Feb. 14, 2019, repealed  38-13, which pertained to truck prohibitions and derived from Code 2011 (Repub),  10-2(L). Provisions pertaining to truck prohibitions are now set forth in Art. V,  38-201 and 38-202. 
Sec. 38-14. - Emergency 911 Gates. 
    The City hereby designates certain City streets to be closed to traffic with the installation of an Emergency 911 Gate. The designated streets on which these gates are installed are described in Section 38-1010. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-2(M)) 
Sec. 38-15. - U-turn prohibitions. 
    The City hereby designates certain locations on City streets as "NO U-TURN." The designated no U-turn locations are described in Section 38-1011. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-2(N); Ord. No. 2016-3806, exh. A(10-2), 9-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate prohibit turns, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(7). 
Sec. 38-16. - Speeds greater or less than 30 miles per hour to be determined by engineering and/or traffic investigation. 
    Whenever the City shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and/or traffic investigation that the 30 miles per hour speed limit hereinbefore set forth is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place, or upon any part of the street or highway, the City shall, upon authorization by the City Council by appropriate ordinance, establish such speed limit as shall be effective at all times when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at such intersection or other place or part of the highway or street. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-3(B)) 
State Law reference- Authority to alter speed limits, Texas Transportation Code  545.356. 
Sec. 38-17. - Speed limits established for certain described streets. 
(a)  The City Council hereby designates certain speed limits on certain described streets, said designated streets and speed limits are described in Section 38-1012. 
(b)  No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle or other vehicle upon streets described in Section 38-1012 at a greater speed than the speed designated for that street or portion of that street as set forth in Section 38-1012, or for streets and highways not designated therein when speeds have been determined and properly posted in accordance with the provisions of this section. Any speed in excess of the limits set forth in the schedule, or when limits are properly posted in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is neither reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-3(E)) 
State Law reference- Authority to alter speed limits, Texas Transportation Code  545.356. 
Sec. 38-18. - Temporary speed limits established for certain described streets. 
(a)  The City Council hereby designates certain temporary speed limits on certain described streets, said designated streets and speed limits are described in Section 38-1013. 
(b)  No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle or other vehicle upon streets described in Section 38-1013 at a greater speed than the speed designated for that street or portion of that street as set forth in Section 38-1013 or for streets and highways not designated therein when speeds have been determined and properly posted in accordance with the provisions of this section. Any speed in excess of the limits set forth in Section 38-1013, or when limits are properly posted in accordance with the provisions of this section, shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is neither reasonable nor prudent and is unlawful. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-3(F); Ord. No. 2016-3757, exh. A(10-3), 4-14-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3804, exh. A(10-3), 9-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Authority to alter speed limits, Texas Transportation Code  545.356. 
Sec. 38-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-3934 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 25, 2017, repealed  38-19, which pertained to the use of wireless communication devices while operating a motor vehicle or bicycle and derived from Ord. No. 2016-3797, Exh. A(10-14), adopted Aug. 11, 2016. 
Secs. 38-20-38-41. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(2); stopping, standing and parking generally, Texas Transportation Code  545.301 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-42. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or operator, other than a Police Officer or City employee acting in the course and scope of their duties, to park, stop or stand a motor vehicle: 
(1)  In or on an unapproved surface. The term "unapproved surface" is defined as any surface not approved by the City according to this Code as a parking surface for vehicles; 
(2)  In or on a yard or lawn; 
(3)  In any location where an official sign indicates parking, stopping or standing is prohibited; 
(4)  Blocking a public or private driveway or alley; 
(5)  Blocking a dumpster; 
(6)  In any location where an official sign indicates that parking, stopping or standing is prohibited during certain time periods; 
(7)  Where prohibited due to special event restricted parking; 
(8)  In a fire lane; 
(9)  In or on City park grass; 
(10)  Double parked on the roadway side of a vehicle stopped at the edge or curb of a street; 
(11)  On a sidewalk; 
(12)  In an intersection; 
(13)  On a crosswalk; 
(14)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
(15)  Within 20 feet of a cross walk at an intersection; 
(16)  Within 30 feet of any traffic control device, flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic control signal; 
(17)  Park facing traffic; 18 inches from Curb. On a two-way roadway that does not do so with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway; 
(18)  Park facing traffic; 18 inches from Curb. On a one-way roadway that does not stop or park the vehicle parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway in the direction of authorized traffic movement with the right-hand wheels within 18 inches of the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway or the left-hand wheels within 18 inches of the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway; and 
(19)  Parking at an expired parking meter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person, owner, occupant, resident, or person in charge of a property, to permit or allow: 
(1)  On property used for residential purposes; 
(2)  With or without a fee charged; 
(3)  The parking, stopping, or standing of a motor vehicle on a yard or lawn. 
(c)  Any motor vehicle unlawfully parked or violating any provisions in this article, whether parked on or in any public parking lot or structure, public property, street, road, highway or alley may be towed at the owner's or operator's expense. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(C)(9)(d), (e); Ord. No. >2017-3963 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-14-2017; Ord. No. 2018-4042 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2018) 
Sec. 38-43. - Parking, standing, or storing of recreational vehicles, trailers or trucks in residential areas. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Camper means a separate vehicle designed for human habitation which can be attached and detached to or towed by a motor vehicle. 
    Commercial Vehicle means a motor vehicle or combination weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds, including a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight or a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds; or has a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds. 
    Driveway means any paved concrete, asphalt, gravel and/or other impervious surface area on a lot designed and required to provide direct access for vehicles between a street and private garage, carport, or other permitted parking space, or parking area or loading area, garage and attached or detached accessory building located on a lot developed with a residential dwelling used by the occupant of the premises principally for, but not limited to, the storage of passenger vehicles or other vehicles and equipment. Driveways or paved parking areas must be substantially free from grass, weeds, or other vegetation and must be adequately maintained. 
    Motor home means a self-contained vehicle designed for human habitation with its own motive power and with a passageway from the body of the home to the driver and front passenger seats. 
    Motor vehicle means a self-propelled device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported. 
    Recreational vehicle means any motor vehicle or trailer designed or used as a travel trailer, camper, motor home, tent trailer, boat, boat trailer, camping trailer, or other similar purposes. 
    Residential area or residential lot means any area or lot occupied by residential dwellings though the area may be zoned for use other than residential. 
    Trailer means a vehicle without motive power designed for carrying persons, animals, or property on its own structure and to be drawn by a vehicle with motive power. The term "trailer" shall include, but not be limited to, semi-trailer and utility trailer. The term "trailer" shall not include any trailer defined as a recreational vehicle. 
    Truck means any motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property, with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity exceeding 2,000 pounds. 
    Truck-tractor means any motor vehicle designed or used primarily for drawing other vehicles. It is intended that the term "truck tractor" includes a motor vehicle that is otherwise a truck-tractor that may be engaged with a semi-trailer. 
    Unapproved surface means any surface not approved by the City according to this Code as a parking surface for vehicles. 
(b)  Parking regulations. 
(1)  Owner, occupant or person in charge . It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in charge in a residential area to: 
a.  Permit or allow the parking, standing or storing of commercial vehicles, trucks, trailers, or truck-tractors on residential streets, unless used for actual supervised loading or unloading of goods or passengers or providing an active service to the property. 
b.  Permit or allow the parking, standing or storing of recreational vehicles on residential streets for a period of time in excess of 72 hours within any 30-day period. 
c.  Permit or allow the parking, standing or storing of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, commercial vehicles, trucks, trailers, or truck-tractors on yards or lawns, unless parked in areas screened from the right-of-way by permanent fencing. 
(2)  Commercial vehicles . It shall be unlawful for the owner, driver, or person in charge of a commercial vehicle to park, stop, or store a commercial vehicle on residential streets in residential areas, unless used for actual supervised loading or unloading of goods and passengers or for vehicles providing an active service to the property. 
(3)  Yards and lawns . It shall be unlawful for the owner, driver, or person in charge of a motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, commercial vehicle, truck, trailer, or truck-tractor park or permit the parking, standing or storing of such vehicle on the yards or lawns in a residential area or residential lot, unless parked in areas screened from the right-of-way by permanent fencing. 
(4)  Solid waste containers . It shall be unlawful for owner, driver, or person in charge of a vehicle to park, place, allow, permit, or cause to be parked or placed any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or any similar obstruction or item ("obstructing item") within 15 feet of, or obstruct in any manner, the collection of solid waste contained in a City-owned container larger than 90 gallons. If an obstructing item prevents the collection of a City-owned solid waste container larger than 90 gallons, the City is authorized to remove the obstructing item. The cost of the removal shall be the responsibility of the owner of the obstructing item. All City-owned solid waste containers larger than 90 gallons shall be marked with a sign or label stating: " Do Not Block or Park Within 15 Feet of Container - Tow Away Zone ." 
(c)  Zoning Board of Adjustment special exceptions. 
(1)  A special exception may be granted to any person identified in subsection (b) of this section, upon application to and approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to accept applications for special exceptions for the parking of vehicles on front yard lawns in residential areas. 
(2)  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and consider applications for special exceptions for the parking of vehicles on residential yards. The Board may issue special exceptions where it determines that the issuance will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the section will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the section shall be observed and substantial justice done. In the event that the Board determines that a special exception shall be issued, then it may impose such restrictions as it deems necessary to protect the character of the neighborhood. Such restrictions may include, but are not limited to, screening and landscaping. 
(3)  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the authority, upon ten days' written notice, to set a hearing date to consider whether or not the terms of the special exception have been complied with upon presentation of evidence by the City staff and the permittee. Upon a finding that the terms of the special exception have been violated, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to revoke, suspend, maintain or alter the terms of the special exception issued. 
(d)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Residential properties zoned R Rural or E Estate are exempt from the regulations in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Commercial properties zoned GC General Commercial, CI Commercial Industrial, BP Business Park and BPI Business Industrial Park are exempt from the regulations in subsection (b) (1 and 4) of this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-6; Ord. No. 2018-4057 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-19-2018) 
Sec. 38-44. - Parking in bike lanes. 
    Parking, stopping or standing in bike lanes is expressly prohibited unless the City hereby designates certain sections of streets where parking is permitted in a bike lane on a limited basis during specified times as follows: Anderson Street from Park Place to Holleman Drive, weekdays from 5:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. and on weekends. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(D)) 
Sec. 38-45. - Parking regulations for certain described areas. 
(a)  The City hereby designates certain areas to be controlled by "No Parking Here to Corner" or "No Parking Anytime" locations for the City are described in the section 38-1014. 
(b)  The City Manager or designee may temporarily allow parking where parking is currently prohibited by City ordinance as part of a City event or special event as defined elsewhere in this Code, or any time when determined necessary for the safety of the general public. When temporary on-street parking is allowed as set forth above, the existing "No Parking Here to Corner" or "No Parking Anytime" signs shall be removed or otherwise altered to provide such notice to citizens. Signs shall not be removed or otherwise altered for more than a consecutive 72-hour period. 
(c)  The term "commercial motor vehicle" in Section 38-1014, means a motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles used to transport property that: 
(1)  Has a gross combination weight or a gross combination weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds, including a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight or a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds; or 
(2)  Has a gross vehicle weight or a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(E); Ord. No. 2016-3755, exh. A(10-4), 3-31-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3771, exh. A(10-4), 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3772, exh. A(10-4), 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3783, exh. A(10-4), 7-14-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3787, exh. A(10-4), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3807, exh. A(10-4), 9-22-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3818, exh. A(10-4), 10-13-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3894 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3911 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2017) 
Sec. 38-46. - Temporary no parking areas. 
    The City Manager or designee may temporarily remove on-street parking in an area where parking is not currently prohibited by City ordinance. The temporary "No Parking" sign shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, which is published by the Texas Department of Transportation. The temporary "No Parking" sign may be placed as part of a special event and/or where safety along the street is a concern. The temporary sign shall not be erected for more than a consecutive 72-hour period. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(F)) 
Sec. 38-47. - Two-hour parking. 
(a)  The designated two-hour parking locations for the City are described in Section 38-1015. 
(b)  The City hereby designates certain areas as two-hour parking from 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday as described in Section 38-1015. 
(c)  The City hereby designates certain areas as two-hour parking 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Vehicles may park for a maximum of two hours at no charge within the designated parking stalls at the locations described in Section 38-1015. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(G); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 38-48. - 30-minute parking. 
    The City hereby designates certain areas as 30-minute parking. The designated 30-minute parking locations for the City are described Section 38-1014. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(I); Ord. No. 2016-3784, exhs. A(10-4), B(10-4), 7-14-2016; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 38-49-38-69. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF PARKING VIOLATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Administrative adjudication of parking offenses, Texas Transportation Code ch. 682. 

Sec. 38-70. - Parking violations made civil offenses. 
(a)  A violation of a provision of this Code governing the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle is designated as a civil offense. 
(b)  A person charged with violating a standing, parking or stopping ordinance under this Code is entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing. Such hearing shall take place no later than ten business days following the date upon which a citation or summons is issued. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(A)) 
Sec. 38-71. - Enforcement Officer. 
    The City Manager or designee shall implement and enforce the provisions of this article and establish procedures consistent with this division necessary to discharge the duty or to affect the policy of this division. Under this division, the City Manager or designee shall also have the authority to reduce the civil fine amounts set herein on a limited basis as part of an amnesty period. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(B)) 
Sec. 38-72. - Hearing Officer. 
    One or more Hearing Officers shall be appointed by the City Manager or designee to administratively adjudicate all parking violations for which a parking citation is issued. A Hearing Officer shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Administer oaths; 
(2)  Accept admissions and hear and determine contests of parking violations under this Code; 
(3)  Issue orders enforceable by the Municipal Court compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents; 
(4)  Issue orders of immobilization or impoundment of vehicles; 
(5)  Set conditions for the release of vehicles immobilized or impounded under this article; and 
(6)  Dismiss parking citations or cases that the Hearing Officer determines to be unenforceable. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(C)(1)) 
Sec. 38-73. - Parking citations. 
(a)  The administrative adjudication process is initiated by the issuance of a parking citation or summons. Authority and powers necessary to issue citations or summons to gain compliance with Code provisions, and all other codes or ordinances of the City, are given to City Parking Enforcement Officers, Code Enforcement Officers, College Station Peace Officers, any other designated code enforcement officials, and Community Services Department staff members with code enforcement duties. A parking citation serves as the summons and notice of administrative adjudication hearing under this section. 
(b)  A parking citation or summons shall include the following information: 
(1)  The nature, date, time, and location of the alleged parking violation. 
(2)  A statement that a person charged with a civil offense under this Code is entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing to determine liability for the charged offense and that such right to a hearing shall be exercised by mail or by appearing before a Hearing Officer within ten business days from the date of the citation or summons. 
(3)  The State license plate number of the vehicle, or if the license plate number is not visible or legible, the vehicle identification number or the State inspection tag number. 
(4)  The make of the vehicle. 
(5)  A notification that failure to answer the citation or to appear at the administrative adjudication hearing is considered an admission of liability for the parking violation and will result in the assessment of civil fines, costs, and fees. 
(c)  The original or a copy of a parking citation or summons, including an electronic copy, is a governmental record kept in the ordinary course of City business and is rebuttable proof of the facts it contains. 
(d)  A parking citation must be served personally on the operator of a vehicle who is present at the time of service. If the operator is not present, or cannot be personally served, the parking citation may be served by affixing the parking citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. A summons may be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle via certified mail, return receipt requested (CMRRR). Mailing the summons CMRRR is deemed proper notice to the registered vehicle owner. 
(e)  An operator of a vehicle who is not the vehicle's owner, but who uses or operates the vehicle with the express or implied permission of the owner, is considered the owner's agent authorized to receive a parking citation in accordance with this section. 
(f)  The original and all copies of a parking citation or summons are prima facie evidence that the parking citation was issued and that service was made in accordance with this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(C)(2)) 
Sec. 38-74. - Vehicle owner and operator liability; presumption of liability and ownership; and defenses. 
(a)  Owner and Operator Liability. Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section the registered owner and the operator of a vehicle, when not the same, are both liable to the City for a parking violation charge, except that the registered owner is not liable if the owner can prove that the vehicle was operated without the owner's express or implied consent. Payment of the civil fine, costs, and fees by either the owner or operator is a final disposition of the charged violation. 
(b)  Rental vehicle owner liability. A vehicle owner who is engaged in the business of renting or leasing vehicles under written rental or leasing agreements is not liable for civil fines, costs, and fees imposed by the City on a rented or leased vehicle if, within 30 days after receiving written notice of a parking violation, the owner provides an affidavit stating the name, address, and driver's license number and state of issuance of a person in possession of the vehicle at the time the parking citation or summons was issued, or a copy of the lease or rental agreement in effect at the time the parking citation was issued. A lessor of a vehicle who fails to comply with this this section is liable for civil fines, costs, and fees. 
(c)  Stolen vehicle defense. It is defense to a charge of a parking violation that at the time of the violation, the illegally parked vehicle was reported to a Police Department as having been stolen before the time of the violation and had not yet been recovered. 
(d)  Registered owner presumption. In a hearing to administratively adjudicate a parking citation or summons or an appeal hearing therefrom, it is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle for which the citation was issued is the person who stopped, stood, or parked the vehicle at the time and place of the parking violation. A computer-generated record of the registration of the vehicle with the Texas Department of Transportation showing the name of the person to whom State license plates were issued is prima facie evidence of the ownership of the vehicle. 
(e)  Payment of parking fee is not a defense. A vehicle owner or operator's payment of any parking fee is not a defense to any parking related offense or violation found in this Chapter. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(C)(3); Ord. No. 2019-4094 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2019-4094 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted May 23, 2019, amended  38-74 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Liability of the vehicle owner and operator; presumption of liability, presumption of ownership," to "Vehicle owner and operator liability; presumption of liability and ownership; and defenses," as set out herein. 
Sec. 38-75. - Hearings. 
(a)  At a hearing before a Hearing Officer, the defendant may either admit, admit with explanation, or deny the alleged violation. 
(b)  The issuing Parking Enforcement Officer or Peace Officer is not required to attend the hearing. 
(c)  The City's prosecuting attorney is not required to attend the hearing. However, if the defendant is represented by legal counsel, the Hearing Officer may notify the prosecuting attorney, who shall have the right to appear on behalf of the City at the hearing. 
(d)  No formal or sworn complaint shall be necessary. The Hearing Officer shall base their decision upon an examination of the contents of the citation or summons and the evidence related to ownership of the vehicle in question, the presumptions and other prima facie evidence established by this division and other applicable law, and the evidence and testimony presented by the defendant and the City. If the Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant is liable for the violation, the Hearing Officer shall find the defendant liable. 
(e)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue an order stating whether the defendant is liable for the violation of this article and the amount, if any, of civil fines, costs or fees assessed against the defendant. 
(f)  All orders issued by the Hearing Officer shall be filed with the Clerk of the College Station Municipal Court. All such orders shall be maintained in a separate index or file by the Municipal Court Clerk. The order may be recorded using computer printouts, microfilm, microfiche or electronic or data processing techniques. 
(g)  Failure of a defendant to appear by mail or personal appearance within the aforesaid ten-business-day period shall be considered an admission of liability for the charged offense. Such defendant shall be liable for the civil fines, costs and fees assessed by order of the Hearing Officer. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(C)(4)) 
Sec. 38-76. - Appeal from hearing. 
(a)  A person determined by a Hearing Officer to be liable for a parking violation may appeal the determination by filing a petition with the Municipal Court, along with any other costs required by law for Municipal Courts not later than 30 calendar days after the Hearing Officer's order is filed with the Municipal Court. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an appeal petition, the Municipal Court shall schedule an appeal hearing and notify all parties of the date, time, and location of the hearing. 
(c)  The appeal hearing shall be a de novo review by the Municipal Judge. Based upon the evidence presented at the appeal hearing and if the Judge determines by a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant committed the violation, the Judge shall find the defendant liable therefore. 
(d)  Service of notice of appeal under this section does not stay the enforcement and collection of any order of a Hearing Officer, unless the person filing the appeal posts with the Municipal Court an appeal bond in an amount equal to all civil fines, costs and fees assessed by the Hearing Officer. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(C)(5)) 
Sec. 38-77. - Enforcement of order. 
(a)  A Hearing Officer's order filed under this division may be enforced by: 
(1)  Impounding the vehicle that is the subject of the order; 
(2)  Immobilizing by placing a device that prohibits movement ("boot") on the vehicle that is the subject of the order; 
(3)  Imposing an additional fine as set out by this section if not paid within the specified time; 
(4)  Denying issuance of or revoking a parking or operating permit, as applicable; or 
(5)  Filing an action to collect the fine, cost, or fee in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Provided, however, that no vehicle shall be impounded or immobilized under this section unless: 
(1)  The person liable under this section has three or more delinquent unpaid citations or summons in a calendar year; and 
(2)  Written notice is mailed to the last known registered owner of the vehicle by certified mail, return receipt requested, with a ten-day return at least ten business days before the vehicle is impounded or immobilized notifying the registered owner that the vehicle is subject to impoundment or immobilization under this section. Said notice shall also notify the registered owner of their right to submit information to a Hearing Officer regarding the propriety of impoundment or immobilization. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(C)(6); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 38-78. - Procedures for impoundment and immobilization. 
(a)  When a vehicle is found parked, whether legally or illegally, at any time upon a public street or public property within the City, and such vehicle has met the criteria for immobilization or impoundment as provided in Section 38-77(b), any authorized employee designated by the City Manager, Peace Officer, or Parking Enforcement Officer for the City may immobilize the vehicle by the installation on, or attachment to, the vehicle of a device, or boot, designed to prohibit the movement of the vehicle. In the alternative, such vehicle may be towed and impounded. 
(b)  At the time of immobilization, the person executing the immobilization shall attach to the vehicle a written notice on a form provided by the City that includes the following information: 
(1)  Notice that the vehicle has been immobilized pursuant to this section and that attempted movement may cause damage to the vehicle; 
(2)  Instructions as to release of the vehicle; 
(3)  Notice that the owner or operator may request a hearing regarding the immobilization within ten business days following the date of immobilization; and 
(4)  Notice that the vehicle may be towed and impounded if the owner or a person authorized to act on behalf of the owner does not obtain a release of the vehicle within 24 hours following the immobilization. 
(c)  Notice that failure to request or appear at a hearing as provided in Subsection (b)(3) of this section waives any objection to the proposed impoundment or immobilization of the vehicle. 
(d)  In the event that the vehicle is towed and impounded, the owner shall be responsible for payment of applicable fees for towing, impoundment and storage in addition to the fines, costs and fees under this section. 
(e)  This section is to be cumulative of existing law, and nothing herein shall be construed to restrict or limit the right to tow and impound vehicles under other applicable law. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(C)(7)) 
State Law reference- Vehicle towing and booting, Texas Occupations Code ch. 2308. 
Sec. 38-79. - Civil fines, costs and fees. 
(a)  Civil fines, costs and fees assessed in connection with this division shall be limited to those specified below. 
(b)  If the vehicle owner or operator remits payment no later than the tenth business day after issuance of the citation or summons, or before the hearing date shown on the citation, the total fine and costs due for the violation is the amount shown on the citation as "Early Payment Fine." If payment of the fine is made on or after the 11th business day after issuance of the citation or summons, the owner or operator shall remit the amount shown on the citation under "Standard Fine." 
(c)  A payment remitted by mail is considered "remitted" on the post-marked date. 
(d)  The following offenses are unlawful and the fines are established and incorporated by reference by all purposes: 
Offense Payment Within 10 Days Payment After 10 Days 1. Park/Stop/Stand in or on unapproved surface $75.00 $85.00 2. Park/Stop/Stand in or on a yard or lawn $75.00 $85.00 3. Parking or stopping in bike lane $35.00 $45.00 4. Park/Stop/Stand -Prohibited $50.00 $60.00 5. Park/Stop/Stand blocking public or private driveway or alley $25.00 $35.00 6. Park/Stop/Stand blocking dumpster $55.00 $65.00 7. Restricted no Park/Stop/Stand/time parking $25.00 $35.00 8. Special event violation $25.00 $35.00 9. Park/Stop/Stand in fire lane $135.00 $145.00 10. Park/Stop/Stand in or on City park grass $75.00 $85.00 11. Parking truck, tractor or trailer on City road $75.00 $85.00 12. Parking in Northgate Parking Garage without paying fee $115.00 $125.00 13. Parking blocking adjacent parking space $35.00 $45.00 14. Immobilization fee $50.00 15. Double Parked $50.00 $60.00 16. Park/Stop/Stand on sidewalk $35.00 $45.00 17. Park/Stop/Stand on crosswalk $35.00 $45.00 18. Park/Stop/Stand within 15 feet of fire hydrant $50.00 $60.00 19. Park/Stop/Stand Within 20 feet of a cross walk at an intersection $35.00 $45.00 20. Park/Stop/Stand more than 18 inches from curb $35.00 $45.00 21. Park/Stop/Stand stop stand in intersection $50.00 $60.00 22. Park/Stop/Stand Facing Traffic $35.00 $45.00 23. Park/Stop/Stand within 30 feet of traffic control device $35.00 $45.00 24. Expired Meter $25.00 $35.00 25. Parking/Standing/Storing of Recreation vehicles, trucks, trailers or truck-tractors $115.00 $125.00  
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(C)(8); Ord. No. >2017-3963 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 12-14-2017; Ord. No. 2019-4095 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2019) 
Sec. 38-80. - Immobilization offenses. 
    It shall be unlawful for: 
(1)  Any person, other than a Peace Officer or employee of the City acting in the course and scope of their duties under this division, to remove or attempt to remove or to tamper in any manner with the immobilization device ("boot") installed on any vehicle pursuant to this division. 
(2)  Any person, except under the direction of a Peace Officer, to tow or move or to cause to be towed or moved, any vehicle on which a boot is then installed pursuant to this division from the place the vehicle was booted. 
(3)  Any person, other than an officer or employee of the City acting in the course and scope of their duties, or the owner or operator of a booted vehicle, to remove or relocate any notice placed upon a booted vehicle pursuant to this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(C)(9)(a)-(c)) 
Secs. 38-81-38-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NORTHGATE AREA 

Sec. 38-104. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Sunday parking. A person may park a motor vehicle in the Northgate Promenade Parking Lot, Northgate on-street parking and the Northgate College Main Garage and is exempt from the above fees on Sundays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. 
(b)  Disabled parking. A person may park a motor vehicle in the Northgate Promenade Parking Lot and is exempt from the above fees if there is displayed on the vehicle valid disabled license plates or a valid disabled parking placard. 
(c)  Friday 12:30 p.m. and 2:30 p.m. parking. A person may park a motor vehicle at the on-street parking meters on the 300 and 400 blocks of Stasney Street and Tauber Street on Friday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 2:30 p.m. and is exempt from the above fees. 
(d)  Northgate Promenade Parking Lot loading zone. 
(1)  Location. The loading zone will be located at parking space numbers 106 through 135 on the south side of the Northgate Promenade Parking Lot located at 310 Church Avenue. 
(2)  Commercial vehicles and times. Only commercial motor vehicles may park, stop, and stand with an unattended vehicle for active loading or unloading, on Northgate Promenade Parking Lot loading zone the during the hours from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m., Monday through Friday. All other motor vehicles are prohibited from stopping, standing, and parking in this area during the specified period of time. 
(3)  Definition. The term "commercial motor vehicle", in this section, means a vehicle has a gross combination weight or a gross combination weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds, including a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight or a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds; or has a gross vehicle weight or a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds. 
(e)  Northgate Promenade Parking Lot Passenger Pick-up Loading Zone. 
(1)  Location. The passenger pick-up loading zone is located at parking space numbers 108-132 on the south side of the Northgate Promenade Parking Lot located at 310 Church Avenue. 
(2)  Passenger pick-up loading zone. Designated area at the Northgate Promenade Parking Lot for active passenger loading and unloading from 9:00 p.m. to 3:00 a.m. Motor vehicles are limited only to active passenger loading and unloading. All other motor vehicles are prohibited from stopping, standing, and parking in this area during the specified time period. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(H)(5); Ord. No. 2018-4028 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-26-2018) 
Sec. 38-105. - Hours of operation of Northgate Promenade Parking Lot and Northgate College Main Parking Garage. 
    The City Manager or designee shall determine the hours of operation of the Northgate Promenade Parking Lot and Northgate College Main Parking Garage. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(H)(4)) 
Sec. 38-106. - Northgate Promenade Parking Lot fee schedule. 
    The City Manager or designee may adjust the parking fee up to or below the amounts set below. The fees established in Section 2-117 shall be charged for the use of a parking space in the Northgate Promenade Parking Lot, located at 310 Church Street. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(H)(1); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 38-107. - Northgate Parking Garage fee schedule. 
(a)  The City Manager or designee may adjust the parking fee up to or below the amounts established. The fees established in Section 2-117 shall be charged for the use of a parking space in the Northgate Parking Garage, located at 309 College Main. 
(b)  License agreements. The City Manager or designee may enter into license agreements for the use of parking spaces in the Northgate College Main Parking Garage and may charge the fees established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(H)(2); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 38-108. - Northgate on-street parking fee schedule. 
    The City Manager or designee may adjust the parking fee up to or below the amounts established. The fees established in Section 2-117 shall be charged for the use of an on-street parking space provided by the City and adjacent to a parking meter anywhere in the Northgate Area, generally located between South College on the East, Wellborn Road on the West, University Drive on the South and the City limit on the North. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(H)(3); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 38-109. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in a space or multiple spaces without paying the required fee into the meter for the space, unless covered by an exemption listed in Section 38-104. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to park in the parking garage without paying the required fee, unless covered by an exemption. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in such a manner that the vehicle prohibits the use of an adjacent designated parking space. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to cause any damage to any parking surface, sidewalk, or any other property owned or maintained by the City by the loading or unloading of goods or by the over weight of a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(H)(6)) 
Secs. 38-110-38-131. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned and junked motor vehicles, Texas Transportation Code ch. 683; junked vehicles, Texas Transportation Code  683.071 et seq. 

Sec. 38-132. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
    Junked vehicle: 
(1)  The term "junked vehicle" means any motor vehicle as defined in Texas Transportation Code ch. 683: 
a.  That is self-propelled; and 
b.  is: 
1.  Wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
2.  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
i.  72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
ii.  30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
(2)  The term "junked vehicle" includes a motor vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft. This definition applies only to: 
a.  A motor vehicle that displays an expired license plate or does not display a license plate; 
b.  An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft an unexpired Federal aircraft identification number registered under Federal Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 CFR 47; or 
c.  A watercraft that: 
1.  Does not have lawfully on board an unexpired certificate of number; and 
2.  Is not a watercraft described by Texas Parks and Wildlife Code  31.055. 
    Motor vehicle collector means a person who owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle, or part of an antique or special interest vehicle, for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code  683.071. 
    Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from the original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(A); altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2018-4029 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-26-2018) 
Sec. 38-133. - Penalty. 
    Anyone violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(A); altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2018-4028 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-26-2018) 
Sec. 38-134. - Effect of article. 
    This article does not affect the law authorizing the immediate removal, as an obstruction to traffic, of a vehicle left on public property. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(P)) 
Sec. 38-135. - Administration. 
    The administration of this article shall be by regularly salaried, fulltime employees of the City, except that any authorized person may remove the public nuisance. The City Manager or designee authorized to administer this article may enter private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance. The Municipal Court Judge may issue orders necessary to enforce this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(M), (N)) 
Sec. 38-136. - Exemption. 
    Vehicles or parts of vehicles are not public nuisances if one or more of the following apply: 
(1)  The vehicle or part thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
(2)  The vehicle or part thereof is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.  Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.  Not a health hazard; and 
c.  Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(D); altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code  683.077. 
Sec. 38-137. - Junked vehicles declared public nuisance. 
(a)  Junked vehicles or parts of junked vehicles which are located in any place where they are visible from a public place or public right-of-way are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tend to reduce the value of private property, invite vandalism, create fire hazards, constitute attractive nuisances creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and produce urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the City. Because of this, they are public nuisances. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance as described in this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(B), (C); altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code  683.072. 
Sec. 38-138. - Notice to abate public nuisance. 
(a)  Not less than ten days' notice of the nature of the nuisance will be given by personal delivery or sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested or delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature confirmation service to: 
(1)  The last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
(2)  Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and 
(3)  The owner or occupant of: 
a.  The property on which the nuisance is located; or 
b.  If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(b)  The notice shall state that: 
(1)  The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed; and 
(2)  Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires. 
(c)  If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, personally delivered. 
(d)  If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(E)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code  683.075. 
Sec. 38-139. - Public hearing. 
(a)  A public hearing shall be held on request of a person who receives notice as provided by this article if the request is made not later than the date by which the nuisance must be abated and removed and shall be held no earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of the notice. Such hearing shall be held before the City Manager or designee. At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. 
(b)  Upon a finding that a nuisance as described in this article exists, the City Manager or designee will order such owner or occupant to remove the junked motor vehicle or vehicle part within ten days after the order is issued. If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, an order requiring removal of the nuisance must include: 
(1)  For a motor vehicle, the vehicle's: 
a.  Description; 
b.  Vehicle identification number; and 
c.  License plate number; 
(2)  For an aircraft, the aircraft's: 
a.  Description; and 
b.  Federal aircraft identification number as described by Federal Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 CFR 47; and 
(3)  For a watercraft, the watercraft's: 
a.  Description; and 
b.  Identification number as set forth in the watercraft's certificate of number. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(F); altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Texas Transportation Code  683.076. 
Sec. 38-140. - Removal with permission of owner or occupant. 
    Within ten days after receipt of notice to remove and abate the nuisance, as herein provided, the owner or occupant may give written permission to the Chief of Police or duly authorized agent for removal of the junked motor vehicle, or parts thereof, from the premises. The giving of such permission shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this section. Cost of removal will be borne by the owner. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(G); Ord. No. 2018-4029 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 7-26-2018) 
Sec. 38-141. - Municipal Court hearing and order. 
    If the nuisance is not removed and abated within the time prescribed by order issued by the City Manager or designee, or if a public hearing is not requested within the ten-day period as provided in Section 38-139, a complaint concerning this public nuisance may be filed in the Municipal Court of the City. Following a hearing and trial, upon a finding of guilty the defendant shall pay a fine in accordance with the penalty provision in this section. On conviction, the Judge of the Municipal Court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance within ten days from the date the order is issued, the same being a reasonable time unless the Judge sets forth a different time period no shorter than ten days as reasonable. If the defendant fails to attend the hearing where the order is issued, a College Station Police Officer will deliver or will cause to be delivered such order to the last known address of the defendant. If the defendant fails to remove and abate the nuisance within the period ordered by the Judge, the Judge may issue an order directing the Chief of Police to have the nuisance removed, and the Chief of Police or duly authorized agent shall take possession of the junked motor vehicle or part thereof and remove it from the premises. The order shall include a description of the vehicle, the vehicle identification number and license number of the vehicle, if the information is available. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(H)) 
State Law reference- Hearing, Texas Transportation Code  683.076. 
Sec. 38-142. - Reconstruction prohibited. 
    A junked motor vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable after it has been removed. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(I)) 
State Law reference- Mandatory provisions, Texas Transportation Code  683.074(b)(1). 
Sec. 38-143. - Relocation of junked vehicle. 
    Relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the City or County after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of such public nuisance has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(J)) 
State Law reference- Authorized provisions, Texas Transportation Code  683.074(g). 
Sec. 38-144. - Disposal of junked motor vehicles. 
(a)  A junked motor vehicle, or part thereof, may be removed to a scrap yard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or a suitable site operated by the City or County. 
(b)  The City may operate a disposal site if the City Council determines that commercial channels of disposition are not available or are inadequate. The City may finally dispose of a junked vehicle or vehicle part, or transfer it to another disposal site if the disposal is scrap or salvage only. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(K)) 
State Law reference- Junked vehicle disposal, Texas Transportation Code  683.078. 
Sec. 38-145. - Notice to Highway Department. 
    The City Manager or delegee shall give notice to the Texas Department of Transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of removal of the junked motor vehicle or part thereof. Said notice shall identify the vehicle or vehicle part. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-5(L)) 
State Law reference- Mandatory provisions, Texas Transportation Code  683.074(b)(3). 
Secs. 38-146-38-173. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOW TRUCKS AND VEHICLE TOWING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Vehicle towing and booting, Texas Transportation Code ch. 2308. 

Sec. 38-174. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle in which the tow truck is summoned by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody, or control of the vehicle. The term "consent tow" does not include an incident management tow or a private property tow. 
    Drop fee means a fee that is offered instead of a towing fee that allows the vehicle operator to stop the tow without paying the full towing fee and any additional storage fees. 
    Hooked up means the vehicle is fully prepared for transport by attachment to a tow truck, lifted in tow position, with tow lights and safety chains attached, and if required placed on a dolly in a raised position and the only action remaining is for the tow operator to drive away. 
    Non-consent tow means any tow of a vehicle that is not a consent tow including: 
(1)  Incident management tow. The term "incident management tow" means any tow of a vehicle in which the tow truck is summoned to the scene of a traffic accident or to an incident, including the removal of a vehicle, commercial cargo, and commercial debris from an accident or incident scene. 
(2)  Private property tow. The term "private property tow" means any tow of a vehicle authorized by a parking facility owner without the consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle. 
    Parking facility means any public or private property used, in whole or in part, for restricted or paid parking of vehicles. The term "parking facility" includes a restricted space on a portion of an otherwise unrestricted parking facility, a commercial parking lot, a parking garage, and a parking area serving or adjacent to a business, church, school, home, apartment complex, property governed by a property owner's association, or government-owned property leased to a private person. 
    Parking facility owner means an owner or operator of a parking facility, including any lessee, employee, or agent of an owner or operator. 
    Person means an individual, a corporation, organization, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, joint venture, association, or other legal entity. 
    Tow business means the business of towing or removing vehicles compensation, or the expectation of compensation, regardless of whether the purpose of the towing is to remove, repair, wreck, store, trade, or purchase vehicles. 
    Tow company means an individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity engaged in the tow business and includes the owner, operator, employee or agent of the tow company, but does not include a political subdivision of the State. For the purposes of this article, each such legal entity is considered a separate tow company. 
    Tow truck means a vehicle, including a wrecker, equipped with a mechanical device used to tow, winch, or otherwise move another vehicle. 
    Tow truck license means the certification of registration issued to a tow company by the State, listing all tow trucks licensed to operate for that tow company within the State. 
    Unauthorized vehicle means any vehicle parked, stored, or located in or on a parking facility without the consent of the parking facility owner. 
    Vehicle means a device in, on, or by which a person or property may be transported on a public roadway. The term "vehicle" includes an operable or inoperable automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, or trailer, but does not include a device moved by human power or used exclusively on a stationary rail or track. 
    Vehicle storage facility (VSF) means a garage, parking lot, or any facility owned or operated by a person other than a governmental entity for storing or parking ten or more vehicles per year. 
    Vehicle storage facility license means the license issued by the State authorizing a business to store vehicles. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-10(A)) 
Sec. 38-175. - License. 
(a)  Unlawful to operate without license. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the tow business and make non-consent tows in the City unless such person possesses a current, valid tow truck license that lists each tow truck operated by that tow company. 
(b)  Vehicle storage facility. Each tow company performing non-consent tows shall utilize a Texas Department of Transportation licensed VSF located within the County. 
(c)  Police inspection. Any tow truck performing non-consent tows within the City limits may be inspected by an official of the College Station Police Department at any time the tow truck is being operated on the public streets as a tow truck. Such inspections may be conducted to ensure required licenses and compliance with this article and State law. Further, upon the request of the Chief of Police or designee, a tow company performing non-consent tows within the City shall produce records from the VSFs used for non-consent tows to ensure compliance with the maximum rates established under this article and other requirements of this article and State law. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-10(B)) 
Sec. 38-176. - Fees to be charged by tow companies. 
(a)  Private property tows fees are regulated by Texas Occupations Code  2308.0575 and 16 T.A.C. 86.455. 
(b)  Drop fees are regulated by Texas Occupations Code  2308.0575 and 16 T.A.C. 86.455. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-10(C)) 
Sec. 38-177. - Driving tow trucks to scene of collision prohibited. 
    No tow company shall drive, or cause to be driven, a tow truck to or near the scene of an incident on a street within the City unless such tow company has been called to the scene by the College Station Police Department or by a vehicle owner or operator involved in the incident. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-10(D)) 
Sec. 38-178. - Soliciting towing business on City street prohibited. 
    No tow company shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, to a person owning or operating any vehicle, which is wrecked or involved in an incident on a public street. This prohibition applies regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of soliciting the business of towing, repairing, selling, or purchasing such vehicle. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-10(E)) 
Sec. 38-179. - Impound tows. 
    Any Police Officer investigating an incident or offense within the City may order the impoundment of any vehicle involved therein when, in the judgment of such officer, criminal prosecution will be involved as a result of such event, or when it is necessary to impound such vehicle to secure evidence, or when the owner or occupant of the vehicle is unable or fails to have such vehicle removed. The fees to be charged for impound tows will not exceed the maximum rates allowed under this article or State law. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-10(F)) 
Sec. 38-180. - Duties of tow companies. 
    It shall be the obligation of all tow companies under this article to operate the tow business in a safe manner, to include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Taking direction from investigating officer. Upon arrival at the scene of a collision within the City, tow truck operators shall take directions on when to engage or tow from the Police Officer investigating the collision. 
(2)  Removing debris of collision. Tow truck operators that engage and tow any vehicle from the scene of an incident within the City shall remove all debris from the incident from the public street. This duty specifically includes the removal of vehicle parts, glass, and other debris. Such debris shall be disposed of in a lawful manner which will keep it out of the gutters, storm sewers, streams, public rights-of-way, or property not belonging to the tow company. 
(3)  Disengaging. A tow truck that removes a vehicle from the original location shall not disengage from the vehicle until the vehicle has been deposited with the appropriate VSF except when the vehicle is released to the owner or operator or when the owner or operator specifies the location of disengagement. This restriction is enacted to prohibit tow trucks from engaging an unauthorized vehicle in a parking facility and moving it to a close location, then returning for another unauthorized vehicle, ultimately towing all the relocated vehicles to a VSF. 
(4)  Drops. A tow truck that has hooked up to a vehicle for towing shall release the vehicle to its owner or operator upon payment of the drop fee and will not tow the vehicle, except when the vehicle is being taken into custody by a Police Officer. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-10(H)) 
Sec. 38-181. - Report of towing of unauthorized vehicle to police dispatcher. 
(a)  The VSF that receives a vehicle from a tow truck that removed the vehicle from private or public property within the City and on a non-consent basis shall notify the City Police Department Office within two hours of receiving the vehicle. The information to be provided in such notification shall include: 
(1)  The general description (brand, model, color) of the vehicle towed, including the state and the license plate, if any; 
(2)  The tow company name that towed the vehicle; 
(3)  The location/address from which the vehicle was towed and reason; 
(4)  The date and time the vehicle was removed from the location; 
(5)  The date and time the vehicle was accepted at the VSF; 
(6)  The street address and phone number of the VSF where the vehicle is located. 
(b)  Such reports shall be made by telephone or in person. A VSF must release vehicles during the time the VSF accepts vehicles. If the VSF accepts vehicles on a 24-hour a day basis, it shall release vehicles on the same basis, with one hour notice. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-10(I)) 
Secs. 38-182-38-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRUCK PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 38-201. - No through trucks. 
(a)  Local street prohibition . It is unlawful for a person to drive or operate a truck or any other motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 14,000 pounds or higher on a street described in Section 38-1009 marked with a sign prohibiting through truck traffic. 
(b)  Truck route . It is unlawful for a person to drive or operate a truck or any other motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 14,000 pounds or higher on any other route except for the through route of State Highway 6. 
(c)  Affirmative defenses . It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that: 
(1)  The person is operating the truck or motor vehicle that is going directly to or from a residential or business address on prohibited street to deliver or pick-up material and the driver or operator has proof of the delivery or pick-up. 
(2)  The person is using the truck or motor for a private purpose not including the transporting, loading, or unloading of material or property. 
(d)  Non-applicability . This section does not apply to person driving or operating a truck or motor vehicle that is: 
(1)  Owned by a governmental entity, 
(2)  Owned by a public or private utility, 
(3)  Engaged in the business of transporting people, or 
(4)  Parked at the owner's or lessee's residence or place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4071 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 2-14-2019) 
Sec. 38-202. - Oversized and overweight loads. 
(a)  Time limits . It is unlawful for any oversized or overweight motor vehicle or load carried by any motor vehicle to travel through the City from 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. exceeding: 
(1)  Height . 16 feet and 6 inches in height, 
(2)  Weight . 254,000 lbs. GWVR, 
(3)  Width . 102 inches in width, or 
(4)  Length . 65 feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4071 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 2-14-2019) 
Secs. 38-203-38-1000. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 

Sec. 38-1001. - Traffic Schedule I, through streets (Reserved). 
State Law reference- Authority to designate through streets, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(9). 
Sec. 38-1002. - Traffic Schedule II, four-way stop intersections. 
Church Avenue College Main Church Avenue Nagle Street Church Avenue Tauber Street Holleman Drive Eleanor Street West Holleman Drive Phoenix Street East Eleanor Street Holleman Drive South Phoenix Street Holleman Drive North Dominik Drive George Bush East Drive Dominik Drive Munson Avenue Francis Drive Munson Avenue Munson Avenue University Oaks Welsh Avenue Deacon Drive Deacon Drive Rio Grande Boulevard Longmire Drive Graham Road Graham Road Victoria Avenue Dowling Road Jones Butler Road Castlegate Drive Ravenstone Loop West Castlegate Drive Kendal Green Circle East Kendal Green Castlegate Drive East Ravenstone Loop Castlegate Drive West Rock Prairie Road William D. Fitch Parkway Southwest Parkway Langford Street Dartmouth Drive Krenek Tap Road Rock Prairie Road W. Jones Butler Road Eagle Avenue Brandenburg Lane North Forest Parkway Appomattox Drive Southern Plantation Drive at Newport Lane Fairview Avenue at Park Place Cross Street Dogwood Street Holleman Drive Jones-Butler Road West Victoria Avenue Eagle Avenue Francis Drive Walton Drive WS Phillips Parkway Barron Cut-off WS Phillips Parkway Brewster WS Phillips Parkway Victoria Market Street Cottage Lane Southern Plantation Drive Alexandria Avenue Southern Plantation Drive Decatur Drive Graham Road and Alexandria Avenue Schaffer Road Eagle Avenue Alexandria Avenue Thomas Street Dexter Drive  
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 10, sched. II; Ord. No. 2016-3805, exh. A(sched. II), 9-22-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3867, exh. A(sched. II), 3-23-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3868, exh. A(sched. II), 3-23-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3873, exh. A(sched. II), 4-13-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3874, exh. A(sched. II), 4-13-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3918 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-24-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate stop intersections, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(8). 
Sec. 38-1003. - Traffic Schedule III, stop signs. 
StreetIntersecting StreetTravel Direction12th Man Circle Pebble Creek Parkway West Abbey Lane Victoria Avenue West Aberdeen Place Dexter Drive West Adrienne Drive Treehouse Trail North Adrienne Drive Treehouse Trail South Adrienne Drive Ponderosa Drive South Adrienne Drive Deacon Drive North Adrienne Circle Deacon Drive South Agate Drive Lakeway Drive West Airline Drive Southwood Drive East Airline Drive Southwood Drive West Airline Drive Shenandoah Drive East Airline Drive Shenandoah Drive West Airline Drive Longmire Drive East Airline Drive Rio Grande Boulevard West Alabama Street Carolina Street East Alabama Street Carolina Street West Alamosa Summit Crossing East Alexandria Avenue Barron Road North Alexandria Avenue Barron Road South Alexandria Avenue Decatur Drive East Alexandria Avenue Southern Plantation Drive South Alexandria Avenue Southern Plantation Drive North Alexandria Avenue Graham Road North Alpine Circle Anderson Street West Amber Hill Amber Ridge Drive West Amber Ridge Drive Emerald Parkway South Amberwood Court Woodcreek Drive South Amethyst Court Amber Ridge Drive East Amherst Court Cornell Drive West Angelina Circle Valley View Drive South Angelina Circle Southwood Drive East Angelina Circle Southwood Drive West Angus Street Fairview Avenue East Angus Street Fairview Avenue West Angus Street Montclair Avenue West Angus Street Ayrshire Street East Anna Street Holik Street East Anna Street Timber Street West Antelope Lane Navarro Drive North Antelope Lane Navarro Drive South Antone Court Anderson Street East Appomattox Drive Raintree Drive North Appomattox Drive Raintree Drive South Appomattox Drive Harvey Road North Appomattox Drive Emerald Parkway North Appomattox Drive Emerald Parkway South Appomattox Drive North Forest Parkway North Appomattox Drive North Forest Parkway South April Bloom Spring Loop South April Bloom Autumn Circle West Arboles Court Nueces Drive North Arguello Drive Tarrow Street East Arizona Street Holleman Drive North Arizona Street Nevada Street South Armistead Street Redmond Drive NE Armistead Street Redmond Drive SW Arnold Road Victoria Avenue East Arnold Alley Nottingham Drive West Arnold Alley Nottingham Drive East Arrington Road SH 6 South East Arroyo Court N. Deacon Drive South Arroyo Court N. Deacon Drive North Ashburn Avenue Francis Drive North Ashburn Avenue Francis Drive South Ashburn Avenue Gilchrist Avenue South Ashburn Avenue Lincoln Avenue North Ashford Drive Southwest Parkway North Ashford W Drive Ashford Drive South Associates Avenue Harvey Road South Aster Drive Nottingham Drive East Aster Drive Nottingham Drive West Athens Drive Dominik Drive North Athens Drive University Oaks South Augsburg Court Edelweiss Avenue East Augsburg Lane Edelweiss Avenue West Augusta Circle Champions Boulevard North Augustine Court Southwood Drive East Aurora Court Park Place North Austin Avenue Southwood Drive East Austin Avenue Southwood Drive West Austin Avenue Brothers Boulevard East Austin Avenue Brothers Boulevard West Austin Avenue Longmire Drive East Austin Avenue Shenandoah Drive East Austin Avenue Shenandoah Drive West Austin Avenue Rio Grande Boulevard West Autumn Circle Tarrow Street West Autumn Circle Spring Loop East Avenue Avenue Lincoln Avenue South Avenue B Lincoln Avenue South Axis Court Navarro Drive South Axis Court Navarro Drive North Ayrshire Street Guernsey Street North Ayrshire Street Guernsey Street South Ayrshire Street Old Jersey Street North Azalea Court Cypress Drive East Azalea Court Cypress Drive West Aztec Court Deacon Drive North Aztec Street Deacon Drive North Baby Bear Dr. Towers Pkwy. West Bahia Drive Ponderosa Drive North Bahia Drive Rock Prairie Road South Balcones Drive Rio Grande Boulevard East Balcones Drive Welsh Avenue West Ballybunion Court St Andrews Drive South Ballybunion Lane St Andrews Drive North Ballybunion Court Tarrow Street East Ballybunion Lane S H 6 South East Banks Street Wellborn Road West Barron Cut Off Eskew North Barron Road SH 40 EFR East Barron Road SH 40/Wm. D. Fitch East Barron Road Wellborn Road West Barron Road Barron Road North Barron Cut-off Brentwood Drive South Barron Cut-off SH 6 South East Barthelow Drive University Oaks South Bay Street Munson Avenue West Bayou Woods Drive Alexandria Avenue East Bayou Woods Drive Alexandria Avenue West Baywood Court Southwood Drive North Baywood Lane Southwood Drive South Bee Creek Southwest Parkway North Bee Creek Anderson Street East 1 Bee Creek Anderson Street East 2 Bee Creek Park Anderson Street East 3 Bee Creek Park Victoria Avenue East Bee Creek Park Victoria Avenue West Bell Street Welsh Avenue West Belsay Avenue Nottingham Drive East Belsay Avenue Victoria Avenue West Benchmark Emerald Parkway West Benchmark Sandstone Drive East Bent Oak Street Dominik Drive South Bent Tree Drive Francis Drive North Berkeley Street Normand Drive West Berkeley Street Edelweiss Avenue East Bermuda Court Edelweiss Avenue West Bernburg Court Edelweiss Avenue East Bernburg Lane St. Andrews Drive West Bernburg Lane St. Andrews Drive East Berry Creek Spearman Drive North Berry Creek Rock Prairie Road South Berry Creek Parkview South Bird Pond Road SH 6 South East Birdie Court Longmire Drive West Birmingham Road Longmire Drive East Birmingham Road Woodcreek Drive North Birmingham Road Cardinal Lane North Bloomfield Lane Treehouse Trail North Blue Jay Court Ponderosa Drive South Bluestem Drive Ponderosa Drive North Bluestem Drive Parkview South Bluestem Circle Deacon Drive North Bogey Court Deacon Drive South Bolero Street Puryear Drive East Bolero Court Walton Drive East Bolton Avenue James Parkway West Bolton Avenue Langford Street East Bolton Avenue Schaffer East Boswell Street Schaffer West Bougainvillea Street University Drive South Bougainvillea Street Church Avenue North Boyett Street Church Avenue South Boyett Street Rock Prairie Road South Boyett Street Graham Road North Bradley Road Eagle Avenue South Branderburg Lane Earl Rudder Freeway W. East Branderburg Lane Glenhaven Drive East Brazoswood Drive Glenhaven Drive West Brazoswood Drive Dartmouth Street East Brazoswood Drive Anderson Street West Brentwood Drive SH 6 South East Brentwood Drive Longmire Drive West Brewster Dr. Brownway South Brewster Dr. Yanworth North Bridle Gate Drive Brothers Boulevard North Bridle Gate Drive James Parkway West Briles Ct. Brewster Dr. North Brittain Court Walton Drive East Brookland Ct. Brewster Dr. North Brooks Avenue Woodcreek Drive South Brookwater Circle Longmire Drive East Brookwater Circle Longmire Drive West Brothers Boulevard Texas Avenue East Brothers Boulevard Deacon Drive South Brothers Boulevard Deacon Drive North Brothers Boulevard Ponderosa Drive South Brothers Boulevard Victoria Avenue West Brothers Boulevard Cornell Drive East Brussels Drive Harvey Road Bucknell Court Dexter Drive West Buena Vista Rio Grande Boulevard West Buena Vista Parkview South Burt Street Wellborn Road East Buttercup Circle Raintree Drive North Caddie Court Ponderosa Drive North Cain Road Cypress Drive East Calico Court Cypress Drive West Callie Circle Westchester Avenue East Camellia Court Welsh Avenue West Camellia Court Rio Grande Boulevard East Canterbury Drive Longmire Drive East Canterbury Drive Rio Grande Boulevard East Capistrano Court Rio Grande Boulevard East Cardinal Lane Victoria Avenue West Carisbroke Loop Victoria Avenue West Carisbroke Loop Westover Street West Carmel Court Berkeley Street East Carmel Place Berkeley Street West Carol Street Holleman Drive North Carol Street Nevada Street South Carol Street Nottingham Drive East Carolina Street Nottingham Drive West Carolina Street Regal Row East Cascades Drive Victoria Avenue West Cascades Drive William D. Fitch Parkway South Castle Rock Parkway Victoria Avenue West Castlebrook Drive Edelweiss Avenue South Castlebrook Drive Winding Road North Castlebrook Drive Haines Drive North Castlebrook Drive Haines Drive South Castlegate Drive Edelweiss Avenue South Castlegate Drive Edelweiss Avenue North Caterina Lane Anderson Street East Caudill Street Deacon Drive North Caudill Street Deacon Drive South Caudill Street Southwest Parkway South Cecilia Court Southwest Parkway North Cecilia Loop Colgate Drive North Cedar Run Drive Krenek Tap South Celinda Circle Krenek Tap North Celinda Circle Woodcreek Drive North Central Park Lane Welsh Avenue West Central Park Lane Pebble Creek Parkway West Central Park Lane Mortier Drive South Central Park Lane Nagle Street East Chadwick Lane Nagle Street West Chalet Court College Main East Champions Boulevard College Main West Chantal Circle Boyett Street West Chantal Circle Second Street East Cherry Street Markham Lane South Cherry Street Hearthstone Court North Cherry Street Hearthstone Court South Cherry Street Emerald Parkway SE Cherry Street Emerald Parkway West Cherry Street Wellborn Road West Chesapeake Court Welsh Avenue East Chimney Hill University Drive East Chimney Hill Wellborn Road West Chippendale S. Boyett Street West Chippendale S. Boyett Street East Christine Lane Lincoln Avenue South Christine Lane Deacon Drive South Church Avenue Church Avenue Eastbound North Church Avenue Francis Drive West Church Avenue Greens Prairie Road Church Avenue Appomattox Drive East Church Avenue Anderson Street East Church Avenue Public Way of the Stack South Churchill Street Anderson Street East Cimarron Court Nottingham Drive East City Hall Ponderosa Drive North Clear Meadow Creek Rock Prairie Road South Clear Meadow Creek Newport Lane East Clearwood Court Victoria Avenue West Clement Court Brentwood Drive North Cloverdale Court Dartmouth Street SE Coachlight Court Dartmouth Street East Coarsiar Dr. Pavillion Ave. South Coastal Drive Brentwood Drive South Coastal Drive Eastmark Drive East Coeburn Drive Dartmouth Street West Colchester Court Cornell Drive West Colgate Circle Tarrow Street East Colgate Circle S. Dexter Drive East Colgate Circle Welsh Avenue West Colgate Circle Stonebrook Drive West Colgate Drive St. Andrews Colgate Drive Texas Avenue West Columbia Court Harvey Road South Columbus Street St. Andrews Drive West Commando Tr. Cain Rd. North Concho Place St. Andrews Drive East Concho Place Brentwood Drive North Concord Circle Brentwood Drive South Congressional Manuel Drive North Congressional Southwest Parkway South Cooner Street Gail Place North Copperfield Parkway Gail Place South Coral Ridge E. Deacon Drive South Coral Ridge W. Deacon Drive South Cornell Drive Greens Prairie Trail South Cornell Drive Schaffer Road East Cornell Drive Schaffer Road West Cornell Drive Manuel Drive South Coronado Drive Richards Street North Coronado Drive Copperfield Parkway East Cortez Court Copperfield Parkway East Cortez Street Copperfield Parkway West Creek Meadow South Greens Prairie Trail North Creek Meadows Boulevard N. S. College Avenue East Creek Meadows Boulevard N. Nagle Street East Creek Meadows Boulevard N. Nagle Street West Creek Meadows Boulevard N. Stasney Street East Crepe Myrtle Stasney Street West Crepe Myrtle Tauber Street East Crescent Pointe Parkway Tauber Street West Crescent Pointe Parkway College Main East Crescent Pointe Parkway College Main West Crest Street Southwest Parkway North Crest Street Cross Street North Cross Street Cross Street South Cross Street Inlow Boulevard North Cross Street Raintree Drive South Cross Street Colgate Drive North Cross Street Southwest Parkway North Cross Street Southwest Parkway South Cross Street Ponderosa Drive North Cross Street Rock Prairie Road South Cross Street Alexandria Avenue West Crosstimbers Alexandria Avenue East Culpepper Drive Wellborn Road West Culpepper Drive Southern Plantation North Culpepper Drive Southern Plantation South Cumberland Court Barron Road North Cypress Drive Holleman Drive North Cypress Drive Nevada Street South Cypress Drive Holleman Drive North Dallis Drive Holleman Drive South Dallis Drive Inlow Boulevard North Danville Court Cross Street South Danville Lane Texas Avenue West Deacon Drive Newark Circle Decatur Drive William D. Fitch Parkway South Decatur Drive Parkview South Decatur Drive Graham Road North Decatur Drive Barron Road South Detroit Street Cardinal Lane North Detroit Street Westchester Avenue East Dexter Drive Welsh Avenue West Dexter Drive Harvey Mitchell Parkway NE Dogwood Street Emerald Parkway North Dogwood Street Norham Drive East Dominik Drive Norham Drive West Donnington Drive Victoria Avenue East Donnington Drive Deacon Drive South Donnington Drive Deacon Drive North Dove Chase Ln. Alexandria Ave. East Dove Chase Ln. Alexandria Ave. West Double Eagle Deacon Drive North Dove Trail Arboleda North Dove Trail E. Bypass East Dove Crossing Lane Longmire Drive West Dove Hollow Lane Longmire Drive East Dover Drive Victoria Avenue East Dover Drive Victoria Avenue West Dowling Road SH 40/Wm. D. Fitch West Downton Abbey Ave. Victoria Ave. East Driftwood Drive Southwest Parkway South Drogo Court Welsh Avenue East Drogo Court Rock Prairie Road North Drogo Court Rock Prairie Road South Durango Street Mortier Drive East Durango Street University Drive North Durango Court University Drive South Durrand Street Ash Street South Eagle Ave. Alexandria Ave. East Eagle Ave. Alexandria Ave. West Eagle Avenue Cooner Street North Eagle Avenue Montclair Avenue East Eagle Avenue Stonebrook Drive East Eagle Avenue Stonebrook Drive West Eagle Avenue Turkey Creek Road West Eagle Avenue Frost Drive East Eastmark Drive George Bush Drive North Edelweiss Avenue Park Place North Edelweiss Avenue Park Place South Edelweiss Avenue Holleman Drive South Edelweiss Avenue Frost Drive West Egremont Pl. Odell Ln. North Egremont Pl. Uphor Dr. North Egremont Pl. Uphor Dr. South Eisenhower Street Frost Drive East Eisenhower Street Fontaine Drive West Eisenhower Street Fontaine Drive East Eisenhower Street Barron Road North Eleanor Street Maryem Street East Eskew Brewster South Essex Green Drive Maryem Street West Essex Green Drive Wellborn Road West F & B Road Montclair Avenue East Fairview Avenue Montclair Avenue West Fairview Avenue Fairview Avenue East Fairview Avenue Highland Street East Fairview Avenue Highland Street West Falcon Circle F & B Road South Faulkner Drive Spearman Drive South Faulkner Drive Pebble Creek Parkway East Faulkner Drive Church Avenue North Faulkner Drive Church Avenue South Fidelity Street Louise Avenue North Fidelity Street Louise Avenue South Fidelity Street Frost Drive East Fidelity Street Foxfire Drive North Fidelity Street Faulkner Drive South Fidelity Street Faulkner Drive North Fidelity Street University Drive North Fidelity Street Gilchrist Avenue North Fieldstone Place Gilchrist Avenue South Finfeather Road Francis Drive North Firebank Pl. Crooked Branch East Firebank Pl. Crooked Branch West Firestone Drive Francis Drive South Firestone Drive George Bush East South First Street Walton Drive North First Street Walton Drive South First Street Lincoln Avenue North First Street Frost Drive West Fitzgerald Circle Frost Drive East Fontaine Drive Sebesta Road West Fontaine Drive Foxfire Drive West Fontaine Drive Foxfire Drive North Forest Drive Foxfire Drive East Foster Avenue Glenhaven Drive West Foster Avenue Glenhaven Drive East Foster Avenue Walton Drive East Foster Avenue Walton Drive West Foster Avenue Texas Avenue West Foster Avenue Wellborn Road West Foster Avenue Deacon Drive North Foster Avenue Decatur Drive East Fox Circle Decatur Drive West Foxfire Drive Spring Creek West Foxfire Drive Hunter Creek Drive East Foxfire Drive Faulkner Drive North Foxfire Drive Faulkner Drive South Foxfire Drive Bird Pond Road East Francis Circle Rio Grande Boulevard East Francis Drive Schaffer Road East Francis Drive Schaffer Road West Francis Drive Agate Drive South Francis Drive Sapphire Drive North Fraternity Row Fairview Avenue West Fraternity Row Holleman Drive North Front Royal Nevada Street South Front Royal Raintree Drive West Front Royal Walton Drive East Front Royal Walton Drive West Frost Drive Texas Avenue West Frost Drive Puryear Drive East Frost Drive Munson Avenue East Gail Place James Parkway West Gardenia Anna Street North Gardenia Graham Road South Garnet Will Drive Dominik Drive South Garnet Will Drive Eagle Avenue South George Bush Drive Glade Street East Georgia Street Pershing Drive West Georgia Street SH 6 South East Gettysburg Court Wellborn Road West Gilchrist Avenue Normand Drive West Gilchrist Avenue Edelweiss Avenue East Gilchrist Avenue Arrington Road East Gilchrist Avenue Sebesta Road South Gilchrist Avenue Bent Tree Drive East Gilchrist Avenue Driftwood Drive West Glade Street Holleman Drive W. North Glenhaven Drive Wellborn Road West Glenna Court Highland Street East Gold Finch Circle Highland Street West Goode Street Montclair Avenue East Goode Street Langford Street East Graham Rd. Alexandria Ave. East Graham Rd. Schaffer Rd. West Graham Road Nueces Drive West Graham Road Fairview Avenue West Gramma Court Welsh Avenue East Graz Drive Welsh Avenue West Great Oaks Drive Caudill Street East Greenleaf Drive Glade Street East Greens Prairie Road Dexter Drive West Greens Prairie Rd. W. Victoria Ave. North Greenwood Drive Rio Grande Boulevard West Greenwood Drive Von Trapp Lane East Gregg Ct. Brewster Dr. North Gridiron Drive Wellborn Road West Gridiron Drive Munson Avenue West Grove Street Bayou Woods Drive East Grove Street Victoria Drive East Grove Street Victoria Drive West Grove Street Brandenburg Lane East Guadalupe Drive Brandenburg Lane West Guadalupe Drive Victoria Drive West Guernsey Street Walton Drive North Guernsey Street Francis Drive South Guernsey Street Rock Prairie Road South Gunsmith Street Victoria Avenue West Haines Drive Nottingham Drive West Haines Drive Nottingham Drive East Haley Place Eagle Avenue North Halter Horseback North Hannover Street Southwood Drive East Hannover Street Southwood Drive West Hardwood Lane Shenandoah Drive East Hardwood Lane Shenandoah Drive West Harrington Avenue Rio Grande Boulevard West Harrington Avenue Brothers Boulevard East Harris Drive Thomas Street North Hartford Drive Tarrow Street East Hartford Drive Chimney Hill Drive East Hartford Drive Chimney Hill Drive West Hartford Drive Treehouse Trail South Harvest Drive Texas Avenue East Harvey Rd. Summit Crossing South Hasselt Street Holleman Drive South Hasselt Street Southwest Parkway North Hasselt Street Park Place North Hawk Owl Cove Park Place South Hawk Tree George Bush Drive North Hawk Tree Luther Street South Hawk Tree Brothers Boulevard East Hawk Tree Airline Drive North Hawk Tree Airline Drive South Hawk Tree FM 2818 North Hawthorn Street Graham Road South Hearthstone Circle George Bush Drive North Hearthstone Circle Park Place South Hearthstone Circle Holleman Drive North Henry Circle Holleman Drive South Hensel Drive Anderson Street East Hereford Street Earl Rudder Freeway East Hibiscus Street St. Andrews Drive West Hickory Drive Munson Avenue West Highland Street Earl Rudder Freeway E. West Highland Street Southwest Parkway North Highland Street Nueces Drive South Highland Street Welsh Avenue West Hillside Drive Westchester Avenue East Hillside Drive Kernstown Lane North Hilltop Drive Southern Plantation Drive South Hilltop Drive Southern Plantation Drive North Hofburg Drive S. College Avenue East Holik Street Nagle Street West Holik Street Edelweiss Avenue South Holik Drive Edelweiss Avenue South Holik Drive SH 40/Wm. D. Fitch West Holik Drive Welsh Avenue East Holleman Drive Francis Drive North Holleman Drive [5] Keefer Loop and Rock Prairie Road West Holston Hills Francis Drive South Holt Street Kyle Avenue South Hondo Drive University Drive South Hondo Drive Cooner Street North Honeysuckle Lane Deacon Drive North Honeysuckle Lane Treehouse Trail North Horse Haven Lane Treehouse Trail South Hunter Creek Drive Ponderosa Drive South Hunter Creek Drive Deacon Drive South Hunter Creek Drive Williams Creek Drive Southwest Inlow Boulevard Williams Creek Drive South Inlow Boulevard Holleman Drive W. South Innsbruck Circle Luther Street W. North Innsbruck Circle Harvey Mitchell Parkway North Iron Horse Way Williams Creek Drive South Iron Horse Way Brandenburg East Ivy Cove Brandenburg West James Parkway Cypress Drive East James Parkway Cypress Drive West James Parkway Rock Prairie W. Road South Jane Street Decatur Drive West Jane Street Stony Creek Lane West Jeanne Drive Decatur Drive East Jennifer Drive Fairview Avenue East Jennifer Drive Fairview Avenue West Jennifer Drive Montclair Avenue West Jennifer Drive Ayrshire Street East Jennifer Circle Ayrshire Street West Johnson Creek Loop Langford Street East Johnson Creek Loop St. Andrews Drive East Jones Butler Road Texas Avenue West Jones Butler Road Earl Rudder Freeway East Jones Butler Road George Bush East West Jones Butler Road Woodcreek Drive South Jones Butler Road Woodcreek Drive North Josephs Creek Court Langford Street East Kalanchoe Court Edelweiss Avenue East Kalanchoe Court Edelweiss Avenue West Karten Lane Orr Street North Karten Lane Haines Drive North Keefer Loop Winding Road North Kernstown Lane Haines Drive South Kernstown Lane Rock Prairie Road South Kernstown Lane Williams Creek Drive North Kerry Street Dartmouth Street East Kerry Street Rio Grande Boulevard East Kerry Street Ponderosa Drive North Kerry Street Longmire Drive East Kerry Street Sterling Drive South King Arthur Circle Richards Street North Kingsmill Court Richards Street South Krenek Tap Holleman Drive North Krenek Tap Southwest Parkway North Kyle Avenue Southwest Parkway South Lake Forest N. Court Bee Creek South Lake Forest S Court Haines Drive North Lakeshore Circle Welsh Avenue West Lakeside Court Southwest Parkway North Lancelot Circle Southwest Parkway South Landsburg Court Boswell Street North Landsburg Lane Boswell Street South Langford Street Caudill Street West Langford Street Glade Street West Langford Street George Bush Drive North Langford Street Park Place North Lanham Drive Park Place South Lanham Drive Timm Drive South Lansing Court Holleman W. Drive East Laredo Court Anderson Street East Larkspur Circle Llano North Lassie Lane Southwest Parkway North Lassie Lane Southwest Parkway South Lassie Lane Nueces Drive South Lassie Lane Texas Avenue West Laura Lane Harvey Road North Laura Lane Texas Avenue West Laura Lane Nimitz Street East Laura Lane Nimitz Street West Lavaca Street Eisenhower Street East Lawyer Place Eisenhower Street West Lawyer Street S. Dexter East Lawyer Street Welsh Avenue West Lawyer Street Church Avenue North Lawyer Street Ponderosa Drive North Leacrest Drive Treehouse Trail North Lee Avenue Ponderosa Drive South Lee Avenue Regal Oaks East Lee Avenue Harvey Road Lee Avenue Ponderosa Drive North Legacy Lane Treehouse Trail North Lemon Tree Lane Ponderosa Drive South Leona Drive Barron Road South Leona Drive Valley View Drive North Leona Drive Valley View Drive South Leona Drive Eagle Avenue North Lincoln Avenue Eagle Avenue South Lincoln Avenue Tarrow Street All-way Linda Lane Purple Martin CV South Little River St. Big River St. North Little River St. Harvey Mitchell Pkwy. South Live Oak Wellborn Road West Live Oak Boyett Street East Live Oak College Main East Live Oak Second Street West Live Oak Victoria Avenue West Llano Place Fairview Avenue East Llano Place Fairview Avenue West Lochburry Court Welsh Avenue West Lodge Street Welsh Avenue East Lodgepole Circle Wellborn Road West Lodgepole Drive Marion Pugh East Lodgepole Drive University Drive South Lonetree Drive Cooner Street North Lonetree Drive Nueces Drive West Long Creek Ln. Greens Prairie Trail South Longleaf Circle Merry Oaks Drive East Longleaf Drive Merry Oaks Drive East Longleaf Drive Texas Avenue West Longmire Drive Deacon Drive South Longmire Drive Wellborn Road West Longmire Court First Street East Lorikeet Lane Appomattox Drive East Lorikeet Lane Harvey Road North Lorikeet Lane Mortier Drive South Louise Avenue Mortier Drive South Louise Avenue George Bush Drive North Louise Avenue Holleman W. Drive South Louise Avenue Alexandria Avenue West Ludlow Lane Alexandria Avenue East Luther Street Francis Drive North Luther Street Gilchrist Avenue South Luther Street Edelweiss Avenue East Luther Street Park Place North Luther Street Park Place South Luther Street W. Luther Street South Mac Arthur Street Grove Street North Mac Arthur Street Graham Road North Madera Circle Harvest Drive East Magnolia Drive Harvest Drive West Magnolia Drive Deacon Drive South Manuel Drive University Drive South Manzano Court Hensel Drive North Maple Avenue Southwest Parkway North Maple Avenue Southwest Parkway South Maple Wood Court Trigger Street North Marcy Lane Trigger Street South Marielene Circle Nueces Drive South Marielene Circle University Oaks South Marion Pugh Dominik Drive North Marion Pugh Dominik Drive South Markham Court Carol Street North Markham Lane Carol Street South Marsteller Avenue Francis Drive North Marsteller Avenue Deacon Drive South Marta Street Victoria Avenue East Maryem Street Victoria Avenue West Maryem Street Inlow Boulevard North Maryem Street Cross Street South Maryem Street Texas Avenue West Meadow View Drive Earl Rudder Freeway W. East Meadow View Drive Stonebrook Drive East Meadow View Drive Rosemary Lane West Meadowbrook Court Texas Avenue East Meadowland Street Gilchrist Avenue North Meadowland Street Gilchrist Avenue South Medina Drive Francis Drive North Medina Drive Francis Drive South Medina Drive Walton Drive North Medina Drive Puryear Drive South Medina Drive George Bush Drive North Merry Oaks Drive Luther Street North Merry Oaks Drive Luther Street South Merry Oaks Drive Park Place North Merry Oaks Drive Park Place South Merry Oaks Drive Texas Avenue West Merry Oaks Drive Wellborn Road West Mescalero Court Victoria Avenue East Middleham Avenue Foster Avenue East Middleham Avenue Texas Avenue West Milam Avenue Williams Creek Drive North Milam Avenue Anderson Street East Mile Drive Pebble Creek Parkway West Mile Drive Pebble Creek Parkway East Mill Creek Alexandria Avenue East Milliff Road Alexandria Avenue West Milner Drive Lincoln Avenue North Milner Drive Shire Drive South Milner Drive SH 6 South West Milner Drive Langford Street East Milner Drive Welsh Avenue East Milner Drive Welsh Avenue West Momma Bear Dr. Towers Pkwy. West Montclair Avenue Rio Grande Boulevard East Montclair Avenue Pedernales Drive East Montclair Avenue Pedernales Drive West Montclair Avenue Wellborn Road West Montclair Avenue Dominik Drive South Morgans Lane Carol Street North Mortier Drive Carol Street South Mortier Drive Francis Drive North Moses Creek Court Welsh Avenue East Moss Street Castlegate Drive Moss Street Barron Road South Mossglenn Circle Victoria Avenue West Muirfield Court Lincoln Avenue South Muirfield Village University Drive North Mullins Court University Drive South Mullins Loop N. Ash Street North Mullins Loop S. Ash Street South Munson Avenue Cooner Street North Mustang Lane Deacon Drive South N. Ridgefield Deacon Drive North Nantucket Street Treehouse Trail North Navarro Drive Treehouse Trail South Navarro Drive Ponderosa Drive North Navarro Drive Ponderosa Drive South Navarro Drive Rock Prairie Road South Navarro Drive Southwest Parkway South Navarro Drive Appomattox Drive West Neal Pickett Boyett Street West Neal Pickett Church Avenue North Neal Pickett Harvey Mitchell Parkway South Neal Pickett Welsh Avenue North Nevada Street Walton Drive South New Port Lincoln Avenue North Newark Circle Deacon Drive South Newark Circle Anderson Street West Newcomb Ln. Cain Rd. North Newport Drive Francis Drive North Night Rain Drive Francis Drive South Nimitz Street Sandstone Drive North Nimitz Street Fairview Avenue West Nimitz Street Williams Creek Drive North Nimitz Street Brandenburg Lane West Nimitz Street Brandenburg Lane East Nimitz Street SH 40/Wm. D. Fitch North Normand Circle Rock Prairie Road North Normand Drive Rock Prairie Road South Normand Drive Cain Road North Normand Drive Cain Road South Normand Drive Dominik Drive North Normand Drive University Oaks South Normand Drive Holleman Drive North North Bardell Court Stone Forest Drive East North Forest Stone Forest Drive West Northgate Parking Schaffer Road West Northgate Parking Schaffer Road East Nueces Drive Cardinal Lane North Nueces Drive Winding Road West Nunn Street Glade Street East Nunn Street Rio Grande Boulevard West Oakbrook Court Harvey Road North Oakdale Circle Texas Avenue East Oakhaven Circle Anderson Street East Oakhaven Circle Anderson Street West Oakwood Trail Glade Street East Old Jersey Street Glade Street West Old Arrington Road Timber Street East Old Arrington Road Timber Street West Old Arrington Road Dexter Drive East Old May Court Dexter Drive West Old Wellborn Highland Street East Old Wellborn Highland Street West Old Wellborn Wellborn Road West Old Wellborn Hereford Street East Oldenburg Court Hereford Street West Oldenburg Lane SH 6 East Olympia Way Wayfarer Lane South Olympia Way East Bypass East Oney Hervey Parks Drive South Onyx Drive Lakeway Drive West Onyx Drive Spearman Drive East Orchid Street Cardinal Lane North Orchid Street Lincoln Avenue South Oriole Court Earl Ruder Freeway E. West Orr Street Sebesta Road South Orr Street Boyett Street East Paintbrush Circle Boyett Street West Pamela Lane Tarrow Street East Park Place William D. Fitch Parkway North Park Place Decatur Drive East Park Place Val Verde Drive South Park Place Balcones Drive North Park Place Park Place North Park Place Park Place South Park Place George Bush Drive North Park Place Glade Street East Park Place Tarrow Street East Park Place Chappel Street West Park Place Navarro Drive South Park Place Nevada Street South Park Place Deacon Drive North Park Place Deacon Drive South Parkland Drive Treehouse Trail North Parkland Drive Treehouse Trail South Parks Drive Ponderosa Drive North Parks Drive Parking Anderson Street West Parkview Brentwood Drive East Parkview St. Andrews Drive West Parrot Cove SH 6 East Pasler Street Longmire Drive West Patricia Street Navarro Drive South Patricia Street Navarro Drive North Pavilion Avenue Victoria Drive West Pavilion Avenue Earl Rudder Freeway W. East Pearce Street St. Andrews Drive East Pebble Creek Parkway St. Andrews Drive West Pecan Grove Court St. Andrews Drive East Pedernales Drive Longmire Drive East Pedernales Drive Longmire Drive West Pershing Drive SH 6 East Pershing Drive Rio Grande Boulevard West Pershing Drive Texas Avenue West Pershing Drive Nimitz Street East Peyton Street Nimitz Street West Peyton Street Eisenhower Street East Pheasant Lane Eisenhower Street West Phoenix Street Southwest Parkway North Pierre Place Tarrow Street East Pierre Place St. Andrews Drive East Pierre Place St. Andrews Drive West Pierre Place Parkview South Pierre Place Navarro Drive South Pine Ridge Drive Navarro Drive North Pine Valley Drive Deacon Drive South Pinon Drive Deacon Drive North Pinon Drive Eagle Avenue North Pintail Lane Starling Drive South Pintail Loop Dominik Drive South Pintail Loop Francis Drive North Plano Drive Francis Drive South Pleasant Forest Kyle Avenue North Plum Hollow Drive Kyle Avenue South Plum Hollow Drive Walton North Plum Hollow Drive Lakeway Drive East Ponderosa Drive Ravenstone Loop North Ponderosa Drive Deacon Drive South Ponderosa Drive Deacon Drive North Ponderosa Drive Angelina Circle North Poplar Street Barron Road North Poplar Street Parks Drive East Poplar Street George Bush Drive North Poplar Street Rosemary Lane North Poplar Street Texas Avenue SE Post Oak Bend Emerald Parkway North Potomac Place Greens Prairie Road South Preston Street Edelweiss Avenue West Prestwick Court Barron Road North Prestwick Court Normand Drive West Pro Court Hardwood Lane North Pronghorn Lane Hardwood Lane South Pronghorn Loop University Oaks North Pronghorn Loop University Oaks South Pueblo Court N. Harvey Road South Pueblo Court S. Texas Avenue West Puffin Way Decatur Drive West Purple Martin Decatur Drive East Puryear Drive Rio Grande Boulevard West Puryear Drive Rock Prairie Road South Puryear Drive Ravenstone Loop South Puryear Drive Castlegate Drive South Puryear Drive Rockingham Loop East Puryear Drive Rockingham Loop West Quality Circle SH 40/ Wm. D. Fitch South Ravenstone Loop Munson Avenue West Rayado Court N. Munson Avenue West Rayado Court S. George Bush Drive North Rayburn Court Emerald Parkway South Reatta Lane Victoria Avenue East Recreation Drive Cardinal Lane North Redmond Drive Pebble Creek Parkway East Redmond Drive Pebble Creek Parkway West Redmond Drive St. Andrews Drive West Redwood Street St. Andrews Drive East Regal Oaks Drive Spearman Drive North Regensburg Lane Greens Prairie Trail Renee Lane Southwest Parkway South Rescue Court Langford Street East Rhett Butler Southwest Parkway North Rhett Butler Pedernales Drive West Rhett Butler Pedernales Drive East Rhett Butler Welsh Avenue East Rhett Butler Welsh Avenue West Richards Street Rio Grande Boulevard East Richland Court N. Deacon Drive South Richland Court S. Haley Place North Rio Bravo Court Welsh Avenue West Rio Grande Boulevard Welsh Avenue East Robcoin Way Williams Lake Dr. East Robin Trail Welsh Avenue East Roblemont Drive Welsh Avenue West Rock Prairie Road West Rio Grande Boulevard West Rock Prairie Road West Welsh Avenue East Rockcliffe Loop Rio Grande Boulevard East Rockingham Loop Welsh Avenue West Rockingham Loop Pedernales Drive East Rockingham Loop Pedernales Drive West Rocky Rhodes Appomattox Drive East Rose Circle Emerald Parkway North Rose Circle Sebesta Road North Rosemary Lane Sebesta Road North Rosewood Drive Deacon Drive South Royal Adelade Rio Grande Boulevard West Royal Adelade Longmire Drive West Royal Adelade E. Bypass East Royal Adelade Harvey Road North Royal Adelade Raintree Drive North Royder Road Southwest Parkway North Royder Road University Oaks North S. Dexter Street Harvey Road South S. Ridgefield Graham Road South S. Traditions Dr. HSC Pkwy. North Sabine Court E. Bypass West San Benito Drive E. Bypass West San Benito Drive Sandstone Drive East San Benito Drive Church Avenue South San Benito Drive Woodcreek Drive South San Benito Drive Appomattox Drive East San Felipe Drive Spring Creek South San Felipe Drive Lawyer Street East San Mario Court Southwest Parkway North San Mario Court Raintree Drive South San Pedro Drive Lee Avenue West San Pedro Drive Raintree Drive North San Saba Circle Victoria Avenue East San Saba Court Rock Prairie Road North San Saba Drive St. Andrews Drive East San Saba Drive St. Andrews Drive South San Saba Drive Holleman Drive W. South San Saba Drive Parkview South Sandelwood Court Deacon Drive South Sandstone Drive Hawk Owl Cove East Sandstone Park Rio Grande Boulevard East Sandstone Park SH 6 South East Sandy Circle Wellborn Road West Santa Rita Court Wellborn Road West Sara Drive Holleman Drive W. East Sara Drive Rock Prairie Road Northwest Sara Lane Rock Prairie Road Northeast Savannah Court Exit Teen Center South Savine Court Exit Teen Center East Scarlet O'Hara Drive Exit Teen Center West Scarlet O'Hara Drive Mission Hills Drive North Schaffer Road Mission Hills Drive South Sebesta Road Royal Adelade Drive North Sebesta Road Pebble Creek Parkway East Sebesta Road Appomattox Drive East Second Street Barron Road South Shadowcrest Drive Appomattox Drive East Shadowoaks North Forest Parkway North Shadowoaks Harvest Drive East Shadowwood Drive Harvest Drive West Shadowwood Drive Decatur Drive West Sherman Drive Barron Road South Shetland Street College Main East Shiloh Court Boyett Street West Shire Drive Boyett Street East Shire Drive First Street West Shoal Creek Drive Spearman Drive North Shoal Creek Drive Spearman Drive South Sienna Drive Spearman Drive North Slice Court Dominik Drive North Socorro Court University Oaks South Song Sparrow University Oaks North Sonoma Circle Harvey Road South Southern Breeze Drive Longmire Drive East Southern Plantation Dr. Alexandria Ave. East Southern Plantation Dr. Alexandria Ave. West Southern Plantation Dr. Decatur Dr. East Southern Plantation Dr. Decatur Dr. West Southern Plantation Drive Purple Martin CV West Southern Trace Drive University Drive South Southland Street Church Avenue North Southwest Parkway Church Avenue South Southwood Athletic Park Cherry Street North Southwood Athletic Park Texas Avenue West Southwood Athletic Park William D. Fitch Parkway North Southwood Athletic Park Sapphire Drive South Southwood Athletic Park Champions Boulevard South Spanish Bay Court Stonebriar Court West Spanish Bay Court Stonebrook Drive West Spanish Bay Court Woodcreek Drive North Spearman Drive Stonebrook Drive East Spicewood Court Rock Prairie Road South Spring Brook Woodcreek Drive North Spring Creek Woodcreek Drive South Spring Creek Raintree Drive North Spring Field Drive Southern Plantation South Spring Field Drive Kernstown Lane South Spring Garden Drive Kernstown Lane South Springmist Drive Edelweiss Avenue East Spruce Street Burt Street North Spruce Street Burt Street South Spruce Street Park Place North Spruce Street Park Place South St. Andrews Drive University Drive North St. Andrews Drive Glenhaven Drive East St. Andrews Drive Hilltop Drive East Stallings Drive Southwood Drive West Stallings Drive Schaffer Road West Stallings Drive Schaffer Road East Stallings Drive Edelweiss Avenue South Starling Drive Welsh Avenue East Starling Drive Stonebrook Drive East Stasney Street Stonebrook Drive West Stasney Street Welsh Avenue West Stasney Street Congressional Drive South Stasney Street Congressional Drive North Sterling Drive University Oaks South Stone Forest Lincoln Avenue South Stone Forest Church Avenue North Stonebriar Court Church Avenue South Stonebriar Court Cherry Street North Stonebridge Court Haines Drive South Stonebridge Drive Haines Drive South Stonebridge Drive Holleman Drive North Stonebrook Drive Appomattox Drive West Stonebrook Drive Dartmouth Street West Stonebrook Drive SH 6 South West Stonewall Court Lakeway Drive West Stony Creek Lane Dexter Drive West Strasburg Court Dexter Drive East Strasburg Court Pershing Drive East Stuttgart Circle Hereford Street West Suffolk Avenue Fairview Avenue East Suffolk Avenue Fairview Avenue West Suffolk Avenue Eleanor Street West Suffolk Avenue Southern Plantation North Summer Haze Ct. Brewster Dr. North Summerglen Drive Southern Plantation South Summerglen Drive Timm Drive North Summit Crossing Buena Vista East Summit Street Shadowcrest Drive South Summit Street Shadowcrest Drive North Sun Meadow Court Stonebrook Drive East Sun Meadow Street Glade Street East Sunflower Trail Glade Street West Sunflower Trail Pershing Drive West Sussex Drive Southwood Drive East Sussex Drive Southwood Drive West Swiss Circle Brothers Boulevard East Sycamore Hills Drive Brothers Boulevard West Sycamore Hills Drive Longmire Drive East Tara Court Shenandoah Drive East Tarrow Street Shenandoah Drive West Tauber Street Rio Grande Boulevard West Tauber Street Greens Prairie East Tauber Street Greens Prairie West Taurus Avenue Welsh Avenue West Taurus Avenue Navarro Drive South Taurus Avenue Navarro Drive North Teakwood Court Brothers Boulevard West Teal Drive Longmire Drive East Technology Parkway Longmire Drive West Technology Way East Bypass East Thomas Street Gunsmith Street East Thomas Street Southwest Parkway South Thomas Street Parkland Drive South Thomas Street George Bush East West Thompson Street Earl Rudder Freeway W. East Thompson Street Graham Road South Thompson Street USC Road East Tiffany Trail USC Road East Tiffany Trail Rio Grande Boulevard East Timber Street Texas Avenue East Timber Knoll Southwood Drive North Timber Knoll Rio Grande Boulevard West Timber Knoll San Felipe Drive East Timm Drive Tarrow Street West Timm Drive SH 6 South West Timm Drive Lakeway Drive East Todd Trail Harvey Road South Todd Trail Barron Road North Todd Trail SH 40/Wm. D. Fitch North Todd Trail Anderson Street West Todd Trail Glade Street East Todd Trail Glade Street West Todd Trail Pershing Drive West Todd Trail Holleman Drive South Tonkaway Lake Road Marta Street South Tonkaway Lake Road Sophia Lane North Towers Pkwy. Cain Rd. North Town Place Dexter Drive East Trace Meadows Texas Avenue West Trace Meadows Krenek Tap North Treehouse Trail Appomattox Drive West Treehouse Trail Woodcreek Drive South Treehouse Trail Lanham Drive West Treehouse Trail Tarrow Street West Trigger Street Thompson Street South Trinity Place Thompson Street North Turkey Creek Road Kerry Street North Turtle Dove Trail Kerry Street South Turtle Dove Trail Guernsey Street North Twin Pond Circle Guernsey Street South Uphor Dr. Etonbury Ave. West USC Entrance Park Place North University Oaks Park Place South University Oaks Angus Street North USC Welsh Avenue West Val Verde Drive Rock Prairie Road South Valley View Drive Graham Road North Valley View Drive Dominik Drive South Van Horn Drive Francis Drive North Van Horn Drive Spring Creek South Vassar Court Alexandria Avenue West Venture Drive Woodcreek Drive South Venture Drive Woodcreek Drive North Veterans Park Mission Hills Drive North Veterans Park Mission Hills Drive South Victoria Avenue Royal Adelade Drive North Victoria Avenue Royal Adelade Drive South Village Drive Raintree Drive South Village Drive Spring Creek South Village Drive Spring Creek West Village Drive Ponderosa Drive North Von Trapp Lane Rock Prairie Road North Von Trapp Lane Francis Drive North W. Dexter Drive William D. Fitch Parkway West W. King Cole Drive Rock Prairie Road South W. King Cole Drive Williams Creek Drive West Wallaceshire Ave. Victoria Ave. East Wallaceshire Ave. Victoria Ave. West Walnut Grove Hwy. 30 North Waterford Drive Welsh Avenue West Wayne Court Welsh Avenue West Wellesley Court Schaffer Road East Welsh Avenue Schaffer Road West Welsh Avenue Kernstown Lane South Welsh Avenue Kernstown Lane North Welsh Avenue Southern Plantation South Welsh Avenue Southern Plantation North Welsh Avenue Holleman Drive North Welsh Avenue Holleman Drive South Welsh Avenue Dexter Drive NW Welsh Avenue Dexter Drive SE West Ridge Drive Southern Plantation North Westchester Avenue Southern Plantation South Westchester Avenue Tiffany Trail West Westfield Drive Appomattox Drive West Westover Street Rio Grande Boulevard West Westover Street St. Andrews Drive West Whistling Straits Drive Pebble Creek Parkway East Whistling Straits Drive Autumn Circle South Whistling Straits Drive Victoria Avenue West Whistling Straits Loop Anderson Street NW Whiterose Anderson Street SW Whitewing Lane Appomattox Drive West Whitewing Lane Earl Rudder Freeway E. West Whitney Court Francis Drive North Whitney Lane Francis Drive South Wilderness Drive Munson Avenue NE Wildewood William D. Fitch Parkway South Wildewood Woodland Springs Drive North Wildrye Drive Jones Butler Road East William D. Fitch Parkway Jones Butler Road East Williams Street Woodsman Drive North Williams Creek Drive Woodsman Drive East Williams Creek Drive Holleman Drive W. East Williams Lake Dr. Joe Will Dr. East Williams Lake Dr. Rock Prairie Rd. E. North Williams Ridge Court Cornell Drive East Willow Loop Nueces Drive South Willow Loop Victoria Avenue West Willow Pond Street Nottingham Drive East Willow Pond Court Raintree Drive North Windfree Drive SH 40/Wm. D. Fitch East Windfree Drive Holleman Drive North Windfree Drive Jones Butler Road East Windfree Drive SH 40/Wm. D. Fitch South Winding Road Holleman Drive South North Winding Road Holleman Drive South South Winding Road Rock Prairie Road East Winding Road Rock Prairie Road West Windmeadows Drive Rock Prairie Road South Windswept Drive Greens Prairie East Windswept Drive SH 40/Wm. D. Fitch South Windswept Drive SH 40/Wm. D. Fitch East Windwood Drive College Main West Winecup Circle Greens Prairie Trail East Winged Foot Drive Creek Meadows Boulevard N. East Winged Foot Drive Creek Meadows Boulevard N. West Winter Park Alexandria Avenue West Wolf Run Drive Alexandria Avenue East Wolf Run Drive Alexandria Avenue West Woodcliff Court Alexandria Avenue East Woodcreek Drive St. Andrews Drive North Woodhaven Circle St. Andrews Drive South Woodhaven Circle St. Andrews Drive North Woodland Parkway St. Andrews Drive South Woodland Parkway University Drive North Woodland Hills Boulevard SH 40/Wm. D. Fitch West Woodland Hills Boulevard F & B Road South Woodsman Drive Arrington Road North Woodsman Alley Old Arrington Road South Woodsman Alley Arrington Road East Woodway Drive Barron Road North Woodway Drive St. Andrews Drive South Woodway Drive Greens Prairie Road East Yale Court Harvey Road South Yellowhose Circle Harvey Road South Yorkshire Drive Greens Prairie Trail NW Yorkshire Drive Castlegate Drive North Yorktown Court Newark Circle NW  
Three-way stops: Church Avenue North Bound with East Bound Church Avenue and at the South Bound Public Way of the Stack. 
# Street Intersecting Street Travel Direction 1242 Donnington Drive Newark Circle North 1243 Hofburg Drive Leyla Lane East 1244 Leyla Lane Renee Lane East 1245 Cain Road Holleman Drive S. West 1246 Quaker Ridge Drive St. Andrews Drive South 1247 Quaker Ridge Court St. Andrews Drive North 1248 Back Water Road Royder Road West 1249 Live Oak Street Greens Prairie Road W. South 1250 Royder Road Greens Prairie Road W. South 1251 Greens Prairie Road W. Wellborn Road West 1252 McCullough Road Wellborn Road West 1253 Church Street Wellborn Road West 1254 Madison Street Wellborn Road West 1255 S. Dowling Road Wellborn Road East 1256 Butte Drive Wellborn Road East 1257 Turnberry Circle Greens Prairie Road W. South 1258 Royder Road Greens Prairie Trail South 1259 Saddle Lane Holleman Drive S. East 1260 Dove Landing Avenue Alexandria Avenue East 1261 Dove Landing Avenue Alexandria Avenue West 1262 Chesapeake Lane Alexandria Avenue East 1263 Chesapeake Court Alexandria Avenue East 1264 Coeburn Court Newport Lane West 1265 Coeburn Court Newport Lane East 1266 Alexandria Avenue Eagle Avenue North 1267 Alexandria Avenue Eagle Avenue South 1268 Dove Hollow Lane Eagle Avenue South 1269 Eagle Avenue Alley Eagle Avenue North 1270 Crested Point Drive Newport Lane East 1271 Crested Point Court Newport Lane West 1272 Jones-Butler Road Frontage Road FM 2818 South 1273 Saddle Lane Quail Run West 1274 Greens Prairie Trail Royder Road East 1275 Greens Prairie Trail Royder Road West 1276 Victoria Avenue W.S. Phillips Parkway South 1277 W.S. Phillips Parkway Victoria Avenue West 1278 Davidson Drive Holleman Drive S. East 1279 Kenyon Drive Holleman Drive S. East 1280 Victoria Avenue SH 40/William D. Fitch South 1281 Appomattox Drive Horse Shoe Drive South 1282 Appomattox Drive Horse Heaven Lane South 1283 Southern Plantation Drive Newport Lane East 1284 Southern Plantation Drive Newport Lane West 1285 Deacon Drive W. Holleman Drive S. West 1286 Gunner Trail Deacon Drive South 1287 Old Ironsides Drive Towers Parkway East 1288 Old Ironsides Drive Towers Parkway West 1289 Commando Trail Deacon Drive South 1290 Towers Parkway Deacon Drive South 1291 Bellerive Bend Drive Royal Adelade Drive North 1292 Cottage Lane Holleman Drive S. East 1293 Junction Boys Road Market Street North 1294 Dalton Lane Greens Prairie Road W. South 1295 Arguello Drive Chimney Hill Drive West 1296 Lakeway Drive SH 6 West 1297 Scott & White Drive SH 6 West 1298 Scott & White Drive Rock Prairie Road North 1299 Healing Way Scott & White Drive North 1300 Healing Way Lakeway Drive South 1301 Medical Avenue Rock Prairie Road North 1302 Medical Avenue Lakeway Drive South 1303 Double Mountain Road Medical Avenue North 1304 Cathedral Pine Road Medical Avenue North 1305 Palm Court Appomattox Drive East 1306 Raintree Drive Appomattox Drive West 1307 Forest Oaks Drive Raintree Drive North 1308 Raintree Drive Forest Oaks Drive East 1309 Arnold Road Navarro Drive East 1310 Navarro Drive Arnold Road South 1311 Navarro Drive Rock Prairie Road North 1312 Victoria Avenue W.S. Phillips Parkway North 1314 Warkworth Lane W.S. Phillips Parkway North 1315 Norwich Drive Victoria Avenue West 1316 Norwich Drive Victoria Avenue East 1317 Norwich Drive Odell Lane West 1318 Norwich Drive Odell Lane East 1319 Farah Drive Arnold Road North 1320 Park Place Fairview Avenue East 1321 Park Place Fairview Avenue West 1322 Cullen Trail Deacon W. Drive South 1323 Cullen Trail Deacon W. Drive North 1324 Capps Drive Cullen Trail West 1325 Capps Drive General Parkway East 1326 General Parkway Rock Prairie Road W. South 1327 Towers Parkway Deacon W. Drive North 1328 Luaren Drive N Forest Parkway North 1329 Alison Avenue N Forest Parkway North 1330 Justin Avenue N Forest Parkway North 1331 Sessile Drive N Forest Parkway South 1332 Claremonth Drive Harverford Road South 1333 Claremonth Drive Harverford Road North 1334 Los Portales Drive Harverford Road South 1335 Los Portales Drive Harverford Road North 1336 Los Portales Drive Davidson Drive South 1339 Los Portales Drive Davidson Drive North 1340 Los Portales Drive Kenyon Drive South 1341 Haynes Lane Tower Parkway West 1342 Luther Street W. Jones-Butler Road East 1343 Luther Street W. Jones-Butler Road West 1344 Penberthy Drive Luther Street W. South 1345 Great Oaks Drive Arboleda Drive North 1346 Durrand Street Great Oaks Drive East 1347 Durrand Street Arboleda Drive North 1348 Spanish Oak Court Arboleda Drive North 1349 Wilshire Court Stonebrook Drive East 1350 Flagstone Court Greens Prairie Trail South 1351 Ledgstone Trail Greens Prairie Trail South 1352 Ledgstone Trail Royder Road East 1353 Greens Prairie Trail Wellborn Road East 1354 Trigger Street Dexter Drive S. West 1355 Armored Avenue General Parkway East 1356 Armored Avenue General Parkway West 1357 Armored Avenue Old Wellborn Road East 1358 Tang Cake General Parkway West 1359 Tang Cake Old Wellborn Road East 1360 W.S. Phillips Parkway Brewster Drive West 1361 W.S. Phillips Parkway Brewster Drive East 1362 W.S. Phillips Parkway Barron Road North 1363 Brewster Drive William D. Fitch Parkway North 1364 W.S. Phillips Parkway Greens Prairie Road W. South 1365 Odell Lane W.S. Phillips Parkway North 1366 Uphor Road W.S. Phillips Parkway East 1367 Norwich Drive Uphor Drive South 1368 Norwich Drive Uphor Drive North 1369 Hadleigh Lane Uphor Drive South 1370 Hadleigh Lane Uphor Drive North 1371 Toodington Lane Uphor Drive South 1372 Toodington Lane Uphor Drive North 1373 Dexter Drive Ayrshire Court West 1374 Timber Drive Greens Prairie Trail North 1375 Creekside Circle Eagle Avenue North 1376 Night Rain Drive Eagle Avenue South 1377 Lienz Lane Eagle Avenue North 1378 Tournay Lane Eagle Avenue North 1379 Lambermont Drive Eagle Avenue North 1380 Kleine Lane Eagle Avenue South 1381 Towers Parkway Rock Prairie Road W. South 1382 Kate Lane Towers Parkway West 1383 Papa Bear Drive Summerway Drive East 1384 Hailes Lane W.S. Phillips Parkway North 1385 Muncaster Lane Hailes Lane East 1386 Muncaster Lane Hailes Lane West 1387 Muncaster Lane Warkworth Lane East 1388 Muncaster Lane Warkworth Lane West 1389 Dunlap Loop Brewster Drive East 1390 Dunlap Loop Brewster Drive South 1391 Alford Street Brewster Drive East 1392 Bridgewood Court Brewster Drive West 1393 Waterstone Court Brewster Drive West 1394 Scoffield Drive Reatta Lane East 1395 Scoffield Drive Reatta Lane West 1396 Fincastle Loop (northern int.) Decatur Drive East 1397 Fincastle Loop (southern int.) Decatur Drive East 1398 Hunter Creek Drive Decatur Drive West 1399 Dayton Court Decatur Drive East 1400 Whispering Creek Drive Decatur Drive West 1401 Candace Court Decatur Drive East 1402 Sunset Ridge Drive Decatur Drive North 1403 Deacon W. Drive Old Wellborn Road East 1404 Kimber Lane Old Wellborn Road East 1405 Kimber Lane General Parkway West 1406 Blanco Drive Balcones Drive North 1407 Bosque Drive Balcones Drive North 1408 Bandera Drive Balcones Drive North 1409 Hayes Lane Papa Bear Drive East 1410 Hayes Lane Papa Bear Drive West 1411 Etonbury Avenue Greens Prairie Road W. South 1412 Belliser Court Etonbury Avenue East 1413 Uphor Drive Etonbury Avenue East 1414 Somerton Court Etonbury Avenue East 1415 Airborne Avenue Deacon W Drive North 1416 General Parkway Deacon W Drive North 1417 Shady Brook Lane Greens Prairie Trail South 1418 Sequoia Drive Appomattox Drive East 1419 Etonbury Avenue Victoria Avenue West 1420 Etonbury Avenue Victoria Avenue East 1421 Warkwort Lane Etonbury Avenue North 1422 Warkwort Lane Etonbury Avenue South 1423 Kimbolton Drive Etonbury Avenue North 1424 Kimbolton Drive Etonbury Avenue South 1425 Cartington Court Etonbury Avenue North 1426 Chillingham Court Etonbury Avenue North 1427 Odell Lane Etonbury Avenue North 1428 Odell Lane Etonbury Avenue South 1429 Goodrich Court Etonbury Avenue North 1430 Carnes Court S. Lowery Meadows Lane East 1431 Shalow Creek Loop Lowery Meadows Lane West 1432 Cedar Creek Court Lowery Meadows Lane East 1433 Cedar Creek Court Lowery Meadows Lane West 1434 Cripple Creek Court Lowery Meadows Lane East 1435 Cripple Creek Court Lowery Meadows Lane West 1436 Lowery Meadows Lane Creek Meadows Boulevard N. South 1437 Wood Glenn Drive Creek Meadows Boulevard N. North 1438 Beaver Creek Drive E. Creek Meadows Boulevard N. West 1439 Flint Creek Drive E. Creek Meadows Boulevard N. West 1440 Flint Creek Drive W. Creek Meadows Boulevard N. West 1441 Corporal Road General Parkway East 1442 Corporal Alley General Parkway West 1443 Sergeant Drive General Parkway East 1444 Sergeant Drive General Parkway West 1445 Church Avenue Church Avenue North 1446 Church Avenue Church Avenue South 1447 Church Avenue Church Avenue East 1448 U Centre Private Driveway Cross Street North  
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-2, ch. 10, sched. III; Ord. No. 2017-3852, exh. A, 1-26-2017; altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2018-4015 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-14-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4038 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-13-2018) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate stop intersections, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(8). 
Footnotes: 

Sec. 38-1004. - Traffic Schedule IV, yield intersections. 
Street Intersecting Street Travel Direction James Parkway Puryear Drive West East Tarrow Street Tarrow Drive West North Forest Parkway Earl Ruder Freeway E. West Texas Avenue Holleman Drive South Veterans Loop Veterans Parkway East Veterans Loop Veterans Parkway West Veterans Fields Veterans Parkway East Veterans Fields Veterans Parkway West Arrington Road Arrington Road South Walton Drive Francis Drive SoutheastNorthbound and Southbound traffic on Holleman Drive South at the intersection with Harvey Mitchell Parkway South (FM 2818)Northbound traffic Koppe Bridge Road at S. Dowling RoadScott and White Drive roundabout intersection approaches  
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 10, sched. IV; Ord. No. 2017-3853, exh. A, 1-26-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate yield intersections, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(8). 
Sec. 38-1005. - Traffic Schedule V, school zones. 
Schedule V-School Zones Location Posted
Hours Posted 
Speed Limit *Operational 
Time 
(School Days) Ord. No./ 
Date 
Adopted BASE 
MAP 
NO.   * The operational time is a period in which the zone is enforceable. This time is variable and may change each semester/year depending on the actual school hours set by CSISD. College Hills Elementary 1. Francis Drive, West of Ashburn Avenue - East of Williams Street. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1986 
Nov. 12, 1992 1998-01 2. Francis Drive, West of Walton Drive - East of James Parkway. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1986 
Nov. 12, 1992 1998-01 3. Gilchrist Avenue, West of Ashburn Avenue - East of Williams Street. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-01 4. Gilchrist Avenue, West of Williams Street - East of Walton Drive. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-01 5. Walton Drive, South of Nunn Street - North of Francis Drive. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1986 
Nov. 12, 1992 1998-01 6. Walton Drive, South of Francis Drive - North of Bolton Avenue. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1986 
Nov. 12, 1992 1998-01 South Knoll Elementary 7. Southwest Parkway, East of Langford Street - West of Laura Lane. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-02 8. Southwest Parkway, East of Lawyer Place - West of Sabine Court. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-02 9. Langford Street, South of S. Ridgefield Court - North of Boswell Street. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-02 10. Langford Street, South of Boswell Street - North of Southwest Parkway. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-02 11. Boswell Street, East of Lawyer Street - West of Langford Street. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-02 Southwood Valley Elementary 12. Deacon Drive, East of San Felipe Drive - West of Brothers Boulevard. When Flashing 20 mph 7:20-8:05 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-02 13. Deacon Drive, East of Pierre Place - West of Celinda Circle. When Flashing 20 mph 7:20-8:05 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-02 14. Brothers Boulevard, South of Todd Trail - North of Deacon Drive (intersection of Deacon and Brothers). When Flashing 20 mph 7:20-8:05 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-02 15. Brothers Boulevard, South of Todd Trail - North of Deacon Drive (intersection of Todd Trail and Brothers). When Flashing 20 mph 7:20-8:05 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-02 Oakwood Middle School/Willow Branch Intermediate School 16. Holik Street, South of George Bush Drive - North of Anna Street (intersection of George Bush and Holik). When Flashing 20 mph 7:45-8:45 a.m. 
3:15-4:00 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-03 17. Holik Street, North of Anna Street - South of George Bush Drive (intersection of Anna and Holik). When Flashing 20 mph 7:45-8:45 a.m. 
3:15-4:00 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-03 18. Anderson Street, South of George Bush Drive - North of Wolf Run. When Flashing 20 mph 7:45-8:45 a.m. 
3:15-4:00 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-03 19. Anderson Street, South of Wolf Run - North of Park Place. When Flashing 20 mph 7:45-8:45 a.m. 
3:15-4:00 p.m. #1441 
Aug. 11, 1983 1998-03 20. Timber Street, South of George Bush Drive and North of Anna Street (intersection of George Bush Dr. and Timbers). When Flashing 20 mph 7:45-8:45 a.m. 
3:15-4:00 p.m. #2210 
Sept. 26, 1996 1998-03 21. Timber Street, North of Anna Street - South of George Bush Drive. When Flashing 20 mph 7:45-8:45 a.m. 
3:15-4:00 p.m. #2210 
Sept. 26, 1996 1998-03 Rock Prairie Elementary/College Station Middle School 22. Welsh Avenue, North of Edelweiss Avenue - South of Willow Loop. When Flashing 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. #1941 
Feb. 13, 1992 1998-04 23. Honeysuckle Lane, East of Welsh Avenue - West of Westchester Avenue. 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. #1941 
Feb. 13, 1992 1998-04 24. Canterbury Drive, East of Welsh Avenue - West of Westchester Avenue. 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. #1941 
Feb. 13, 1992 1998-04 25. Dover Drive, East of Welsh Avenue - West of Westchester Avenue. 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. #1941 
Feb. 13, 1992 1998-04 26. Abbey Lane, East of Victoria Avenue - West of Nottingham Drive. 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. #1989 
April 11, 1989 1998-04 27. Yorkshire Drive, East of Victoria Avenue - West of Nottingham Drive. 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. #1989 
April 11, 1989 1998-04 28. Victoria Avenue, South of Yorkshire Drive - North of Shire Drive. When Flashing 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. #1821 
Sept. 14, 1989 1998-04 29. Rock Prairie Road, East of Rio Grande Boulevard - West of Bahia Drive. When Flashing 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. #1987 
Nov. 12, 1987 1998-04 30. Rio Grande Boulevard, South of Capistrano Court - North of Rock Prairie Road. When Flashing 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. #1987 
Nov. 12, 1987 1998-04 31. Westchester Avenue, South of Dover Street - North of Rock Prairie Road. 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. #1874 
Dec. 13, 1990 1998-04 32. Rock Prairie Road, East of Shire Drive - West of Victoria Avenue. When Flashing 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. # 2259 
Aug. 28, 1997 1998-04 33. Edelweiss Avenue, East of Caterina Lane - West of Innsbruck Circle. When Flashing 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. # 2703 
Mar. 11, 2004 N/A 34. Innsbruck Circle, North of western intersection of Edelweiss Avenue and Innsbruck Circle. 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. # 2703 
Mar. 11, 2004 N/A 35. Innsbruck Circle, North of eastern intersection of Edelweiss Avenue and Innsbruck Circle. 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. # 2703 
Mar. 11, 2004 N/A 36. Sunflower Trail, North of Edelweiss Avenue - South of Welsh Avenue. 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. # 2703 
Mar. 11, 2004 N/A A&M Consolidated High School 37. Welsh Avenue, South of Nueces Drive - North of FM 2818 (intersection of Welsh and Nueces). 7:30 a.m.-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:30 a.m.-4:15 p.m. #1889 
April 11, 1991 1998-02 38. Welsh Avenue, North of FM 2818 - South of Nueces Drive (intersection of Welsh and FM 2818). 7:30 a.m.-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:30 a.m.-4:15 p.m. #1889 
April 11, 1991 1998-02 39. Nueces Drive, South of Hondo Drive - North of Arboles Circle 7:30 a.m.-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:30 a.m.-4:15 p.m. #2403 
Aug. 12, 1999 1999-01 40. Nueces Drive, North of FM 2818 - South of Guadelupe Drive 7:30 a.m.-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:30 a.m.-4:15 p.m. #2403 
Aug. 12, 1999 1999-01 41. Guadalupe Drive, West of Langford Street - East of Nueces Drive 7:30 a.m.-4:15 p.m. 25 mph 7:30 a.m.-4:15 p.m. #2403 
Aug. 12, 1999 1999-01 42. Welsh Avenue, North of FM 2818 (at the south end of the limit identified in #38 above) When Flashing 35 mph 7:30-8:30 a.m. 
3:30-4:15 p.m. Sept. 26, 2013 NA 43. Welsh Avenue, South of FM 2818 (345 feet south of the FM 2818 and Welsh intersection) When Flashing 35 mph 7:30-8:30 a.m. 
3:30-4:15 p.m. Sept. 26, 2013 NA 44. Nueces Drive, North of FM 2818 (at the south end of the limit identified in #40 above) When Flashing 35 mph 7:30-8:30 a.m. 
3:30-4:15 p.m. Sept. 26, 2013 NA 45. FM 2818, West of Welsh (650 feet west of FM 2818 and Welsh intersection) When Flashing 35 mph 7:30-8:30 a.m. 
3:30-4:15 p.m. Sept. 26, 2013 NA 46. FM 2818, East of Nueces (220 feet east of FM 2818 and Nueces intersection) When Flashing 35 mph 7:30-8:30 a.m. 
3:30-4:15 p.m. Sept. 26, 2013 NA Pebble Creek Elementary 47. Parkview Drive, West of Bogey Court - East of Birdie Court. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #2198 
Aug. 29, 1996 1998-05 48. Venture Drive, West of Lakeway Drive - East of S.H. 6 East Frontage Road. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #2198 
Aug. 29, 1996 1998-05 49. Lakeway Drive, South of Greens Prairie Road - North of Parkview Drive. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #2198 
Aug. 29, 1996 1998-05 50. Lakeway Drive, North of Quality Circle - South of Venture Drive. When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #2198 
Aug. 29, 1996 1998-05 Forest Ridge Elementary 51. Greens Prairie Road, West of Arrington - East of Castlegate Drive. When Flashing 25 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #2868 
Feb. 9, 2006 N/A Cypress Grove Intermediate 52. Graham Road, West of Schaffer Road - East of Victoria Avenue. When Flashing 25 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #2403 
Aug. 12, 1999 1999-02 53. Graham Road, West of S.H. 6 West Frontage Road - East of Schaffer Road. When Flashing 25 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #2403 
Aug. 12, 1999 1999-02 54. Schaffer Road, North of Graham Road - South of Hasselt Street. When Flashing 25 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. #2403 
Aug. 12, 1999 1999-02 Creekview Elementary 55. Eagle Avenue, West of New Port Lane - 385 feet east of school property When Flashing 20 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. # 
Aug 17, 2009 N/A Greens Prairie Elementary School & Pecan Trail Intermediate School 56. Greens Prairie Trail - beginning 210 feet east of the intersection with Royder Road and extending west until 200 feet west of the intersection with Flagstone Court. When Flashing 25 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. Aug. 10, 2017 N/A 57. Royder Road - beginning 400 feet north of the intersection with Greens Prairie Trail and extending 850 feet from the south side of the intersection to the City Limit. When Flashing 25 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. Aug. 10, 2017 N/A 58. Ledgestone Trail - beginning 220 feet north of the intersection with Greens Prairie Trail and Extending south to the intersection. When Flashing 25 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. Aug. 10, 2017 N/A 59. Flagstone Court - beginning 220 feet north of the intersection with Greens Prairie Trail and Extending south to the intersection. When Flashing 25 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. Aug. 10, 2017 N/A College Station High School 60. Barron Road - beginning 220 feet east of the intersection with Victoria Avenue and extending west 1350 feet from the west side to the intersection When Flashing 25 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. # 
July 12, 2012 N/A 61. Victoria Avenue - beginning 250 feet north of the intersection with Barron Road and extending south 1730 feet from the south side of the intersection When Flashing 25 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. # 
July 12, 2012 N/A Spring Creek Elementary 62. WS Phillips Parkway - beginning 1,050 feet northwest of the intersection with Brewster Drive and extending southwest to 50 feet northwest of the intersection with Haines Lane When Flashing 20 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. July 23, 2015 N/A 63. Brewster Drive - beginning at the intersection with WS Phillips Parkway and extending northeast to 1,150 feet northeast of the intersection with WS Philips Parkway When Flashing 20 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. July 23, 2015 N/A 64. Dunlap Loop - beginning at the property line between 4007 and 4009 Dunlap Loop and extending southeast to the intersection with Brewster Drive. 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. 20 mph 7:15-8:45 a.m. 
2:45-4:15 p.m. July 23, 2015 N/A College View High School 65. George Bush Drive (FM 2347) - beginning 200 feet east of Holik Street to approximately 175 feet west of Timber Street. When Flashing 30 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. Oct 13, 2016 N/A 66. Timber Street - beginning approximately 160 feet south of the intersection with George Bush Drive. When Flashing 30 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. Oct 13, 2016 N/A 67. Holik Street - beginning at the intersection with George Bush Drive and extending south 375 feet. When Flashing 30 mph 7:30-8:15 a.m. 
2:45-3:30 p.m. Oct 13, 2016 N/A International Leadership of Texas 68. Graham Road, East of Dove Crossing Lane, West of S.H. 6 West Frontage Road. When Flashing 25 mph 7:15-8:15 a.m. 
3:15-4:30 p.m. March 28, 2019 69. Longmire Drive, North of Bridle Gate Drive, South Birmingham Drive. When Flashing 25 mph 7:15-8:15 a.m. 
3:15-4:30 p.m. March 28, 2019 70. Birmingham Road, 200 feet north of Graham Road. 7:15-8:15 a.m. 
3:15 p.m.-4:30 p.m. 25 mph March 28, 2019  
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 10, sched. V; Ord. No. 2016-3815, exh. A(sched. V), 10-13-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3914 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2017; Ord. No. 2018-4014 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-14-2018; Ord. No. 2019-4082 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-28-2019) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate school crossings, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(11). 
Sec. 38-1006. - Traffic Schedule VI, bikeways and bike prohibitions. 
BIKEWAYS AND BIKE PROHIBITIONS Road Name To From Anderson Street George Bush Drive (FM 2347) Southwest Parkway Appomattox Drive 200 feet northwest of Horsehaven Lane Horsehaven Lane Arnold Road Normand Drive 100 feet northeast of Farah Drive Arrington Road Decatur Drive William D. Fitch Parkway (SH 40) Arrington Road Greens Prairie Road West South Oaks Drive Barron Road William D. Fitch Parkway (SH 40) State Highway 6 Frontage Road Central Park Lane Colgate Drive Krenek Tap Road College Main CS City limits 80 feet north of Spruce Street Patricia Street Dartmouth Street Southwest Parkway East Harvey Mitchell Parkway South (FM 2818) Dartmouth Street Harvey Road (SH 30) Holleman Drive East Deacon Drive Wellborn Road (FM 2154) Texas Avenue South (SH B6-R) Deacon Drive West Holleman Drive South General Parkway Decatur Drive 150 feet Southeast of Alexadria Avenue Arrington Road Eagle Avenue William D. Fitch Parkway (SH 40) State Highway 6 Frontage Road Emerald Parkway Rosewood Drive Bent Oak Street Etonbury Avenue 140 feet northwest of Warkworth Lane 140 feet southeast of Goodrich Court General Parkway Deacon Drive West 100 feet northwest of Capps Drive George Bush Drive (FM 2347) Wellborn Road (FM 2154) Texas Avenue South (SH B6-R) George Bush Drive East Texas Avenue South (SH B6-R) Holleman Drive East Graham Road Wellborn Road (FM 2154) State Highway 6 Frontage Road Healing Way Scott & White Drive Lakeway Drive Holleman Drive Oney Hervey Drive 650 feet southwest of Texas Avenue South (SH B6-R) Holleman Drive George Bush Drive East 1,600 feet southwest of State Highway 6 Frontage Road Jones-Butler Road George Bush Drive (FM 2347) Harvey Mitchell Parkway (FM 2818) Access Road Krenek Tap Road Texas Avenue South (SH B6-R) 1,850 feet southwest of State Highway 6 Frontage Road Lakeway Drive State Highway 6 South Frontage Road 100 feet southeast of Medical Avenue Lakeway Drive Venture Drive Technology Way Lakeway Drive 1,850 feet northwest of William D Fitch Parkway Agate Drive Lincoln Avenue Texas Avenue South (SH B6-R) University Drive East (FM 60) Longmire Court 500 feet northwest of Valley View Drive Valley View Drive Longmire Drive Valley View Drive 200 feet southeast of Brothers Boulevard Longmire Drive 1,050 feet northwest of Deacon Drive 400 feet northwest of Rock Prairie Road Longmire Drive 280 feet southeast of Rock Prairie Road Barron Road Marian Pugh Drive 350 feet Southeast of George Bush Drive (FM 2347) Holleman Drive West Medical Avenue Rock Prairie Road Lakeway Drive Normand Drive Rock Prairie Road Arnold Road Rio Grande Boulevard Harvey Mitchell Parkway South (FM 2818) Santa Rita Court Rio Grande Boulevard Ponderosa Drive Rock Prairie Road Royder Road Greens Prairie Trail 650 feet southeast of Greens Prairie Trail Scott and White Drive State Highway 6 South Frontage Road Rock Prairie Road Sebesta Road State Highway 6 South Frontage Road Sandstone Drive Towers Parkway 140 feet northwest of Old Ironside Drive 140 feet southeast of Hayes Lane University Drive East (FM 60) State Highway 6 South Frontage Road The City limit southwest of Boonville Road (FM 158) Victoria Avenue Abbey Lane William D. Fitch Parkway (SH 40) Victoria Avenue William D. Fitch Parkway (SH 40) 600 feet southwest of Etonbury Lane Walton Drive Texas Avenue South (SH B6-R) Nunn Street Welsh Avenue Holleman Drive Rock Prairie Road William D. Fitch Parkway State Highway 6 South Frontage Road Pebble Creek Parkway  
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 10, sched. VI) 
Sec. 38-1007. - Traffic Schedule VII, one-way streets and alleyways. 
Alleyways on the south boundary of the Southgate Shopping Center. This alleyway shall be signed one-way traveling from Montclair Avenue to Highland Street 
Williams Street one-way street traveling from Gilchrist Avenue to Francis Drive 
Lodge Street one-way street traveling from University Drive to Church Avenue 
Alleyways on the south of the Promenade Parking Lot. One-way from Boyett Street to Promenade Lot 
East Tarrow Drive one-way street traveling from University Drive to Tarrow 
Tarrow Drive one-way street traveling from E. Tarrow to University Drive 
Boswell Street one-way street traveling from Lawyer Street to Langford Street 
Patricia Street one-way street traveling from College Main to Lodge Street (west bound) 
Newton Road beginning at its intersection with Aberdeen Place and ending at its intersection with George Bush Drive is one-way northbound, toward George Bush Drive. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 10, sched. VII; Ord. No. 2016-3786, exh. A(sched. VII), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3893 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate one-way streets, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(11). 
Sec. 38-1008. - Traffic Schedule VIII, no right turn and no left turn. 
Street Intersecting Street Travel Direction No Lt.Turn No Rt.Turn Arguello Drive Tarrow Street West ? Brothers Boulevard Southwood Valley Elementary School parent pick-up and drop-off driveway located 815 feet north of Deacon Drive North ? 1 Church Street Wellorn Road West ? Dominik Drive Texas Avenue West ? Eagle Avenue Public alley 350 feet northeast of Newport Lane Southwest ? 1 Francis Drive College Hills Elementary Driveway South ? 1 Hastings Drive Way Holleman Drive North ? Holik Street Oakwood Intermediate School Driveway that is 330 feet southeast of the George Bush Drive (FM 2347) Intersection Northwest ? Holik Street College View High School Driveway that is 220 southeast of the George Bush Drive (FM 2347) Intersection Northeast ? Holleman Drive Hastings Drive Way East ? Holleman Drive Village Drive West ? Ledgestone Trail Greens Prairie Trail southeast ? 2 Pecan Trail 
Intermediate 
School Driveway Greens Prairie Trail northwest ? 2 Post Oak Exit Harvey Road North ? Royder Road Ledgestone Trail southeast ? 1 Royder Road Private Alley 300 feet southeast of Ledgestone Trail southeast ? 1 Tarrow Street University Drive South ? Tarrow Street Arguello Drive South ? Tarrow Street Arguello Drive South ? Tarrow Street Arguello Drive South ? Tarrow Street University Drive South ? Tarrow Street East University Drive South ? Tarrow Street East Tarrow Street North ? Tarrow Street East Tarrow Street North ? Texas Avenue Deacon Drive South ? Texas Avenue (SH B6-R) University Drive (FM 60) Southwest ? Timber Street College View High School Driveway that is 420 feet southeast of George Bush Drive (FM 2347) intersection Southeast ? University Drive Tarrow Street West ? University Drive Tarrow Street East ? University Drive Ashbury Street West ? University Drive Ashbury Street East ? Welsh Avenue Rock Prairie Elementary driveway located 650 feet northwest of Rock Prairie Road Northwest ? 1 WS Phillips Parkway Spring Creek Elementary Parent Exit that is 280 feet northeast of the Brewster Driver Intersection Southeast ? WS Phillips Parkway Spring Creek Elementary Parent Exit that is 280 feet northeast of the Brewster Driver Intersection Northeast ?  
1  On school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. and on school days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. 
2  No Right-Turn on red on school days from 7:00 AM until 4:30 PM 
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 10, sched. VIII; Ord. No. 2016-3782, exh. A(sched. VIII), 7-14-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3912 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3913 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3932 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-25-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate prohibit turns, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(7). 
Sec. 38-1009. - Traffic Schedule IX, truck prohibitions. 
Street Intersecting Street Traffic Direction Barron Cut-off Road Barron Road East/West Bird Pond North/South Munson Dominik North Munson Lincoln South North Graham Road East/West Old Wellborn Road Cain Road North/South  
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 10, sched. IX; Ord. No. 2019-4071 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 2-14-2019) 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of loads and equipment, Texas Transportation Code  621.203. 
Sec. 38-1010. - Traffic Schedule X. Emergency 911 Gates. 
3504 Wild Plum Street 
Bent Tree Drive at Sebesta Road 
College Main beginning at its intersection with University Drive and extending to its intersection with Patricia Street 
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 10, sched. X) 
Sec. 38-1011. - Traffic Schedule XI, no U-turns. 
Street Intersecting Street Traffic Direction Texas Avenue Lone Star North Texas Avenue University Drive North University Drive Texas Avenue West Wellborn Road Church Avenue North University Drive East Tarrow Street West University Drive Tarrow Street West Harvey Road George Bush Drive East East Wellborn Road Southwest Parkway South Texas Avenue Harvey Road North Texas Avenue University Drive and Cooner Street North FM 2818 Holleman Drive South West FM 2818 Holleman Drive West West Holleman Drive West FM 2818 South Holleman Drive South FM 2818 North Holleman Drive South Market Street Southeast Wellborn Road (FM 2154) Harvey Mitchell Parkway (FM 2818) interchange North Wellborn Road (FM 2154) Harvey Mitchell Parkway (FM 2818)interchange South  
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 10, sched. XI; Ord. No. 2016-3806, exh. A(sched. XI), 9-22-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3871, exh. A(sched. XI), 3-23-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority to designate prohibit turns, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(7). 
Sec. 38-1012. - Traffic Schedule XII, speed limits. 
(a)  Speed limits established for State Highways: 
(1)  FM 60 (Raymond Stotzer Parkway/University Drive). For traffic moving in an westerly direction for 1.696 miles from the intersection with FM 158, the speed limit shall be 60 miles per hour. For the next 1.642 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. For the next 0.776 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. For the next 0.649 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. For the next 0.545 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. For the next 0.960 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. For the next 1.373 miles, to the College Station West City limit, the speed limit shall be 65 miles per hour. 
For traffic moving in a easterly direction for 1.373 miles from the College Station West City limit, the speed limit shall be 65 miles per hour. For the next 0.960 miles, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. For the next 0.545 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. For the next 0.649 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. For the next 0.776 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. For the next 1.642 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. For the next 1.696 miles to the intersection with FM 158, the speed limit shall be 60 miles per hour. 
(2)  FM 2347 (George Bush Drive). For traffic moving in an easterly direction for the first 0.350 mile from Easterwood Airport, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. For the next 0.200 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. For the next 0.670 mile, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. For the next 0.200 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. For the next 1.450 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour to the intersection of Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue). 
For traffic moving in a westerly direction, for the first 1.450 miles from the intersection of Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue), the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. For the next 0.200 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. For the next 0.670 mile, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. For the next 0.200 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. For the next 0.350 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour to Easterwood Airport. 
(3)  Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue). For traffic moving in a southerly direction for the first 1.815 miles from the North City limit, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. For the next 1.190 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. For the next 0.942 mile, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour to the intersection of SH 6 (Earl Rudder Freeway South). 
For traffic moving in a northerly direction, for the first 0.166 mile from the intersection of SH 6 (Earl Rudder Freeway South), the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. For the next 0.795 mile, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. For the next 1.190 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. For the next 1.815 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour to the North City limit. 
(4)  SH 30 (Harvey Road). For traffic moving in an easterly direction for the first 0.250 mile from the intersection with Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue), the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. For the next 1.490 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. For the next 0.200 mile, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. For the next 1.444 miles, the speed limit shall be 60 miles per hour. For the next 0.200 mile, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. For the next 0.189 mile, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour to the East City limit. 
For traffic moving in a westerly direction, for the first 0.189 mile from the East City limit, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. For the next 0.200 mile, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. For the next 1.444 mile, the speed limit shall be 60 miles per hour. For the next 0.200 mile, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. For the next 1.490 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. For the next 0.250 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour to the intersection of Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue). 
(5)  SH 6 East Frontage Road. 
a.  For traffic moving in a northerly direction from Greens Prairie Road to Sebesta Road: 
Distance Speed Limit For the first 2.302 miles 55 miles per hour For the next 0.305 miles 50 miles per hour For the last 0.555 miles to Sebesta Road 55 miles per hour  
b.  For traffic moving in a southerly direction from the overpass of Rock Prairie Road to Greens Prairie Road: 
Distance Speed Limit For the first 0.113 miles 50 miles per hour For the last 2.302 miles to Greens Prairie Road 55 miles per hour  
c.  From Sebesta Road north to the North City limit (one way): 
Distance Speed Limit For the first 0.200 miles from Sebesta Road 40 miles per hour For the next 2.622 miles 50 miles per hour For the next 0.320 miles 40 miles per hour For the next 0.200 miles 45 miles per hour For the next 0.405 miles 50 miles per hour For the next 0.300 miles 45 miles per hour For the last 0.270 miles to the North City limit 55 miles per hour  
(6)  SH 6 West Frontage Road. 
a.  From the North City limit south to the intersection of Deacon Drive at Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue) (one-way): 
Distance Speed Limit For the first 0.285 miles from the North City limit 50 miles per hour For the next 0.835 miles 45 miles per hour For the next 0.330 miles 40 miles per hour For the next 0.350 miles 45 miles per hour For the next 0.675 miles 50 miles per hour For the next 1.028 miles 55 miles per hour For the next 0.250 miles 50 miles per hour For the last 0.200 miles to the intersection of Texas 45 miles per hour  
b.  For traffic moving in a southerly direction from the intersection of Deacon Drive at Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue) to Greens Prairie Road: 
Distance Speed Limit For the first 0.892 miles from Deacon Drive 45 miles per hour For the next 2.302 miles to Greens Prairie Road 55 miles per hour  
c.  For traffic moving in a northerly direction from Greens Prairie Road to Deacon Drive: 
Distance Speed Limit For the first 2.302 miles from Greens Prairie Road 55 miles per hour For the next 0.892 miles to Deacon Drive 45 miles per hour  
(7)  FM 2818 (Harvey Mitchell Parkway). 
a.  From the North City limit south to the intersection of SH 6 (one-way): 
Distance Speed Limit For the first 2.078 miles from the West City limit 60 miles per hour For the next 2.397 miles 55 miles per hour For the next 0.742 miles* 50 miles per hour For the next 1.520 miles to the intersection of SH 6 East Frontage Road 45 miles per hour *Within the limits of said 50 miles per hour speed zone, from approximately 650 feet west of Welsh Avenue to approximately 220 feet east of Nueces Drive, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour when so signed for school zone.  
b.  From the intersection of SH 6 north to the North City limit (one-way). 
Distance Speed Limit For the first 1.520 miles from the intersection of SH 6 East Frontage Road 45 miles per hour For the next 0.742 miles* 50 miles per hour For the next 2.397 miles 55 miles per hour For the next 2.078 miles to the West City limit 60 miles per hour *Within the limits of said 50 miles per hour speed zone, from approximately 650 feet west of Welsh Avenue to approximately 220 feet east of Nueces Drive, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour when so signed for school zone.  
(b)  Speed limits established for City streets. 
(1)  Anderson Street. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Anderson Street and FM 2347 (George Bush Drive) to the termination of Anderson Street. 
(2)  Ashburn Avenue. For traffic moving northwest and southeast, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Ashburn Avenue and Lincoln Avenue to the intersection of Ashburn Avenue and Gilchrist Avenue. 
(3)  Barron Road. For traffic moving northeast and southwest, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour from the intersection of Barron Road and FM 2154 (Wellborn Road) to the intersection of Barron Road and SH 6 West Frontage Road. 
(4)  Bird Pond Road. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour from the intersection of Bird Pond Road and Rock Prairie Road to the East City limit. 
(5)  Boyett Street. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Boyett Street and Spruce Street to the intersection of Boyett Street and FM 60 (University Drive). 
(6)  Cain Road. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour from the West City limit to the intersection of Cain Road and FM 2154 (Wellborn Road). 
(7)  Cherry Street. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Cherry Street and Boyett Street to the intersection of Cherry Street and Nagle Street. 
(8)  Church Avenue. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Church Avenue and FM 2154 (Wellborn Road) to the intersection of Church Avenue and Nagle Street. 
(9)  College Main. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the North City limit to the intersection of College Main and FM 60 (University Drive). 
(10)  Cross Street. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Cross Street and College Main to the intersection of Cross Street and Nagle Street. 
(11)  Dartmouth Street. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour from the intersection of Dartmouth Street and SH 30 (Harvey Road) to the intersection of Dartmouth Street and Krenek Tap Road. 
(12)  Deacon Drive. 
a.  For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Deacon Drive and Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue) to the intersection of Deacon Drive and Welsh Avenue. 
b.  For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour from the intersection of Deacon Drive and Welsh Avenue to the intersection of Deacon Drive and FM 2154 (Wellborn Road). 
(13)  Dexter Drive. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Dexter Drive and FM 2347 (George Bush Drive) to the intersection of Dexter Drive and Holleman Drive. 
(14)  Dominik Drive. 
a.  For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Dominik Drive and Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue) to the intersection of Dominik Drive and Munson Avenue. 
b.  For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour from the intersection of Dominik Drive and Munson Avenue to the termination of Dominik Drive. 
(15)  Dowling Road. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour from the West City limit to the intersection of Dowling Road and FM 2818. 
(16)  Emerald Parkway. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Emerald Parkway and SH 6 (Earl Rudder Freeway South) East Frontage Road to the termination of Emerald Parkway. 
(17)  Finfeather Road. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour from the North City limit to the intersection of Finfeather Road and F&B Road. 
(18)  First Street. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of First Street and Spruce Street to the intersection of First Street and Patricia Street. 
(19)  F&B Road. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 40 mph from the intersection of FM 2818 and F&B Road to the intersection of Turkey Creek Road and F&B Road. 
(20)  FM 2154 (Wellborn Road). For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour from the North City limit to the intersection of FM 2154 (Wellborn Road) and Church Avenue. 
(21)  Gateway Boulevard. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Gateway Boulevard and SH 6 East Frontage Road to the intersection of Gateway Boulevard and Lakeway Drive. 
(22)  George Bush Drive East. 
a.  For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour from the intersection of George Bush Drive East and Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue) to the intersection of George Bush Drive East and Foster Avenue. 
b.  For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of George Bush Drive East and Foster Avenue to the intersection of George Bush Drive East and Dominik Drive. 
c.  For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of George Bush Drive East and Dominik Drive to the intersection of George Bush Drive East and Holleman Drive. 
(23)  Graham Road. For traffic moving northeast and southwest, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour from the intersection of Graham Road and FM 2154 (Wellborn Road) to the intersection of Graham Road and SH 6 West Frontage Road. 
(24)  Greens Prairie Trail. 
a.  For traffic moving in an easterly direction for the first 1.081 miles from the West City limit, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour to the East City limit. 
b.  For traffic moving in a westerly direction for the first 1.081 mile from the East City Limits, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour to the West City limit. 
(25)  Holleman Drive. 
a.  For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Holleman Drive and FM 2818 (Harvey Mitchell Parkway South) to the intersection of Holleman Drive and Taurus Avenue. 
b.  For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour from the intersection of Holleman Drive and Taurus Avenue to the intersection of Holleman Drive and Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue). 
(26)  Krenek Tap Road. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Krenek Tap Road and Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue) to the intersection of Krenek Tap Road and SH 6 (Earl Rudder Freeway South) West Frontage Road. 
(27)  Lakeway Drive. 
a.  For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour from the intersection of Lakeway Drive and State Highway 6 Frontage Road to the intersection of Lakeway Drive and Medical Avenue. 
b.  For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Lakeway Drive and Medical Avenue to the termination of Lakeway Drive. 
(28)  Lincoln Avenue. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Lincoln Avenue and Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue) to the intersection of Lincoln Avenue and FM 60 (University Drive). 
(29)  Lodge Street. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Lodge Street and Church Avenue to the intersection of Lodge Street and FM 60 (University Drive). 
(30)  Longmire Drive. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from its most northern point north of Valley View Drive to the intersection of Longmire Drive and Barron Road. 
(31)  Louise Street. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Louise Street and FM 2154 (Wellborn Road) to the intersection of Louise Street and Boyett Street. 
(32)  Louise Street. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Louise Street and Second Street to the intersection of Louise Street and College Main. 
(33)  Luther Street West. For traffic moving northeast and southwest, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour from the intersection of Luther Street West and FM 2818 (Harvey Mitchell Parkway South) to the intersection of Luther Street West and Marion Pugh Drive. 
(34)  Maple Street. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Maple Street and FM 2154 (Wellborn Road) to the intersection of Maple Street and First Street. 
(35)  Marion Pugh Drive. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Marion Pugh Drive and FM 2347 (George Bush Drive West) to the intersection of Marion Pugh Drive and Luther Street West. 
(36)  Munson Avenue. For traffic moving northwest and southeast, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Munson Avenue and Lincoln Avenue to the intersection of Munson Avenue and Dominik Drive. 
(37)  Nagle Street. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the North City limit to the intersection of Nagle Street and FM 60 (University Drive). 
(38)  Nantucket Drive. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Nantucket Drive and Snug Harbor to the intersection of Nantucket Drive and SH 6 West Frontage Road. 
(39)  North Forest Parkway. For traffic moving northeast and southwest, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour from the intersection of North Forest Parkway and SH 6 (Earl Rudder Freeway South) East Frontage Road to the intersection of North Forest Parkway and Appomattox Drive. 
(40)  North Graham Road. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour from the West City limit to the intersection of North Graham Road and Old Wellborn Road. 
(41)  Old Wellborn Road. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 45 mph beginning at its most northern end and ending at its intersection with North Graham Road. 
(42)  Patricia Street. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Patricia Street and First Street to the intersection of Patricia Street and Boyett Street. 
(43)  Pebble Creek Parkway. 
a.  For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Pebble Creek Parkway and William D. Fitch Parkway to the intersection of Pebble Creek Parkway and Royal Adelaide Loop. 
b.  For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Pebble Creek Parkway and State Highway 6 Frontage Road to the intersection of Pebble Creek Parkway and Lakeway Drive. 
(44)  Ponderosa Drive. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Ponderosa Drive and SH 6 West Frontage Road to the intersection of Ponderosa Drive and Rio Grande Boulevard. 
(45)  Raintree Drive. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Raintree Drive and SH 6 (Earl Rudder freeway South) East Frontage Road to the termination of Raintree Drive. 
(46)  Rio Grande Boulevard. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Rio Grande Boulevard and FM 2818 (Harvey Mitchell Parkway South) to the intersection of Rio Grande Boulevard and Rock Prairie Road. 
(47)  Rock Prairie Road West. 
a.  For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour from the West City limit to the intersection of Rock Prairie Road and FM 2154 (Wellborn Road). 
b.  Rock Prairie Road. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour from the intersection of Rock Prairie Road and FM 2154 (Wellborn Road) to the intersection of Rock Prairie Road and SH 6 East Frontage Road. 
c.  For traffic moving in an easterly direction for the first 0.498 mile from the intersection of Rock Prairie Road and SH 6 East Frontage Road, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. For the next 4.489 miles, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour to the South City limit. 
d.  For traffic moving in a westerly direction. For the first 4.489 miles from the South City limit, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. For the next 0.498 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour to the intersection of Rock Prairie Road and SH 6 East Frontage Road. 
(48)  Sebesta Road. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Sebesta Road and SH 6 (Earl Rudder Freeway South) East Frontage Road to the intersection of Sebesta Road and Sandstone Drive. 
(49)  Second Street. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Second Street and Cherry Street to the intersection of Second Street and Church Avenue. 
(50)  Schaffer Road. For traffic moving northwest and southeast, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Schaffer Road and Arnold Road to the intersection of Schaffer Road and Graham Road. 
(51)  SH 40 (William D. Fitch Parkway). 
a.  For traffic moving in a easterly direction for the first 2.655 miles from FM 2154, the speed limit shall be 60 miles per hour. For the next 0.356 miles to the intersection of the SH 6EFR, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. 
b.  For traffic moving in a westerly direction for the first 0.356 miles from SH 6 EFR, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. For the next 2.655 miles to the intersection of FM 2154, the speed limit shall be 60 miles per hour. 
(52)  Southwest Parkway. 
a.  For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour from the intersection of Southwest Parkway and FM 2154 (Wellborn Road) to the intersection of Southwest Parkway and Welsh Avenue. 
b.  For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Southwest Parkway and Welsh Avenue to the intersection of Southwest Parkway and Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue). 
c.  Southwest Parkway. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour from the intersection of Southwest Parkway and Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue) to the intersection of Southwest Parkway and SH 6 (Earl Rudder Freeway South) West Frontage Road. 
(53)  Spring Loop. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Spring Loop and Tarrow Street to the intersection of Spring Loop and FM 60 (University Drive. 
(54)  Spruce Street. For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Spruce Street and First Street to the intersection of Spruce Street and College Main. 
(55)  Stasney Street. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Stasney Street and Cherry Street to the intersection of Stasney Street and FM 60 (University Drive). 
(56)  Tarrow Street East. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Tarrow Street East and Tarrow Street to the intersection of Tarrow Street East and FM 60 (University Drive). 
(57)  Tarrow Street. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Tarrow Street and FM 60 (University Drive) to the intersection of Tarrow Street and Lincoln Avenue. 
(58)  Tauber Street. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from the intersection of Tauber Street and Cherry Street to the intersection of Tauber Street and FM 60 (University Drive). 
(59)  Victoria Avenue. For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Victoria Avenue and Rock Prairie Road to the termination of Victoria Avenue. 
(60)  Welsh Avenue. 
a.  For traffic moving north and south, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Welsh Avenue and Holleman Drive to the intersection of Welsh Avenue and Rock Prairie Road. 
b.  For traffic moving east and west, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour from the intersection of Holleman Drive and Business SH 6-R (Texas Avenue) to the intersection of Holleman Drive and SH 6 (Earl Rudder Freeway South) West Frontage Road. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 10, sched. XII; Ord. No. 2019-4081 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-28-2019) 
State Law reference- Authority to alter speed limits, Texas Transportation Code  545.356. 
Sec. 38-1013. - Traffic Schedule XIII, temporary speed limits. 
    Barron Road. For traffic moving northeast and southwest, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour from the intersection of Barron Road and FM 2154 (Wellborn Road) to the intersection of SH 40 (William D. Fitch Parkway), 35 miles per hour from the intersection of Barron Road and SH 40 to the intersection of Decatur Drive, 45 miles per hour from the intersection of Barron Road and Decatur Drive to the intersection of SH 6 East Frontage Road. 
    FM 2154 (Wellborn Road). For traffic moving in a southerly direction for the first 0.600 mile from the North City limit, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. For the next 0.570 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. For the next 0.331 mile, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. For the next 1.523 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. For the next 2.427 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour to the South City limits. 
For traffic moving in a northerly direction, for the first 2.427 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. For the next 1.523 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. For the next 0.331 mile, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. For the next 0.570 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. For the next 0.600 mile, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour to the North City limits. 
    FM 2818 (Harvey Mitchell Parkway South). For traffic moving in a southerly direction from the North City limit, the speed limit shall be 60 miles per hour to the intersection of Holleman Drive. 
(1)  For traffic moving in an easterly direction, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour from the intersection of Holleman Drive to the intersection of Welsh Avenue. For traffic continuing to move in an easterly direction from Welsh Avenue to Rio Grande Boulevard, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. For the next 1.519 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour to the intersection of SH 6 (Earl Rudder Freeway South) East Frontage Road. 
(2)  For traffic moving in a westerly direction for the first 1.519 miles from the intersection of SH 6 (Earl Rudder Freeway South) West Frontage Road, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour to the intersection of Rio Grande Boulevard. The speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. 
(3)  From the intersection of Rio Grande Boulevard to the intersection of Welsh Avenue. From Welsh Avenue to Holleman Drive, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(4)  For traffic moving in a northerly direction, the speed limit shall be 60 miles per hour from the intersection of Holleman Drive to the North City limit. 
(5)  FM 2818 (Harvey Mitchell Parkway), for traffic moving north and south from Mile Post 10.242 to Mile Post 11.642, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour in construction areas when the temporary speed limit is posted. After TXDOT's FM 60 (Raymond Stotzer Parkway) Overpass Improvement Project completion and removal of the temporary speed limit signs the temporary speed limit shall revert to the speed limit established by Ordinance No. 3529 dated September 26, 2013. This ordinance does not repeal Ordinance No. 3529 dated September 26, 2013. 
    State Highway 6. For traffic moving northbound and southbound from the northern City limits to the Barron Road interchange, the speed limit shall be 60 miles per hour during the TXDOT managed construction projects to Relocated the Ramps on SH 6 as well as the SH 6 and Rock Prairie Road bridge overpass project. 
    Graham Road. From Longmire Drive to Dove Crossing Lane, the speed limit is 30 miles per hour in posted construction zones. After March 1, 2016 and completion of the Graham Road Rehabilitation Project the ordinance from which this subsection is derived will expire and Ordinance No. 2621 dated April 10, 2003 will control the speed limit. This subsection does not repeal Ordinance No. 2621 dated April 10, 2003. 
    FM 2154. For traffic moving north and south from Mile Post 15.513 to Mile Post 15.994, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour in construction zones when posted. After the FM 2154 and Greens Prairie Trail Intersection Improvements Project completion and temporary speed limit signs are removed, speed limits shall revert to those established by Ordinance No. 2621 dated April 10, 2003. This subsection does not repeal Ordinance No. 2621 dated April 10, 2003. 
    Greens Prairie Trail. For traffic moving east and west from FM 2154 to Flagstone Court, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour in construction zones when posted. After FM 2154 and Greens Prairie Trail Intersection Improvements Project completion and temporary speed limit signs are removed, speed limits shall revert to those established by Ordinance No. 2621 dated April 10, 2003. This subsection does not repeal Ordinance No. 2621 dated April 10, 2003. 
    Greens Prairie Trail. For east and west bound from FM 2154 to Royder Road, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour in construction zones when posted. After completion of the Greens Prairie Trial Widening Project and the temporary speed limit signs are removed, speed limits shall revert to those already established by ordinance. This subsection does not repeal any other speed limit ordinances. 
    Holleman Drive South , from the Rock Prairie Road West to North Dowling Road, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour in construction areas or zones when said speed is posted. This temporary speed reduction ordinance will expire when the temporary speed limit signs are removed at the completion of the construction project. This section does not repeal any speed limit ordinances in Section 38-17. 
    Royder Road , for traffic moving south to north from the City limit to 700 feet past Backwater Drive, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour in construction areas when said speed is so indicated. Upon completion of the project and when temporary speed limit signs are removed, speed zones shall revert to the original speed zone of 35 miles per hour. This section does not repeal any speed limit ordinances in Section 38-17. 
    For TXDOT's FM 60 (Raymond Stotzer Parkway) Overpass Improvement Project from: 
FM 60 (Raymond Stotzer Parkway), for traffic moving west and east from Mile Post 4.110 to Mile Post 4.310, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour in posted construction areas when temporary speed limit signs are posted. 
FM 60 (Raymond Stotzer Parkway), for traffic moving west and east from Mile Post 4.310 to Mile Post 4.510, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour in posted construction areas when temporary speed limit signs are posted. 
FM 60 (Raymond Stotzer Parkway), for traffic moving west and east from Mile Post 4.510 to Mile Post 5.031, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour in posted construction areas when temporary speed limit signs are posted. 
FM 60 (Raymond Stotzer Parkway), for traffic moving west and east from Mile Post 5.031 to Mile Post 5.245, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour in posted construction areas when temporary speed limit signs are posted. 
Upon completing TXDOT's FM 60 (Raymond Stotzer Parkway) Overpass Improvement Project and removing temporary speed limit signs the temporary speed limit reverts to the speed limit established by Ordinance No. 3085 dated August 6, 2008. This ordinance does not repeal Ordinance No. 3085 dated August 6, 2008. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 10, sched. XIII; Ord. No. 2016-3757, exh. A(sched. XIII), 4-14-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3804, exh. A(sched. XIII), 9-22-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3924 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-3992 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-5-2018; Ord. No. 2018-3996 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-22-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4020 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-28-2018) 
State Law reference- Authority to alter speed limits, Texas Transportation Code  545.356. 
Sec. 38-1014. - Traffic Schedule XIV, no parking here to corner and no parking any time. 
Traveling on Between Travel Direction Aberdeen Place Newton Road and Dexter Drive East No parking any time Aberdeen Place Dexter Drive and Newton Road West No parking any time Ailin Drive 525 feet south of Crescent Pointe Parkway and Crescent Pointe Parkway North No parking any time Ailin Drive Crescent Pointe Parkway and 60 feet south of Jax Drive South No parking any time Ailin Drive 190 feet south of Jax Drive and Copperfield Parkway South No parking any time Alamosa Street Summit Crossing Lane and Buena Vista West No parking any time Alley Crosstimbers Drive and Southwest Parkway South No parking in alley Alley Southwest Parkway and Crosstimbers Drive North No parking in alley Alley Ailin Drive and Jax Drive all directions No parking any time Anderson Street George Bush Drive and Park Place North No parking any time Anderson Street George Bush Drive and Wolf Run Drive North No parking any time Anderson Street Holleman Drive and Village Drive South No parking here to corner Anderson Street Park Place and Village Drive North No parking here to corner Anderson Street Park Place and Village Drive North No parking any time Anderson Street Village Drive and Holleman Drive North No parking any time Anderson Street Village Drive and Park Place South No parking any time Anderson Street Village Drive and Park Place South No parking here to corner Anderson Street Wolf Run Drive and George Bush Drive South No parking any time Anderson Street Wolf Run Drive and Park Place North No parking any time Anderson Street Southwest Parkway and Bee Creek Drive North No parking any time Anderson Street Park Place and Wolf Run Drive South No parking here to corner Anderson Street Alpine Circle and Lemon Tree South No parking any time Anderson Street Alpine Circle and Oakdale Circle North No parking any time Anderson Street Antone Court and Holleman Drive South No parking any time Anderson Street Brentwood Drive and Mossglenn Circle North No parking any time Anderson Street Clement Court and Antone Court South No parking any time Anderson Street Clement Court and Holik Street North No parking any time Anderson Street Clement Court and Holik Street North No parking 6:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. M-F Anderson Street Cloverdale Circle and Southwest Parkway North No parking any time Anderson Street Cloverdale Circle and Mossglenn Circle South No parking any time Anderson Street Holik Street and Clement Court South No parking any time Anderson Street Holik Street and Pine Ridge Drive North No parking any time Anderson Street Holleman Drive and Village Drive South No parking 6:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. M-F Anderson Street Lemon Tree and Pine Ridge Drive South No parking any time Anderson Street Mossglenn Circle and Cloverdale Circle North No parking any time Anderson Street Oakdale Circle and Alpine Circle South No parking any time Anderson Street Oakdale Circle and Brentwood Drive North No parking any time Anderson Street Park Place and Village Drive North No parking 6:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. M-F. Anderson Street Pine Ridge Drive and Holik Drive South No parking any time Anderson Street Pine Ridge Drive and Lemon Tree North No parking any time Anderson Street Pine Ridge Drive and Alpine Circle North No parking any time Anderson Street Southwest Parkway and Cloverdale Circle South No parking any time Anderson Street Village Drive and Holleman Drive North No parking 6:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. M-F Anderson Street Village Drive and Park Place South No parking 6:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. M-F Anderson Street Park Place and George Bush Drive South No parking any time Anderson Street Wolf Run Drive and Wolf Run Drive North No parking any time Angus Street Welsh Avenue and Ayrshire Street East No parking any time Anna Street Timber Street to Holik Street Northeast No stopping, standing, or parking any time. Anna Street Holik Street to Timber Street Southeast On school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m., No stopping, standing, or parking Antelope Lane West Ridge Drive and Pronghorn Loop West No parking any time Appleby Place From the property line between 4414 and 4416 Appleby Place to the intersection with Ravenstone Loop East No stopping, standing, or parking along Appleby Place on school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Appleby Place From the intersection with Ravenstone Loop to the property line between 4404 and 4406 Appleby Place West No stopping, standing, or parking along Appleby Place on school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. April Bloom Autumn Circle and Spring Loop West No parking any time April Bloom Autumn Circle and Spring Loop Northwest No parking any time Armistead Street Rosemary Lane and Redmond Drive East No parking any time Arrington Road East side of Arrington Road from 300 feet south of Decatur Drive to the State Highway 6 Frontage Road south North No parking any time Arrington Road West side of Arrington Road from State Highway 6 Frontage Road south to Decatur Drive South No parking any time Ash Street Eisenhower Street and Turner Street Northeast No parking anytime Ashburn Avenue On the west side of Ashburn Avenue beginning at the intersection of Gilchrist and extending north 480 feet No parking, standing, or stopping Ashburn Avenue On Ashburn Avenue within 30 feet of the intersection with Gilchrist Avenue No parking, standing, or stopping Ashford Drive Ashford W. Drive and Southwest Parkway North No parking any time Ashford Drive Ashford W. Drive and Southwest Parkway East No parking any time Ashford Drive Ashford W. Drive and Southwest Parkway West No parking here to corner Ashford Drive Ashford W. Drive and Southwest Parkway South No parking any time Ashford Drive Ashford W. Drive and Southwest Parkway South No parking here to corner Ashford Drive Southwest Parkway and North No parking here to corner Associates Avenue Harvey Road and South No parking any time Athens Drive University Oaks Boulevard and Dominik Drive South No parking any time Athletic Park W. and North No parking any time Aurora Court Park Place and North No parking here to corner Aurora Court and Park Place South No parking any time Avenue A Lincoln Avenue and South No parking any time Avenue A and Lincoln Avenue North No parking any time Axis Court Northern most end and Pronghorn Loop West No parking any time Ayrshire Street Angus Street and Kerry Street North No parking here to corner Ayrshire Street Angus Street and Old Jersey Street South No parking any time Ayrshire Street Kerry Street and Angus Street South No parking any time Ayshire Street Angus Avenue and W. Dexter Drive North No parking any time Ayshire Street at Kerry Street and All directions No parking any time Backwater Lane Royder Road to Creek Meadows Blvd North No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Backwater Lane Creek Meadows Blvd to Royder Road South No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Backwater Lane Royder Road to Creek Meadows Blvd. North No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Backwater Lane Creek Meadows Blvd. to Royder Road South No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Bell Street at Ayrshire Street and East No parking any time Bell Street at Ayrshire Street and West No parking any time Bell Street at Hereford Street and East No parking any time Bell Street at Hereford Street and West No parking any time Bent Tree Drive Sebesta Road and Rosebud Court South No parking any time Boswell Street Boswell Street to Langford Street Northwest No stopping, standing, or parking any time. on northwest side Boswell Street From the school driveway 100 feet southwest of Langford Street to Langford Street Northwest No stopping, standing, or parking any time. on southwest side Bougainvillea Street Wild Plum Street and Marigold Street East No parking any time Bougainvillea Street and South No parking any time Boyett Street Cherry Street and Spruce Street South No parking any time Boyett Street Spruce Street and City of Bryan South No parking any time Boyett Street Spruce Street and Cherry Street North No parking here to corner Boyett Street Church Avenue and Louise Avenue South No parking any time Boyett Street Louise Avenue and Spruce Street South No parking any time Boyett Street City of Bryan and Spruce Street North No parking any time Boyett Street University Drive and Patricia Street South No parking here to corner Boyett Street Louise Avenue and Church Avenue North No parking any time Boyett Street Church Avenue and Patricia Street North No parking any time Boyett Street Church Avenue and University Drive North No parking here to corner Boyett Street Beginning 60 feet north of the intersection with University Drive and ending 130 feet north of University Drive West Only commercial motor vehicles may stop and stand with an unattended vehicle for active loading or unloading, on the west side of Boyett Street beginning 60 feet north of the intersection with University Drive and ending 130 feet north of University Drive during the hours from 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. All other vehicles except commercial vehicles are prohibited from stopping, standing, and parking in this area from 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. All vehicles are prohibited from stopping, standing, and parking in this area from 9:00 p.m.-3:00 a.m. Any other time all vehicles may park for free within the designated parking stalls for a maximum of 2 hours. Boyett Street From the corner of Boyett Street and Spruce Street extending 115 feet to the south to the property line at 504 Boyett Street East No parking Brewster Drive WS Phillips Parkway to William D. Fitch Parkway Northeast No stopping, standing, or parking any time Brewster Drive William D. Fitch Parkway to WS Phillips Parkway Southwest No stopping, standing, or parking any time Brothers Boulevard Deacon Drive and Todd Trail South No parking any time Brothers Boulevard Deacon Drive and Todd Trail South No parking stopping or standing 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. M-F Brothers Boulevard Todd Trail and Deacon Drive North No parking, stopping, standing 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. M-F Buena Vista 190 feet west of Alamosa Street and Summit Crossing Lane East No parking any time Bush East Drive Dominik Drive and University Oaks North No parking any time Bush East Drive Harvey Road and University Oaks South No parking any time Bush East Drive University Oaks Boulevard and Dominik Drive South No parking any time Bush East Drive University Oaks Boulevard and Harvey Road North No parking any time Castlebrook Drive Nottingham Drive and Regal Row Southeast No stopping, standing, or parking on schooldays from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Castlebrook Drive Nottingham Drive and Regal Row Northwest No stopping, standing, or parking on schooldays from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Castlebrook Drive Nottingham Drive and Regal Row Southeast No stopping, standing, or parking on schooldays from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Caudill Street Beginning 40 feet north of the Lawyer Street and Gunsmith Street intersection No parking on the north side of Caudill for the next 325 feet Central Park Lane Southwest Parkway and Krenek Tap Road North/South No parking any time Cherry Street Boyett Street and Second Street West No parking any time Cherry Street Boyett Street and College Main West No parking any time Cherry Street Nagle Street and Stasney Street East No parking here to corner Cherry Street College Main and Tauber Street East No parking any time Cherry Street College Main and Tauber Street North No parking any time Cherry Street Second Street and Boyett Street East No parking any time Cherry Street 50 feet east of the intersection with College Main and extending 50 feet to the east South 30-minute parking zone Church Avenue Boyett Street and First Street East No parking any time Church Avenue First Street and Wellborn Road East No parking any time Church Avenue Second Street and Boyett Street East No parking any time Church Avenue Wellborn Road and First Street West No parking here to corner Church Avenue College Main and Second Street East No parking any time Church Avenue Second Street and College Main West No parking here to corner Church Avenue College Main and Lodge Street East No parking any time Church Avenue First Street and Boyett Street West No parking any time Church Avenue Boyett Street and Second Street West No parking any time Church Avenue College Main and Tauber Street West No parking any time Church Avenue Lodge Street and College Main East No parking any time Church Avenue Nagle Street and Stasney Street East No parking any time Church Avenue Nagle Street and University Drive Northwest No parking any time Church Avenue Nagle Street and University Drive West No parking any time Church Avenue Second Street and College Main West No parking any time Church Avenue Stasney Street and Nagle Street West No parking any time Church Avenue Tauber Street and Stasney Street West No parking any time Church Avenue Tauber Street and Lodge Street East No parking any time Church Avenue University Drive and Nagle Street Southeast No parking any time Church Avenue University Drive and Nagle Street East No parking any time Church Avenue University Drive and Nagle Street South No parking any time Church Avenue Second Street and College Main West No parking any time Claremont Drive Davidson Drive to Kenyon Drive Northeast No parking any time Colgate Drive Cypress Drive and Carnation Court East No parking here to corner Colgate Drive Cypress Drive and Carnation Court East No parking any time College Main Patricia Street and North No parking any time College Main Patricia Street and University Drive North No parking any time College Main Patricia Street and University Drive North No parking this side of sign College Main Church Avenue and Cross Street South No parking here to corner College Main Cross Street and Church Avenue North No parking this side of sign College Main Cherry Street and Spruce Street South No parking any time College Main Church Avenue and Cross Street South No parking any time College Main City of Bryan and Spruce Street North No parking any time College Main Cross Street and Louise Avenue South No parking any time College Main Cross Street and Church Avenue North No parking any time College Main Louise Avenue and Cherry Street South No parking any time College Main Louise Avenue and Cross Street North No parking any time College Main Spruce Street and City of Bryan South No parking any time College Main Spruce Street and Cherry Street North No parking any time Collin Mills Drive Haskell Hollow Loop and Slocum Hill Drive South No parking any time Conference Center and George Bush Drive South No parking loading zone Cooner Texas Avenue to Around the Cul-de-sac East No Parking Anytime Cooner Around the Cul-de-sac to West side of the intersection with MacArthur West No Parking Anytime Cordova Ridge Court Northwest side of Cordova Ridge Court beginning at the intersection of Renee Lane and extending 640 feet into it cul-de-sac Southwest No parking any time Cottage Lane From the intersection with Market Street to the intersection with Holleman Drive South Northeast No parking any time Cottage Lane From the intersection with Holleman Drive South to the intersection with Market Street Southwest No parking any time Creak Meadows 
Blvd. N Creek Meadows Blvd. from 50 feet west of Backwater Lane to 50 feet east of Backwater Lane East No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Creak Meadows 
Blvd. N Creek Meadows Blvd. from 50 feet east of Backwater Lane to 50 feet west of Backwater Lane West No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Creak Meadows 
Blvd. N Creek Meadows Blvd. from 50 feet west of Backwater Lane to 50 feet east of Backwater Lane East No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Creak Meadows 
Blvd. N Creek Meadows Blvd. West No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Creak Meadows 
Blvd. N From 50 feet east of Backwater Lane to 50 feet west of Backwater Lane No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Crepe Myrtle Street Hollyhock Street and Schaffer Road West No parking any time Crest Street Manuel Drive and Richards Street South No parking any time Crest Street Sterling Drive and Richards Street South No parking here to corner Crest Street Richards Street and Sterling Drive North No parking any time Crest Street Sterling Drive and Manuel Drive North No parking any time Crosby Creek Court Around the cul-de-sac and to Haskell Hollow Loop South No parking any time Cross Street Nagle Street and Dogwood Street West No parking [0:00] a.m. to [0:00] p.m. Cross Street Nagle Street and Dogwood Street West No parking here to corner Cross Street Dogwood Street and Nagle Street West No parking any time Cross Street Stasney Street and Tauber Street East No parking here to corner Cross Street Tauber Street and Stasney Street West No parking here to corner Cross Street Nagle Street and Stasney Street East No parking any time Cross Street Nagle Street and Stasney Street East No parking here to corner Cross Street Dogwood Street and Nagle Street East No parking any time Cross Street Culpepper Drive and Milam Avenue East No parking any time Cross Street Dogwood Street and Milam Avenue West No parking any time Cross Street Dogwood Street and Nagle Street East No parking any time Cross Street Milam Avenue and Culpepper Drive West No parking any time Cross Street Beginning 20 feet west of the intersection with Tauber Street and extending 50 feet to the west North 30-minute parking zone during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily Cross Street Milam Avenue and Dogwood Street East No parking any time Crosstimbers Drive Alley and Cypress Drive East No parking any time Crosstimbers Drive Alley and Hickory Drive West No parking any time Crosstimbers Drive Cypress Drive and Crosstimbers Drive East No parking any time Crosstimbers Drive Hickory Drive and Alley East No parking any time Crosstimbers Drive Hickory Drive and Cypress Drive East No parking any time Crosstimbers Drive Southwest Parkway and Crosstimbers Drive North No parking any time Crystal Dove Avenue Dove Crossing Lane and Alexandria Avenue West No parking any time Cullen Trail Cullen Trail and Keefer Loop West No parking any time Culpepper Drive Cross Street and University Sq. North No parking between signs Culpepper Drive Cross Street and North No parking any time Culpepper Drive Cross Street and Inlow Boulevard South No parking any time Culpepper Drive Inlow Boulevard and Cross Street North No parking any time Culpepper Drive and Cross Street South No parking any time Cypress Drive Southwest Parkway and Crosstimbers Drive North No parking any time Dakota Lane Alamosa Street and Buena Vista North No parking any time Dartmouth Street Krenek Tap Road and Harvey Mitchell Parkway All directions No parking any time Davidson Drive and Haverford Road intersection No parking within the intersection or within 50 feet of the intersection measured from the extension of the curb Davidson Drive and Los Portales intersection No parking within the intersection or within 50 feet of the intersection measured from the extension of the curb Davidson Drive Holleman Drive South to Claremont Drive South/southeast No parking any time Davidson Drive Holleman Drive South to Haverford Road North/northwest No parking any time Deacon Drive Longmire Drive and Texas Avenue West No parking any time Deacon Drive San Felipe Drive and Brothers Boulevard West No parking here to corner Dexter Drive Park Place and Thomas Street North No parking any time Dexter Drive Thomas Street and Winding Road North No parking any time Dexter Drive Winding Road and Thomas Street South No parking any time Dogwood Street Inlow Boulevard and Cross Street North No parking any time Dogwood Street Cross Street and Inlow Boulevard South No parking [0:00] a.m. to [0:00] p.m. Dominik Drive Athens Drive and Olympia Way East No parking any time Dominik Drive Munson Avenue and Athens Drive East No parking any time Dominik Drive Olympia Way and Stallings Drive East No parking here to corner Dove Crossing Lane Graham Road and Dove Landing Avenue South No parking any time Dove Landing Avenue Dove Crossing Lane and Dove Hollow Lane West No parking any time Dowling Road Harvey Mitchell Parkway and Marion Pugh Drive North No parking any time Dunlap Loop Brewster Drive to Alford Street Northwest On school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m., no stopping, standing, or parking any time Dunlap Loop Alford Street to Dunlap Loop Southeast On school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m., no stopping, standing, or parking any time Dunlap Loop Brewster Drive to Alford Street Northwest On school days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m., no stopping, standing, or parking any time Dunlap Loop Alford Street to Dunlap Loop Southeast On school days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m., no stopping, standing, or parking any time E. Bypass Greens Prairie and Rock Prairie Road South No parking within 15 feet of pavement E. Bypass Rock Prairie Road and Greens Prairie North No parking within 15 feet of pavement Edelweiss Avenue Welsh Avenue and Caterina Lane Southwest No stopping, standing, or parking on schooldays from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m., and from 2:00 p.m. until 3:30 p.m. Edinburgh Place From the property line between 4414 and 4416 Edinburgh Place to the intersection of Ravenstone Loop East No stopping, standing, or parking along Edinburgh on school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Edinburgh Place From the intersection with Ravenstone Loop to the property line between 4404 and 4406 Edinburgh Place West No stopping, standing, or parking along Edinburgh on school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Eisenhower Street University Drive and Cooner Street East No parking any time Eisenhower Street University Drive and Cooner Street West No parking any time Eleanor Street Holleman Drive and Thompson Street South No parking any time Eleanor Street Thompson Street and Montclair Avenue West No parking here to corner Fairview Avenue George Bush Drive and Old Jersey Street North No parking any time Fairview Avenue Angus Street and Kerry Street North No parking here to corner Fairview Avenue Angus Street and George Bush Drive South No parking here to corner Fairview Avenue Angus Street and George Bush Drive South No parking this side of sign Fairview Avenue Fidelity Street and Kerry Street South No parking any time Fairview Avenue Guernsey Street and Fidelity Street North No parking here to corner Fairview Avenue Kerry Street and Guernsey Street North No parking any time Fairview Avenue Kerry Street and Angus Street South No parking here to corner Fairview Avenue Kerry Street and Angus Street South No parking this side of sign Fairview Avenue Old Jersey Street and Angus Street North No parking this side of sign Fairview Avenue Old Jersey Street and Angus Street North No parking here to corner Fairview Avenue Park Place and Fidelity Street South No parking any time First Street Patricia Street and Church Avenue South No parking here to corner First Street Louise Avenue and Church Avenue North No parking here to corner First Street Louise Avenue and Louise Avenue South No parking any time First Street Louise Avenue and Maple Avenue South No parking any time First Street Maple Avenue and Spruce Street South No parking any time First Street Maple Avenue and City limits North No parking any time First Street Maple Avenue and City limits South No parking any time First Street Maple Avenue and City limits East No parking any time First Street Maple Avenue and City limits West No parking any time First Street Patricia Street and Church Avenue South No parking any time First Street Church Avenue and Patricia Street East No parking, stopping or standing 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. First Street Church Avenue and Louise Street East No parking on the east side of First Street. This parking removal will begin on December 1, 2014, expire and terminate on July 1, 2015 First Street Spruce Street and City limits No parking on the west side Flagstone Court Greens Prairie Trail to the termination of Flagstone Court 660 feet north of Greens Prairie Trail Northwest No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Flagstone Court Flagstone Court from the termination of Flagstone Court 660 feet north of Greens Prairie Trail to Greens Prairie Trail Southeast No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Flagstone Court Greens Prairie Trail to the termination of Flagstone Court 660 feet north of Greens Prairie Trail Northwest No stopping, standing, or parking anytime on School Days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Flagstone Court Flagstone Court from the termination of Flagstone Court 660 feet north of Greens Prairie Trail to Greens Prairie Trail Southeast No stopping, standing, or parking anytime on School Days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. FM 60 and All directions No parking any time FM 60 Beginning 47 feet east of the center of the College Main right-of-way and ending 66 feet east of that point North No parking any time Foster Avenue Francis Drive and Gilchrist Avenue North No parking any time Foster Avenue Francis Drive and Walton Drive South No parking any time Foster Avenue George Bush East Drive and Moss Street South No parking any time Foster Avenue Gilchrist Avenue and Francis Circle South No parking any time Foster Avenue Gilchrist Avenue and George Bush East Drive North No parking any time Foster Avenue Moss Street and Gilchrist Avenue South No parking any time Foster Avenue Moss Street and George Bush East Drive North No parking any time Foster Avenue Walton Drive and Lincoln Avenue South No parking any time Foster Avenue Lincoln Avenue and Walton Drive North No parking any time Foster Avenue Walton Drive and Francis Drive North No parking any time Francis Drive Foster Avenue and Texas Avenue East No parking any time Francis Drive Foster Avenue and Texas Avenue East No parking here to corner Francis Drive Texas Avenue and Foster Avenue West No parking any time Francis Drive Westover Street and Munson Avenue East No parking here to corner Francis Drive Ashburn Avenue and Williams Street East No parking except 3:00 p.m.-3:30 p.m. Francis Drive Williams Street and Walton Drive East No parking except 3:00 p.m.-:30 p.m. Francis Drive Williams Street and Ashburn Avenue West No parking, stopping, standing 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. M-F Francis Drive Williams Street and Ashburn Avenue West No parking any time Francis Drive Williams Street and Walton Drive East No parking any time Francis Drive Ashburn Avenue and Williams Street East No parking any time Francis Drive Foster Avenue and Milner Drive West No parking any time Gardenia Street Wild Plum Street and Marigold Street East No parking any time Gardenia Street and South No parking any time George Bush Drive Rosemary Lane and Texas Avenue West No parking any time George Bush Drive Anderson Street and Holik Drive East No parking any time George Bush Drive Bizzell Street and Holik Drive West No parking any time George Bush Drive Coke and Pershing Drive West No parking any time George Bush Drive Coke and Newton Road West No parking any time George Bush Drive Coke and Bizzell Street West No parking any time George Bush Drive Dexter Drive and Fairview Avenue East No parking any time George Bush Drive Fairview Avenue and Montclair Avenue East No parking any time George Bush Drive Highland Street and Wellborn Road East No parking any time George Bush Drive Holik Drive and Timber Street East No parking any time George Bush Drive Houston Street and Coke West No parking any time George Bush Drive Lee Avenue and Pershing Drive East No parking any time George Bush Drive Newton Road and Dexter Drive East No parking any time George Bush Drive Pershing Drive and Newton Road East No parking any time George Bush Drive Redmond Drive and Anderson Street East No parking any time George Bush Drive Rosemary Lane and Redmond Drive East No parking any time George Bush Drive Timber Street and Lee Avenue East No parking any time George Bush Drive Wellborn Road and Houston Street West No parking any time George Bush East Drive Kyle Avenue and Dominik Drive Northwest No parking any time Gilchrist Avenue Texas Avenue and Foster Avenue West No parking any time Gilchrist Avenue Foster Avenue and Texas Avenue East No parking here to corner Gilchrist Avenue Marsteller Avenue and West No parking any time Gilchrist Avenue On the south side of Gilchrist Avenue between James Parkway and Munson Avenue No parking, standing, or stopping. Gilchrist Avenue On the north side of Gilchrist Avenue within 30 feet of the intersections Ashburn Avenue and Marsteller Avenue No parking, standing, or stopping. Gilchrist Avenue On the northwest side of Gilchrist Avenue from 50 feet northeast of Williams Street to 50 feet southwest of Williams Street No parking, standing, or stopping. Glade Street Holleman Drive and Pershing Drive South No parking any time Glade Street Holleman Drive and Orr Street North No parking any time Glade Street Orr Street and Holleman Drive South No parking any time Glade Street Pershing Drive and Holleman Drive North No parking any time Glade Street Southwest Parkway and 300 feet northwest of Southwest Parkway Northwest No parking any time Glade Street Southwest Parkway and 300 feet northwest of Southwest Parkway Southeast No parking any time Glade Street Anna Street to Park Place Southeast No stopping, standing, or parking any time Glade Street Park Place to Anna Street Northwest On school days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m., no stopping, standing, or parking Greens Prairie Trail Wellborn Road to Royder Road Northeast No stopping, standing, or parking anytime Greens Prairie Trail Royder Road to Wellborn Road Southwest No stopping, standing, or parking anytime Greens Prairie Trail Royder Road and Shady Brook Lane West/northwest No stopping, standing, or parking any time. along the west/northwest side of Greens Prairie Trail from Royder Road to 480 feet north of Shady Brook Lane Greens Prairie Trail Royder Road and Shady Brook Lane East/southeast No stopping, standing, or parking any time. along the east/southeast side of Greens Prairie Trail from Royder Road to 480 feet north of Shady Brook Lane Greens Prairie Trail Royder Road and Royder Road East/southeast No stopping, standing, or parking any time. along the east/southeast side of Greens Prairie Trail from Royder Road to 100 feet southwest of Royder Road Guadalupe Drive Langford Street and Nueces Drive West No parking any time Gunsmith Street Trigger Street and Caudill Street West No parking any time Gunsmith Street Trigger Street and Caudill Street Northwest No parking any time Haskell Hollow Loop Deacon Drive West and Crosby Creek Court East No parking any time Haskell Hollow Loop Inside of Haskell Hollow Loop between Crosby Creek Court and Collin Mills Drive Clockwise-East, South, West, and North No parking any time Haverford Road and Los Portales Drive intersection No parking within the intersection or within 50 feet of the intersection measured from the extension of the curb Haverford Road and Claremont Drive intersection No parking within the or within 50 feet of the intersection measured from the extension of the curb Haverford Road Davison Drive to Claremont Drive West/northwest No parking any time Haverford Road and Claremont Drive Southwest No parking on the southeast side of Haverford Road from Claremont Drive to 140 feet southwest of Claremont Drive measured from the extension of the nearest Claremont Drive curb edge through the intersection Hayes Lane Towers Parkway and Papa Bear Drive West No parking any time Highland Street George Bush Drive and Grove Street North No parking any time Highland Street George Bush Drive and Grove Street North No parking here to corner Holik Street George Bush Drive and Anna Street North No parking any time Holik Street George Bush Drive and Anna Street North No parking here to corner Holik Street Anna Street and George Bush Drive South No parking here to corner Holik Street Anna Street and Park Place South No parking any time Holik Street Anna Street and Park Place West No parking any time Holik Street Park Place to 50 feet northwest of Anna Street Northwest No stopping, standing, or parking any time Holik Street 690 feet south of George Bush Drive to George Bush Drive Northwest No stopping, standing, or parking any time Holik Street George Bush Drive to 380 feet southeast of George Bush Drive Southeast No stopping, standing, or parking any time Holik Street 540 feet southeast of George Bush Drive to Park Place Southeast No stopping, standing, or parking any time Holik Street Beginning 50 feet northwest of Anna Street and ending 690 feet southeast of George Bush Drive Northwest 30-minute parking zone along the northeast side of Holik Street on school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Holik Street Beginning 380 feet southeast of George Bush Drive and ending 540 feet southeast of George Bush Drive Southeast 30-minute parking zone along the southwest side of Holik Street on school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Holik Street Beginning 50 feet northwest of Anna Street and ending 690 feet southeast of George Bush Drive Northwest 30-minute parking zone along the northeast side of Holik Street on school days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Holik Street Beginning 380 feet southeast of George Bush Drive and ending 540 feet southeast of George Bush Drive Southeast 30-minute parking zone along the southwest side of Holik Street on school days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Holleman Drive Holik Drive and Anderson Street West No parking bike lane Holleman Drive Eleanor Street and Carolina Street West No parking here to corner Hollyhock Street Crepe Myrtle Street and Willow Pond Street South No parking any time Hollyhock Street Sun Meadow Street and Crepe Myrtle Street South No parking any time Horse Haven Lane 200 feet west of Appomattox Drive and Horseback Court South No parking any time Horse Shoe Drive Horse Haven Lane and Appomattox Drive West No parking any time Horse Shoe Drive Horse Haven Lane and Appomattox Drive South No parking any time Horseback Court Horse Haven Lane and Cul-de-sac West No parking any time Horseback Drive Eastern section of street and Horse Haven Lane West No parking any time Horseback Drive Southern section of street and North No parking any time Horseback Drive at Horse Haven Lane Western section of looped street and East No parking any time Inlow Boulevard Culpepper Drive and Milam Avenue East No parking any time Inlow Boulevard Milam Avenue and Dogwood Street East No parking any time Inlow Boulevard Nagle Street and Dogwood Street West No parking any time Inlow Boulevard Dogwood Street and Milam Avenue West No parking any time Inlow Boulevard Milam Avenue and Culpepper Drive West No parking any time Inlow Boulevard Milam Avenue and S College Avenue West No parking any time Jane Street Cooner Street and University Drive North No parking any time Jane Street University Drive and Cooner Street East No parking any time Jane Street University Drive and Cooner Street West No parking any time Jax Drive Alley and Ailin Drive East No parking any time Jax Drive Ailin Drive and 30 feet west of Ailin Drive West No parking any time Jax Drive 35 feet east of Alley and Alley West No parking any time Junction Boys Road From 230 feet south of the intersection with Market Street to the intersection with Market Street Northbound No parking any time Junction Boys Road From the intersection with Market Street to 230 feet south of the intersection with Market Street Southbound No parking any time Kate Lane Keefer Loop and Summerway Drive Southeast No parking any time Keefer Loop Rock Prairie Road and Toni Court West No parking any time Keefer Loop Toni Court and Rock Prairie Road West No parking any time Kenyon Drive and Los Portales intersection No parking within the intersection or within 50 feet of the intersection measured from the extension of the curb Kenyon Drive and Claremont Drive intersection No parking within the or within 50 feet of the intersection measured from the extension of the curb Kenyon Drive Holleman Drive to Claremont Drive Southeast No parking any time Kenyon Drive and Holleman Drive Northwest No parking on the northwest side of Kenyon Drive from Holleman Drive South to 160 feet from the Holleman Drive South measured from the extension of the nearest Holleman Drive pavement edge through the intersection Kenyon Drive and Claremont Drive Northwest No parking on the northwest side of Kenyon Drive from Claremont Drive to 120 feet from Claremont Drive measured from the extension of the nearest Claremont Drive curb edge through the intersection Langford Street King Arthur Circle and Southwest Parkway South No parking here to corner Langford Street Southwest Parkway and King Arthur Circle North No parking here to corner Langford Street Southwest Parkway and King Arthur Circle North No parking any time Langford Street From Boswell Street to Southwest Parkway Southwest No stopping, standing, or parking any time Langford Street From Ridgefield Circle South to Boswell Street Southwest No stopping, standing, or parking on school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Langford Street From Southwest Parkway to Ridgefield Circle South Northwest No stopping, standing, or parking on school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Langford Street From Ridgefield Circle South to Boswell Street Southwest No stopping, standing, or parking on school days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Langford Street Southwest Parkway to Ridgefield Circle South Northwest No stopping, standing, or parking on school days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Lassie Lane Holleman Drive and Richards Street North No parking any time Lassie Lane Sterling Drive and Richards Street South No parking any time Lawyer Street Beginning 235 feet from the western intersection of Caudill Street and Lawyer Street No parking on the south side of Lawyer Street for the next 140 feet Ledgestone Trail Greens Prairie Trail to Royder Road Northeast No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Ledgestone Trail Royder Road to Greens Prairie Trail Southwest No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Ledgestone Trail Greens Prairie Trail to Royder Road Northeast No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Ledgestone Trail Royder Road to Greens Prairie Trail Southwest No stopping, standing, or parking on School Days from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Lee Avenue George Bush Drive and Shetland Street North No parking here to corner Lee Avenue Shetland Street and George Bush Drive South No parking any time Lincoln Avenue Tarrow Street and Ashburn Avenue West No parking here to corner Lincoln Avenue Texas Avenue and Foster Avenue West No parking here to corner Lincoln Avenue Ashburn Avenue and Tarrow Street East No parking any time Lincoln Avenue Ashburn Avenue and East No parking any time Lincoln Avenue Munson Avenue and West No parking any time Lincoln Avenue Munson Avenue and University Drive West No parking any time Lincoln Avenue University Drive and East No parking any time Lincoln Avenue Foster Avenue and Texas Avenue East No parking any time Lincoln Avenue Foster Avenue and Texas Avenue East No parking here to corner Lincoln Avenue Avenue A and Foster Avenue East No parking any time Lincoln Avenue Avenue A and Nimitz Street West No parking any time Lincoln Avenue Foster Avenue and Avenue A West No parking any time Lincoln Avenue Foster Avenue and Avenue A West No parking here to corner Lincoln Avenue Nimitz Street and Nunn Street West No parking here to corner Lincoln Avenue Grand Oaks Circle and Munson Avenue East No parking here to corner Lincoln Avenue Grand Oaks Circle and Munson Avenue East No parking any time Little River Street Northeast side of Little River Street beginning at the intersection of Harvey Mitchell Parkway South and extending 175 feet to the intersection with a private alley Northwest No parking any time Live Oak Texas Avenue and Eisenhower Street West No parking any time Live Oak Street Eisenhower Street and Turner Street Southwest No parking anytime Lodge Street Church Avenue and Patricia Street North No parking Sundays 7:00 a.m.-1:00 p.m. Lodge Street Patricia Street and University Drive North No parking here to corner Lodge Street and All directions No parking 12:00 a.m. to 4:00 a.m. (Fri., Sat., Sun.) Lodge Street and All directions No parking 10:00 p.m. to 12:00 a.m. (Thur., Fri., Sat., Sun.) Lodge Street Patricia Street and extending 50 feet South East No parking any time Lodge Street Patricia Street and extending 65 feet South West No parking any time Lodge Street at Patricia Street and North No parking any time Lodge Street at Patricia Street and South No parking any time Longmire Court and Valley View Drive North No parking this side of sign Longmire Court and All directions No parking any time Longmire Drive FM 2818 and Valley View Drive South No parking this side of sign Longmire Drive Deacon Drive and Treehouse Trail North No parking any time Longmire Drive Treehouse Trail and Deacon Drive South No parking any time Longmire Drive Airline Drive and Valley View Drive East No parking except for designated areas. Longmire Drive Airline Drive and Valley View Drive West No parking any time Los Portales Drive Davidson Drive to Kenyon Drive Northeast No parking any time Los Portales Drive and Davidson Drive Northeast No parking on the northeast side of Los Portales from Davidson Drive to within 140 feet northwest of Davidson Drive measured from the extension of the nearest Davidson Drive curb edge through the intersection Louise Avenue First Street and Wellborn Road East No parking here to corner Louise Avenue Wellborn Road and First Street West No parking any time Louise Avenue First Street and Boyett Street West No parking any time Louise Avenue College Main and Second Street East No parking any time Louise Avenue College Main and Second Street North No parking. Luther Street West from Harvey Mitchell Parkway (FM 2818) Marion Pugh Drive Northeast No parking any time Luther Street West from Marion Pugh Drive Harvey Mitchell Parkway (FM 2818) Southwest No parking any time Magnolia Drive Merry Oaks Drive and Merry Oaks Drive Southwest No parking any time Magnolia Drive Merry Oaks Drive and Merry Oaks Drive South No parking any time Magnolia Drive Merry Oaks Drive and Merry Oaks Drive East No parking any time Magnolia Drive Merry Oaks Drive and Merry Oaks Drive West No parking any time Magnolia Drive Merry Oaks Drive and Merry Oaks Drive Northwest No parking any time Magnolia Drive Merry Oaks Drive and Merry Oaks Drive North No parking any time Magnolia Drive Merry Oaks Drive and Merry Oaks Drive Northeast No parking any time Mandi Court Horse Shoe Drive and Cul-de-sac South No parking any time Mandi Court Horse Shoe Drive and Cul-de-sac East No parking any time Maple Avenue First Street and Wellborn Road East No parking here to corner Maple Avenue First Street and Wellborn Road East No parking any time Marion Pugh Drive Luther Street and George Bush Drive South No parking any time Marion Pugh Drive Luther Street W. and George Bush Drive South No parking any time Market Street From the intersection with Cottage Lane to the intersection with Holleman Drive South Eastbound No parking any time Market Street From the intersection with Holleman Drive South to the intersection with Cottage Lane Westbound No parking any time Marsteller Avenue On Marsteller Avenue within 30 feet of the intersection with Gilchrist Avenue No parking, standing, or stopping Milam Avenue Cross Street and Inlow Boulevard South No parking any time Milam Avenue Inlow Boulevard and Cross Street North No parking any time Montclair Avenue Angus Street and George Bush Drive South No parking here to corner Montclair Avenue Angus Street and George Bush Drive South No parking any time Montclair Avenue Angus Street and Kerry Street North No parking here to corner Montclair Avenue Angus Street and Kerry Street North No parking this side of sign Montclair Avenue Angus Street and George Bush Drive South No parking this side of sign Montclair Avenue George Bush Drive and Angus Street North No parking any time Montclair Avenue Kerry Street and Grove Street North No parking any time Montclair Avenue Eleanor Street and Luther Street South No parking here to corner Mortier Avenue Chantal Circle and Edelweiss Avenue East No parking any time Munson Avenue Dominik Drive and Gilchrist Avenue South No parking here to corner Munson Avenue Bayou Woods Drive and Hardwood Lane North No parking here to corner Munson Avenue Bayou Woods Drive and Hardwood Lane North No parking any time Munson Avenue Dominik Drive and Bayou Woods Drive North No parking any time Munson Avenue Dominik Drive and Bayou Woods Drive North No parking here to corner Munson Avenue Hardwood Lane and University Oaks North No parking here to corner Munson Avenue Harvey Road and University Oaks South No parking any time Munson Avenue University Oaks Boulevard and Harvey Road North No parking any time Munson Avenue Bayou Woods Drive and Dominik Drive South No parking any time Munson Avenue University Oaks Boulevard and Hardwood Lane South No parking here to corner Munson Avenue Dominic Drive to Lincoln Avenue Northwest No parking any time Munson Avenue Lincoln Avenue to Dominic Drive Southwest No parking any time. N. Graham Road City limit and Old Wellborn Road West No parking here to corner Nagle Street Cross Street and Cherry Street South No parking any time Nagle Street Cross Street and Cherry Street South No parking between signs Nagle Street Cross Street and Cherry Street South No parking here to corner Nagle Street Church Avenue and Cross Street South No parking any time Nagle Street Church Avenue and Cross Street South No parking here to corner Nagle Street Cross Street and Church Avenue North No parking any time Nagle Street Cross Street and Cross Street North No parking any time Nagle Street Cross Street and Cross Street North No parking here to corner Nagle Street University Drive and Church Avenue South No parking any time Nagle Street University Drive and Church Avenue South No parking here to corner Nimitz Street Lincoln Avenue and Ash Street South No parking any time Nimitz Street Cooner Street and University Drive North No parking any time Nimitz Street University Drive and Cooner Street South No parking here to corner Nimitz Street Poplar Street and Ash Street Southeast No parking anytime Northgate Parking Lot and East No parking any time Nueces Drive Madera and Guadalupe Drive Northwest No parking any time Nueces Drive Harvey Mitchell Parkway and Guadalupe Drive South No parking any time Nueces Drive at Guadalupe Drive and South No parking any time Nunn Street Lincoln Avenue and Walton Drive North No parking any time Nunn Street Walton Drive and Lincoln Avenue South No parking any time Old Jersey Street Fairview Avenue and Ayrshire Street West No parking any time Old Jersey Street Fairview Avenue and Ayrshire Street West No parking here to corner Old Jersey Street Ayrshire Street and East No parking any time Old Jersey Street and Ayrshire Street East No parking any time Old Jersey Street Ayrshire Street and Fairview Avenue West No parking any time Old Jersey Street Fairview Avenue and Ayrshire Street East No parking any time Olympia Way Dominik Drive and University Oaks North No parking here to corner Olympia Way University Oaks Boulevard and Dominik Drive South No parking here to corner Olympia Way University Oaks Boulevard and Dominik Drive South No parking any time Oney Harvey Drive On the west side to the end of the road and on the east side from Holleman Drive to 140 feet down the east side of Oney Harvey Drive East/West No parking any time Oney Hervey Holleman Drive and North No parking here to corner Oney Hervey and Holleman Drive South No parking here to corner Orchid Street Wild Plum Street and Marigold Court East No parking any time Orchid Street and North No parking any time Papa Bear Drive Towers Parkway and extending west and south to 120 feet southwest of the intersection with Hayes Lane West/South No parking any time Park Place Anderson Street and Texas Avenue West No parking any time Park Place Aurora Court and Holik Street East No parking any time Park Place Anderson Street and Aurora Court East No parking here to corner Park Place Anderson Street and Aurora Court East No parking any time Park Place Aurora Court and Anderson Street West No parking this side of sign Park Place Holik Street and Anderson Street East No parking any time Park Place Holik Street and Anderson Street South No parking any time Park Place Texas Avenue and Anderson Street All directions No parking any time Patricia Street Lodge Street and College Main East No parking any time Patricia Street First Street and Boyett Street West No parking any time Patricia Street Lodge Street and College Main East No parking loading zone Patricia Street Bottle Cap Alley and Boyett Street East No parking any time Patricia Street Lodge Street and College Main East No parking any time Patricia Street Lodge Street and College Main East No parking loading zone Patricia Street Boyett Street and First Street East No parking loading zone Patricia Street Boyett Street and First Street East No parking here to corner Patricia Street Boyett Street and First Street East No parking any time Patricia Street Lodge Street and College Main West No parking any time Patricia Street College Main and Lodge Street All directions No parking any time Patricia Street Beginning 60 feet east of the intersection with Boyett Street and extending 72 feet to the east North No parking any time Pedernales Drive San Benito Drive and Val Verde Drive North No parking any time Pedernales Drive Val Verde Drive and San Benito Drive South No parking here to corner Pershing Avenue Shetland and North No parking any time Pershing Avenue Shetland and South No parking any time Pheasant Lane West Ridge Drive and Navarro Drive West No parking any time Pintail Lane West Ridge Drive and Navarro Drive West No parking any time Pintail Loop Navarro Drive and West No parking here to corner Pintail Loop Navarro Drive (Southern intersection) and East No parking any time Pintail Loop and North No parking until next corner Poplar Street Texas Avenue and Eisenhower Street South No parking any time Poplar Street Eisenhower Street and Turner Street Northeast No parking anytime Pronghorn Lane West Ridge Drive and Navarro Drive West No parking any time Pronghorn Loop Navarro Drive (Northern most intersection) and West No parking here to corner Pronghorn Loop Navarro Drive (Southern intersection) and East No parking any time Pronghorn Loop and North No parking until next corner Public Alley Alamosa Street and Buena Vista North No parking any time Public Alley Buena Vista and Alamosa Street South No parking any time Public Alley South of 4200 Block of Alexandria and All directions No parking any time until March 8, 2009 Puryear Drive Dominik Drive and Kyle Avenue South No parking any time Ravenstone Loop Adjacent to properties 2061, 2063, 2065, 2067, and 2069 and East No parking any time Ravenstone Loop Adjacent to properties 2061, 2063, 2065, 2067, and 2070 and West No parking any time Ravenstone Loop From the property line between 2073 and 2075 Ravenstone Loop to the property line between 2025 and 2023 Ravenstone Loop East to North to West No stopping, standing, or parking along Ravenstone Loop on school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Ravenstone Loop From Ravenstone Loop to Ravenstone Loop North to east to south to west No stopping, standing, or parking along Ravenstone Loop on school days from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. and from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Raymond Stotzer P.W. City limits and Turkey Creek Road West No parking on pavement Raymond Stotzer P.W. City limits and Turkey Creek Road East No parking on pavement Redmond Drive Armistead Street and George Bush Drive Southeast No parking any time Redmond Drive Texas Avenue and Redmond Drive Southeast No parking any time Redmond Drive Lenert Circle and Rosemary Lane North No parking any time Redmond Drive Rosemary Lane and Lenert Circle West No parking any time Redwood Alley Bent Oak Street and Emerald Parkway South No parking in alley Redwood Alley Emerald Parkway and Bent Oak Street North No parking in alley Regal Row 3404 Regal Row to in front of 3510 Regal Row Southwest No stopping, standing, or parking on schooldays from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Regal Row 3503 Regal Row to in front of 3413 Regal Row Northeast No stopping, standing, or parking on schooldays from 7:00 a.m. until 9:00 a.m. Regal Row 3404 Regal Row to in front of 3510 Regal Row Southwest No stopping, standing, or parking on schooldays from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Regal Row 3503 Regal Row to in front of 3413 Regal Row Northeast No stopping, standing, or parking on schooldays from 2:30 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. Regiment Way Deacon Drive West and Papa Bear Drive South No parking any time Regiment Way Papa Bear Drive and Deacon Drive West North No parking any time Register Drive Haskell Hollow Loop and 140 feet east of Haskell Hollow Loop East No parking any time Renee Lane Barron Road and the Termination of the Roadway 260 feet north of Passendale Lane Northwest No parking any time Renee Lane Termination of the Roadway 260 feet north of Passendale Lane and Barron Road Northeast No parking any time Rhett Butler Drive Bayou Woods Drive and University Oaks Boulevard North No parking any time Rhett Butler Drive University Oaks Boulevard and Bayou Woods Drive South No parking any time Rhett Butler Drive University Oaks Boulevard and Harvey Road North No parking any time Richards Street Crest Street and Lassie Lane East No parking any time Richards Street Lassie Lane and Crest Street West No parking here to corner Richards Street Lassie Lane and Texas Avenue East No parking here to corner Rio Grande Boulevard Harvey Mitchell Parkway and Airline Drive North No parking except Sundays and holidays Rio Grande Boulevard Laredo Court and Harvey Mitchell Parkway South No parking except Sundays and holidays Rosemary Lane Armistead Street and George Bush Drive South No parking any time Rosemary Lane Milliff Road and George Bush Drive South No parking any time Rosemary Lane Milliff Road and Redmond Drive South No parking any time Rosemary Lane Redmond Drive and Milliff Road West No parking any time Royder Road 860 feet south of Greens Prairie Trail to Greens Prairie Trail Northwest No stopping, standing, or parking anytime Royder Road Greens Prairie Trail to 860 feet south of Greens Prairie Trail Southeast No stopping, standing, or parking anytime Royder Road Greens Prairie Trail to 1,100 feet north of Backwater Lane Northwest No stopping, standing, or parking anytime Royder Road 1,100 feet north of Backwater Lane to Greens Prairie Trail Southeast No stopping, standing, or parking anytime S. College Avenue Cross Street and Inlow Boulevard South No parking any time S. College Avenue University Drive and Inlow Boulevard South No parking any time S. College Avenue Hensel Street and University Drive North No parking any time S. Dexter Drive Haines Drive and Concho Place North No parking any time Scarlet O'Hara Drive Harvey Road and University Oaks Boulevard South No parking here to corner Scarlet O'Hara Drive University Oaks Boulevard and Harvey Road North No parking any time Second Street Church Avenue and Louise Avenue South No parking any time Second Street Louise Avenue and Church Avenue North No parking here to corner Second Street Louise Avenue and Cherry Street South No parking any time Second Street Louise Avenue and Church Avenue North No parking any time Second Street Louise Avenue and Church Avenue East No parking any time Second Street Cherry Street and Louise Avenue East No parking. SH 6 Frontage Road Harvey Mitchell Parkway and Brothers Boulevard North No parking any time Sienna Drive and Holleman Drive W. North No parking between signs Sienna Drive Holleman Drive W. and North No parking here to corner Southland Street To the end of the road and from Wellborn Road to 125 feet down the south side of Southland Street North/South No parking any time Southwest Parkway Wellborn Road and Welsh Avenue West No parking any time Southwest Parkway Welsh Avenue and Wellborn Road East No parking any time Southwood Drive Southwest Parkway and 300 feet southeast of Southwest Parkway Northwest No parking any time. Southwood Drive Southwest Parkway to 300 feet southeast of Southwest Parkway Southeast No parking any time Spring Brook Summer Court and Fall Circle East No parking any time Spring Brook Tarrow Street and Summer Court East No parking any time Spring Loop Autumn Circle and April Bloom West No parking here to corner Spring Loop Fall Circle and Autumn Circle West No parking here to corner Spring Loop Summer Court and Tarrow Street East No parking any time Spring Loop Tarrow Street and Summer Court West No parking here to corner Spring Loop April Bloom and Autumn Circle Southeast No parking this side of sign Spring Loop Tarrow Street and South No parking any time Spruce Street Boyett Street and First Street West No parking any time. Spruce Street Boyett Street and First Street East No parking any time. Spruce Street Boyett Street and First Street North No parking any time. Spruce Street Boyett Street and First Street South No parking any time. Spruce Street College Main and Boyett Street East No parking any time Stallings Drive Dominik Drive and University Oaks Boulevard North No parking any time Stasney Street University Drive and Church Avenue South No parking any time Stasney Street University Drive and Church Avenue South No parking here to corner Stasney Street Church Avenue and Louise Avenue South No parking any time Stasney Street Church Avenue and Cross Street South No parking any time Stasney Street Church Avenue and South No parking any time Stasney Street Church Avenue and University Drive North No parking any time Stasney Street From University Drive (FM 60) to Cross Street No Parking on the east side of the street Stasney Street From Cross Street to Cherry Street No Parking on the west side of the street Stasney Street Cherry Street intersection and extending to the south for 85 feet East No parking here to corner State Highway Business 6-R Access Road for Texas Avenue Walton Drive through the access Road termination at 1055 Texas Avenue Both sides No parking unless parking is permitted in a designated parking space Sterling Drive Crest Street and Lassie Lane East No parking here to corner Sterling Drive Lassie Lane and Crest Street West No parking any time Sterling Drive Lassie Lane and Crest Street East No parking any time Sterling Drive Texas Avenue and Lassie Lane West No parking any time Suffolk Avenue Burt Street and Pershing Drive West No parking any time Suffolk Avenue Burt Street and Pershing Drive Southwest No parking any time Suffolk Avenue Pershing and West/South No parking any time Summer Court Circle Summer Court and West No parking any time Summer Court Spring Loop and Summer Court Circle South No parking here to corner Summer Court Summer Court Circle and Spring Loop North No parking here to corner Sun Meadow Street Schaffer Road and Hollyhock Street East No parking any time Tarrow Street Peyton Street and University Drive South No parking any time Tarrow Street Banks Street and Peyton Street South No parking any time Tarrow Street Columbus Street and Pearce Street South No parking any time Tarrow Street Pearce Street and Banks Street South No parking any time Tarrow Street Preston Street and Columbus Street South No parking any time Tarrow Street University Drive and Wellesley Court North No parking any time Tarrow Street Vassar Court and Lincoln Avenue North No parking any time Tarrow Street Wellesley Court and Vassar Court North No parking any time Tarrow Street Lincoln Avenue and Preston Street South No parking any time Tauber Street Church Avenue and Cross Street South No parking any time Tauber Street Cherry Street and Cross Street North No parking here to corner Tauber Street Cross Street and Church Avenue North No parking here to corner Tauber Street Cross Street and Church Avenue North No parking any time Tauber Street Church Avenue and University Drive North No parking here to corner Tauber Street Cross Street and Cherry Street South No parking any time Tauber Street From University Drive (FM 60) to Church Street No Parking on the east side of the street Tauber Street From Church Street to Cross Street No parking on the west side of the street for the first 130 feet north of the intersection Tauber Street From Cross Street to Cherry Street No parking on the west side of the street Tauber Street From Cross Street to Cherry Street No Parking on east side of the street beginning at the corner of Cherry Street and extending 280 feet south Timber Street Anna Street and George Bush Drive South No parking any time Toni Court No parking in the cul-de-sac or on the south side Trace Meadows West Ridge Drive and Pronghorn Loop West No parking any time Turtle Dove Trail Dove Crossing Lane and Dove Hollow Lane West No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard Athens Drive and Munson Avenue West No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard Athens Drive and Olympia Way East No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard Bayou Woods Drive and Rhett Butler Drive East No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard George Bush East Drive and Stallings Drive West No parking here to corner University Oaks Boulevard Merry Oaks Drive and Tara Court West No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard Munson Avenue and Rhett Butler Drive West No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard Munson Avenue and Athens Drive East No parking here to corner University Oaks Boulevard Olympia Way and Athens Drive West No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard Olympia Way and Stallings Drive East No parking here to corner University Oaks Boulevard Rhett Butler Drive and Munson Avenue East No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard Rhett Butler Drive and Bayou Woods Drive West No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard Stallings Drive and Olympia Way West No parking here to corner University Oaks Boulevard Stallings Drive and George Bush Drive East No parking here to corner University Oaks Boulevard Bayou Woods Drive and Merry Oaks Drive West No parking here to corner University Oaks Boulevard Scarlet O'Hara Drive and Rhett Butler Drive East No parking here to corner University Oaks Boulevard Merry Oaks Drive and Scarlet O'Hara Drive No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard Tara Court and Merry Oaks Drive East No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard Bayou Woods Drive and Rhett Butler Drive East No parking here to corner University Oaks Boulevard Bayou Woods Drive and Merry Oaks Drive West No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard E. Bypass and Scarlet O'Hara Drive East No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard Merry Oaks Drive and Scarlet O'Hara Drive East No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard Tara Court and Scarlet O'Hara Drive East No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard Stallings Drive and Olympia Way West No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard George Bush East Drive and Stallings Drive East No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard 505 feet east of George Bush Drive East and 560 feet east North No parking any time University Oaks Boulevard George Bush Drive East and East No parking any time Val Verde Drive Pedernales Drive and Rio Grande Boulevard West No parking here to corner Val Verde Drive and Pedernales Drive West No parking any time Valley View Drive Texas Avenue and Longmire Court East No parking any time Valley View Drive Longmire Court and Texas Avenue West No parking here to corner Valley View Drive Longmire Drive and Southwood Drive East No parking here to corner Valley View Drive Southwood Drive and Longmire Court West No parking this side of sign Valley View Drive Longmire Drive and Southwood Drive East No parking any time Valley View Drive Texas Avenue and Longmire Drive East No parking any time Valley View Drive Texas Avenue and Longmire Drive East No parking here to corner Valley View Drive Angelina Circle and East No parking any time Valley View Drive Angelina Circle and West No parking any time Vassar Court and Tarrow Street East No parking any time Victoria Avenue Rock Prairie Road and SH 40 North No parking any time Victoria Avenue Rock Prairie Road and SH 40 South No parking any time W. King Cole Drive Krenek Tap and Texas Avenue East No parking any time W. Dexter Drive Ayrshire Street and Kerry Street East No parking any time W. Dexter Drive Ayrshire Street and Kerry Street West No parking any time Walton Drive Milner Drive and Foster Avenue East No parking any time Walton Drive Puryear Drive and Harrington Avenue East No parking any time Walton Drive Foster Avenue and Milner Drive West No parking any time Walton Drive Milner Drive and Harrington Avenue West No parking any time Walton Drive Nunn Street and Francis Circle Northwest No parking any time Walton Drive Puryear Drive and Nunn Street Northwest No parking any time Wellborn Road Louise Avenue and Church Avenue East No parking any time Wellborn Road Louise Avenue and Church Avenue North No parking any time Wellborn Road Harvey Mitchell Parkway and Sallie Lane North No parking here to corner Wellborn Road Sallie Lane and Marshall Road North No parking here to corner Wellesley Court and Tarrow Street East No parking any time Welsh Avenue Nueces Drive and F M 2818 North No parking any time Welsh Avenue Holleman Drive and Extending North 100 feet All directions No parking any time Whitewing Lane Dove Crossing Lane and Dove Hollow Lane West No parking any time Williams Street Francis Drive and Gilchrist Avenue North No parking any time Williams Street Francis Drive and Gilchrist Avenue North No parking between signs Willow Pond Street Hollyhock Street and Schaffer Road West No parking any time Wolf Run Drive Anderson Street and Anderson Street West No parking any time Wolf Run Drive Anderson Street and Anderson Street Northeast No parking any time Wolf Run Drive Anderson Street and Anderson Street East No parking any time Wolf Run Drive Anderson Street and Anderson Street Southwest No parking any time Wolf Run Drive Anderson Street and Anderson Street West No parking any time Wolf Run Drive Wolf Pen Court and Anderson Street Northeast No parking any time Wolf Run Drive Wolf Pen Court and Anderson Street East No parking any time WS Phillips Parkway Hailes Lane to Barron Cut-off Road Northwest No stopping, standing, or parking any time WS Phillips Parkway Barron Cut-off Road to Hailes Lane Southeast No stopping, standing, or parking any time  
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(I), ch. 10, sched. XIV; Ord. No. 2016-3755, exh. A(sched. XIV), 3-31-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3771, exh. A(sched. XIV), 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3772, exh. A(sched. XIV), 5-16-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3783, exh. A(sched. XIV), 7-14-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3784, exh. A(sched. XIV), 7-14-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3787, exhs. A(sched. XIV), B(sched. XIV), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3807, exh. A(sched. XIV), 9-22-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3818, exh. A(sched. XIV), 10-13-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3834, pt. 1(exh. A), 11-10-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3860, pt. 1(exh. A), 3-23-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3869, pt. 1(exh. A), 3-23-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3870, pt. 1(exh. A), 3-23-2017; altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2017-3894 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-13-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3911 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-10-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3933 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-25-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3945 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3946 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 10-12-2017; Ord. No. 2017-3955 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-9-2017; Ord. No. 2018-3977 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-25-2018; Ord. No. 2018-3978 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-25-2018; Ord. No. 2018-3982 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-8-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4027 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-26-2018; Ord. No. 2019-4068 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 2019-4069 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 2019-4070 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-24-2019; Ord. No. 2019-4096 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2019; Ord. No. 2019-4097 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-23-2019) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(2). 
Sec. 38-1015. - Traffic Schedule XV, two-hour parking 8:00 a.m.-5:00. p.m. Monday-Friday. 
Traveling On Between Travel Direction Boyett Street Patricia Street and Church Avenue West Church Avenue 40 feet southwest of First Street and 95 feet northeast of Wellborn Road North Northwest Church Avenue 43 feet north of its intersection with University Drive and extending 160 feet to the north North Montclair Avenue Angus Street and Kerry Street North Fairview Ave Angus Street and Kerry Street North Fairview Avenue Old Jersey Street and Angus Street North Fairview Avenue Angus Street and George Bush Drive South Fairview Avenue Kerry Street and Angus Street South Fairview Avenue Angus Street and Kerry Street North Fairview Avenue Kerry Street and Angus Street South Montclair Avenue Angus Street and Kerry Street North Montclair Avenue Angus Street and George Bush Drive South Lee Avenue Shetland Street and George Bush Drive South Lee Avenue Park Place and Shetland Street South Lee Avenue George Bush Drive and Shetland Street North Cherry Street Nagle Street and East Nueces Drive Guadalupe Drive and Welsh Avenue North/East  
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  10-4(G)(3), ch. 10, sched. XV; altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, Texas Transportation Code  542.202(a)(2). 
Chapter 40 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 40-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automated container means a container provided by the city or the city's contractor of varying capacities used for garbage or recycling collection. 
    Bag means a plastic sack or trash compactor sack designed to store refuse and having sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted at the top, the opening closed by tie or other seal. 
    Benefited property means a lot or tract, which drains into a creek, river, slough, culvert, or other channel that is part of the Municipal Drainage Utility System. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in parts per million by weight. 
    Brush means cuttings or trimmings from trees, shrubs, or lawns and similar materials. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Bulky waste . See Waste . 
    Chlorinated fluorocarbon (CFC) means a refrigerant used in freezers, refrigerators, and air conditioners. 
    Church means a place for the purpose of religious study, worship, fellowship, education and contemplation, including, but not limited to, a sanctuary, parish house, public school, parochial school, rectory or convent. For the purpose of this chapter, real property used as a church shall be considered a commercial usage. 
    Commercial customer means any customer who is an enterprise or establishment whose main purpose is to carry on a commercial activity whether for profit or not. Said definition shall include all uses not falling within the category of residential, including, but not limited to, churches, hospitals, schools and industries. 
    Conservation means those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
    Construction demolition waste . See Waste . 
    Curbside means the area directly behind the curb. In the absence of a curb, the curbside is the area directly behind the edge of roadway. 
    Customer means any person receiving any provided utility service from the City. 
    Customer service line means the potable water line from the customer's residence, building or place of business to the water meter located near the intersection of the customer's property and the City's right-of-way or utility easement, or the sewer line from the customer's residence, building or place of business to a customer-supplied clean-out located at the intersection of the customer's property and the City's right-of-way or utility easement. 
    Dead animal means any animal or portion thereof, having expired from any cause. 
    Discard means to abandon a material and not use, re-use, reclaim, or recycle it. A material is abandoned by being disposed of; burned or incinerated (except where the material is being burned as a fuel for the purpose of recovering usable energy); or physically, chemically, or biologically treated (other than burned or incinerated) in lieu of or prior to being disposed. 
    Discharge means and includes deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
    Disposal site means a managed area of land upon which solid waste is disposed of in accordance with standards, rules or orders established by the State. 
    Drip irrigation means the controlled, slow application of small amounts of water to soil over a long period of time, usually several hours. 
    Excess wastewater means potable or non-potable water from dripping or leaking pipes, valves, plumbing or fixtures, or seep water, rain water or stormwater entering into sewer customer service lines through cracks, pipe joints, openings or other defects in the sewer customer service lines. 
    Garbage . See Waste . 
    Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
    Handicapped household means a residential unit where all adult occupants are certified by a licensed medical doctor as being physically incapable of transporting municipal solid waste or recycling to the property curbside. 
    Hazardous substance means those materials as defined in City Ordinance No. 1820, approved September 14, 1989. 
    Hazardous waste . See Waste . 
    Hospital means a building or portion thereof, used or designed for the housing or treatment of the sick, aged, mentally ill, injured, or infirm persons; provided that this definition shall not include rooms in any residential dwelling, hotel, or apartment hotel. For the purpose of this chapter, real property used as a hospital shall be considered a commercial usage. 
    Household waste . See Waste . 
    Industrial means real property on which manufacture or assembly is carried on for profit, employing labor or machinery. 
    Industrial solid waste . See Waste . 
    Inert material means a naturally occurring non-putrescible material that is essentially insoluble such as soil, dirt, clay, sand, gravel, and rock. 
    Infectious wastes . See Waste . 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and, therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City's Texas Pollution Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent State or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any State regulations contained in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Lead acid battery means a secondary or storage battery that uses lead as the electrode and diluted sulfuric acid as the electrolyte and is used to generate electrical current. 
    Liquid waste . See Waste . 
    Litter means any manmade or man-used object, organic or inorganic material, or solid waste and specifically includes, but is not limited to, waste as defined in this chapter which is not placed in a container, or an authorized sanitary waste disposal site, or another approved area, depository or vehicle designated for transport or disposal of litter, garbage or waste. 
    Medical waste . See Waste . 
    Municipal Drainage Utility System means the drainage system owned or controlled in whole or in part by the City and dedicated to the service of benefited property. 
    Municipal solid waste . See Waste . 
    Non-contact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
    Non-essential water use means water uses that are neither essential nor required for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare, including: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscaped areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except as otherwise provided by Division 5 of Article II of this chapter; 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle; 
(3)  Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas except to maintain health and safety conditions; 
(4)  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(5)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
(6)  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type pools; 
(7)  Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
(8)  Failure to repair a controllable leak within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak; and 
(9)  Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than firefighting, or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare. 
    pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City's TPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State, and local governmental entities. 
    Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, sewage sludge, garbage, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, and cellar dirt; municipal, agricultural and industrial wastewater; and certain characteristics of wastewater, including, but not limited to, pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of an ecosystem. 
    Premises means an estate, including land and buildings thereon, contiguous and under one ownership. 
    Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means a "treatment works," as defined by 33 USC 1292 as it currently exists or as it may be amended from time to time, which is owned by the City. The term "publicly owned treatment works" includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
    Putrescible waste . See Waste . 
    Reclaimed water means domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for a beneficial use, pursuant to the provisions of 30 T.A.C. 210, as it currently exists or may be amended from time to time, and other applicable rules and permits. 
    Recyclable material means a material that has been recovered or diverted from the non-hazardous waste stream for purposes of reuse, recycling, or reclamation, a substantial portion of which is consistently used in the manufacture of products that may otherwise be produced using raw or virgin materials. Recyclable material is not solid waste. However, recyclable material may become solid waste at such time, if any, as it is abandoned or disposed of rather than recycled, whereupon it will be solid waste with respect only to the party actually abandoning or disposing of the material. 
    Recycling means a process by which materials that have served their intended use or are scrapped, discarded, used, surplus, or obsolete are collected, separated, or processed and returned to use in the form of raw materials in the production of new products. Except for mixed municipal solid waste composting, that is, composting of the typical mixed solid waste stream generated by residential, commercial, and/or institutional sources, recycling includes the composting process if the compost material is put to beneficial use. 
    Recycling drop-off center means a location, either temporary or permanent, within the City established for the receipt of recyclable solid waste, including, but not limited to, aluminum, metal and glass. 
    Residential means any building or portion of a building occupied by a person or group of persons as a place of residence. 
    Residential unit means any building or portion thereof which contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation for not more than one family, such as a house, an apartment, a group of rooms or a single room intended for occupancy as separate living quarters. Separate living quarters are those in which the occupants live separately from any other individuals in the building and which have a direct access from the outside of the building or through a common hall. In accordance with this definition, each apartment unit in an apartment building is counted as one residential unit. The term "residential unit" includes conventional "stick-built" units, prefabricated panelized, componentized, sectional, and modular units, dormitories and roominghouses, manufactured (mobile) homes, moved or relocated units, and separate living quarters created in an existing residential or nonresidential structure. 
    Returned check means any payment instrument returned to the City for insufficient funds or any other reason. 
    Returned check fee means a fee levied by the City each time a payment instrument is returned to the City for insufficient funds or any other reason. 
    Right-of-way means real property owned in fee simple or as an easement interest for the purpose of placing utilities or roadways. For the purpose of this chapter, real property used as rights-of-way shall be considered a commercial usage. 
    Rubbish means non-putrescible solid waste (excluding ashes) consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste materials. Combustible waste materials include, but are not limited to, paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastic, yard trimmings and leaves. Noncombustible waste materials include, but are not limited to, glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture and other materials that will not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures of 1,600 degrees to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
    Scrap tire means any tire that can no longer be used for its original intended purpose. 
    Service line means the potable water line from the City's water main to the intersection of the customer's property and the City's right-of-way or utility easement; or the sewer line from the City's sewer main to a customer's property and the City's right-of-way or utility easement. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
    Sewer means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
    Special waste . See Waste . 
    Storage means the holding of solid waste for a temporary period, at the end of which the solid waste is processed, disposed of, or stored elsewhere. Facilities established as non-putrescible recyclable wastes, for consolidation of parking lot or street sweepings or wastes collected and received in sealed plastic bags from such activities as periodic Citywide cleanup campaigns and cleanup of rights-of-way or roadside parks, or for accumulation of used or scrap tires prior to transportation to a processing or disposal site are considered examples of storage facilities. The term "storage" includes operation of pre-collection and post-collection as follows: 
    Pre-collection means that storage by the generator, normally on the generator's premises, prior to initial collection; 
    Post-collection means that storage by a transporter or processor, at a processing site, while the waste is awaiting processing or transfer to another storage, disposal or recovery facility. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer) means a sewer which carries stormwater, surface water and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including snow melt. 
    Suspended solids (SS) means solids which either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    System failure means any mechanical failure of pumping equipment or system component that causes a loss of capability to provide water service to the City. 
    TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality 
    Tire means a circular continuous cushion or part thereof designed for encircling a wheel to facilitate vehicular movement. 
    Transportation unit means a truck, trailer, open-top box, enclosed container, rail car, piggy-back trailer, ship, barge or other transportation vehicle used to contain solid waste being transported from one geographical area to another. 
    Transporter means a person who collects and transports solid waste, but does not include a person transporting such person's own household waste. 
    Unprepared solid waste. See Waste . 
    Utilities means any property or facility owned by a private or public utility, for the purpose of providing water, sewer, solid waste, drainage or electric service. 
    Vector means an agent, such as an insect, snake, rodent, bird, or animal, capable of mechanically or biologically transferring a pathogen from one organism to another. 
    Waste means: 
(1)  The term "bulky waste" means large objects or stable matter with weights, dimensions and/or proportions greater than those allowed in basic collection, including but not limited to stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture, and brush. This definition shall exclude household waste, bagged household waste, contractor generated construction and demolition waste, dead animals or hazardous waste. 
(2)  The term "construction demolition waste" means waste resulting from construction or demolition projects; includes all materials that are directly or indirectly the by-products of construction work or that result from renovation, or demolition of buildings and other structures, including, but not limited to, paper, cartons, gypsum board, wood, concrete, rubber and plastics. 
(3)  The term "garbage" means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
(4)  The term "hazardous waste" means any solid or liquid waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the Administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, 42 USC 6901 et seq., as amended. 
(5)  The term "household waste" means any solid waste (including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks) derived from households (including single and multiple residences, hotels, and motels, bunkhouses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day-use recreation areas); excluding yard waste or brush that is completely free of any household wastes. 
(6)  The term "industrial solid waste" means solid waste resulting from or incidental to any process of industry, manufacturing, mining, or agricultural operations. 
(7)  The term "infectious wastes" means waste material containing pathogens or biologically active materials which because of its type, concentration, and quality are capable of transmitting disease to persons exposed to the waste materials. 
(8)  The term "liquid waste" means any waste material that is determined to contain "free liquids" as defined by EPA Method 9095 (Paint Filter Test) as described in "Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Wastes, Physical/Chemical methods" (EPA Publication Number SW-846). 
(9)  The term "medical waste" means animal waste, bulk blood and blood products, microbiological waste, pathological waste, sharps, and special waste from healthcare-related facilities as those terms are defined in 25 T.A.C. 1.132 (Tex. Dept. of Health Services, Definition, Treatment and Disposition of Special Waste from Health Care-Related Facilities). The term "medical waste" excludes artificial, non-human materials removed from a patient and requested by the patient, including, but not limited to, orthopedic devices and breast implants. 
(10)  The term "municipal solid waste" means solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial, institutional, and recreational activity, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals, abandoned vehicles, and all other waste, excluding industrial solid waste and hazardous waste or substances. 
(11)  The term "putrescible waste" means organic wastes, such as garbage, wastewater treatment plant sludge, and grease interceptor waste, that is capable of being decomposed by microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause odors or gases or is capable of providing food for or attracting birds, animals, and disease vectors. 
(12)  The term "special waste" means any solid waste or combination of solid wastes that because of its quantity, concentration, physical or chemical characteristics, or biological properties requires special handling and disposal to protect human health or the environment. If improperly handled, transported, stored, processed or disposed of or otherwise managed, it may pose a present or potential danger to the human health or the environment. 
(13)  The term "unprepared solid waste" means any solid waste garbage, brush, rubbish or yard waste which has not been placed in an approved container or prepared for collection and is in contact with the ground, regardless of surface. 
    Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
    White goods means major appliances such as refrigerators, freezers, washing machines, dryers, hot water heaters, stoves, dishwashers, etc. 
    Xeriscape means a method of landscaping which conserves water through the use of specific principles of design, plant selection, installation, maintenance, and irrigation methods. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-1(A) ; Ord. No. 2017-3866,  11-1(A), 3-23-2017; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-2. - Fines and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates or fails to comply with a provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. 
(b)  In addition to any fines and/or penalties the customer is subject to all costs (labor, equipment, materials, and contractors) incurred by the City for the remediation caused by the violation. 
(c)  The customer will also be subject to all reconnect fees if any utility service had been disconnected because of the violation. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-1(H)) 
Sec. 40-3. - Creation of municipal utility districts. 
(a)  District defined. In this section, the term "district" means any municipal utility district, created and operating under the authority granted by Section 59, Article XVI of the Texas Constitution. 
(b)  Compliance with policies. Any municipal utility district to be created within the City or its extraterritorial jurisdiction must, as a condition of its creation, comply with written policies adopted by the City Council. 
(c)  Reimbursement for expenses. 
(1)  Petition to create district. Within six months after consent to the creation of a district is given by the City, or within three months after the district is created by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or its successor agency, whichever is later, the owner or the developer of the land within the district must pay the fee established pursuant to Section 2-117 to reimburse the City for expenses relating to processing the petition to create the district. 
(2)  Petition to annex or acquire land. To partially reimburse the City for expenses related to a district's annexation or acquisition of land, the owner or developer of land within the district that has not paid the Council-approved fee to process the petition to create the district must make a one time payment in the amount established pursuant to Section 2-117 within six months after receiving the City's consent to annex or after the district acquires land that is: 
a.  Not contiguous to the district's boundaries; or 
b.  Contiguous to the district's boundaries and greater than five acres. 
(3)  Infrastructure plan review and inspection fee. 
a.  Defined. The infrastructure plan review and inspection fee means the fee established pursuant to Section 2-117 to reimburse the City for engineering and planning fees and expenses related to the City's: 
1.  Review of plans and specification of the district's facilities; and 
2.  Inspection of the district's facilities. 
b.  When fee required. In addition to the other district fees required by this section, the owner or developer of land within a district that constructs public infrastructure must pay the City the infrastructure plan review and inspection fee when a district: 
1.  Is created; or 
2.  Annexes new land into the district or acquires land, and public infrastructure improvements are constructed in the newly annexed or acquired area. 
c.  When paid. The infrastructure plan review and inspection fee must be paid each time the owner or developer of land within the district requests: 
1.  The City's initial acceptance of the public infrastructure located in the City limits; or 
2.  A letter from the City confirming that the public infrastructure within the district located in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction complies with the City's ordinances and regulations applicable to public infrastructure within the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-12) 
Sec. 40-4. - Roadway maintenance fee. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Category or categories means one of 65 categories recognized in Table 1: Land Use Codes of the ITE Trip Generation Handbook 3rd Edition determined from the land uses of the nonresidential customers. 
    City limits means the City limits of College Station as they exist on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived and as they may be amended from time to time. 
    Roadway maintenance fee means the fee that is established by this section which is assessed against, and collected from, owners or occupants of benefitted property within City limits for the purpose of planning, constructing, operating, monitoring and maintaining the transportation system of the City. 
    Tier means one of five tiers established per trip factor index calculations and the monthly base rate established for each tier. 
    Transportation system or road system means the structures, traffic controls, streets and other facilities in the public right-of-way, such as bridges, sidewalks and alleys which are dedicated to the use of motor vehicles, transit, bicycles and pedestrians, all of which are owned and/or controlled in whole by the City and which are dedicated to the transportation system service of the City, including provisions for additions, improvements and extensions to such system. 
    Utility customer means the holder of a City utility account or the person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, governmental entity or other entity responsible for the payment of the road maintenance fee. 
(b)  Establishment and revision of roadway maintenance fee. 
(1)  The City Council hereby establishes a roadway maintenance fee to be paid by utility customers within the City limits. Such roadway maintenance fee shall be set in amounts which will provide sufficient funds to properly maintain the transportation system. 
(2)  Collection of the roadway maintenance fee against each benefitted property shall be made by a monthly charge to be added to the utility customer's utility bill for such property. 
(3)  The City Council has established a fee schedule based upon the cost of maintaining the transportation system as shown in Exhibit A which is attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived and incorporated by reference herein. Such fee schedule may be amended by the City Council based upon changes in the cost of maintaining the transportation system. 
(c)  Transportation fund. 
(1)  A separate fund shall be created effective January 1, 2017, known as the roadway maintenance fund. All roadway maintenance fees shall be deposited in the roadway maintenance fund. It shall not be necessary for the expenditures from the roadway maintenance fund to specifically relate to any particular property from which the roadway maintenance fees were collected. 
(2)  An annual report of the roadway maintenance fund and the roadway maintenance fee program will be provided to the City Council. 
(d)  Findings. 
(1)  The number of motor vehicle trips and the average length of those trips generated by a benefitted property may reasonably be used to estimate the apportioned cost of the transportation system attributable to a benefitted property. 
(2)  The characteristics and use of a benefitted property may reasonably be used to estimate the number and length of motor vehicle trips generated by the benefitted property. 
(3)  Based on the best available data, the method of imposing the roadway maintenance fee reasonably apportions the cost of the transportation system among the benefitted properties. 
(4)  It is reasonable and equitable to impose a set monthly road maintenance fee per each benefitted property. 
(5)  It is reasonable and equitable to use trip generation rates for benefitted property from the Trip Generation Manual, 9th Edition, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Further, it is reasonable and equitable to use trip lengths derived from travel model statistics of the area to yield a vehicle-mile service unit generation for specific land uses. 
(6)  It is reasonable and equitable to consider trip generation rates from the City's 2015 Roadway Impact Fee Study in determining the trip factor used for each benefitted property. 
(e)  Determination of fee. 
(1)  Collection of the roadway maintenance fee shall be based on each benefitted property's reasonably equitable share in the total number of vehicle miles generated by all property within the City limits. The reasonably equitable share depends on the type of land use and the calculated vehicle miles per development unit (also referred to as Transportation Demand Factor) provided in the Land Use/Vehicle-Mile Equivalency Table (LUVMET) in Attachment A of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(2)  The trip generation rates listed in the LUVMET are derived from the Trip Generation Manual, 9th Edition, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, and are the number of trips anticipated to and from a benefitted property per its land use and established units during the p.m. peak hour. 
(3)  For applicable nonresidential land uses, the trip generation rate is reduced to account for "pass-by trips" to obtain trip rates. 
(4)  Trip rates are multiplied by the average trip length (miles) specific to the land use category to obtain the transportation demand factor expressed as vehicle miles per development unit for each land use category. 
(5)  Each benefitted property is assigned a land use category identified in the LUVMET, and the size of the benefitted property in terms of number of development units is obtained from appraisal district property tax records or other reliable sources, as applicable. 
(6)  For each benefitted property, the transportation demand factor from the LUVMET is multiplied by the number of development units to calculate the transportation demand generated by that benefitted property in terms of vehicle miles. 
(7)  The reasonably equitable share of each benefitted property in the total roadway maintenance fee per billing period is calculated as a function of the transportation demand generated by a benefitted property to the total transportation demand generated by all benefitted properties. 
(f)  Billing and collection of fee. The roadway maintenance fee shall be billed and collected with the monthly utility bill. All such bills shall be rendered monthly and shall be due upon receipt. 
(g)  Recovery of unpaid fee. Any roadway maintenance fee due hereunder which is not paid when due may be recovered in action at law by the City. In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this section or this Code, failure of any utility customer to pay the roadway maintenance fee promptly when due shall subject such utility customer to the discontinuance of utility services provided by the City. 
(h)  Administration; rules and regulations. The City Manager or designee shall be responsible for the administration of this section. The City Manager or designee shall be responsible for developing rules, regulations and procedures for the administration of fees and the consideration of petitions for modification and appeals pertaining to the fees charged hereunder; developing maintenance programs; and establishing transportation system criteria and standards for the operation and maintenance of the transportation system. 
(i)  Disposition of fees and charges. 
(1)  The roadway maintenance fee shall not be used for the general government proprietary purposes of the City, except to pay for the equitable share of the cost of accounting, management and government thereof. 
(2)  Other than as described above, the roadway maintenance fee shall be used solely to pay for the costs of operation, administration, planning, engineering, development of guidelines and controls, inspection, maintenance, repair, improvement, renewal, replacement and reconstruction of the transportation system and costs incidental thereto. 
(j)  Exemption. 
(1)  The City reserves the right to exempt properties from provisions of this section through Council action. 
(2)  The following properties are exempted from the provisions of this section: 
a.  Property owned by the College Station Independent School District. 
b.  Property owned by Texas A&M University. 
c.  Property owned by the Texas A&M University System. 
(k)  Appeals. 
(1)  A utility customer may appeal the roadway maintenance fee established herein pursuant to the procedure set forth in this section and as set out in any process developed by the City Manager pursuant to Subsection (h) of this section. 
(2)  An appeal shall be in writing and submitted to the City Manager or designee within 14 calendar days after the date of the public utility billing statement containing the matter to be disputed. 
(3)  Appeals may be submitted for the following reasons: 
a.  The utility customer's exempt property has been assessed a roadway maintenance fee; 
b.  A roadway maintenance fee for the utility customer's benefitted property is assessed in duplicate on multiple utility accounts; 
c.  A roadway maintenance fee is assessed to the utility customer's property outside the City limits; 
d.  A roadway maintenance fee assessed against the utility customer's benefitted property is incorrect due to improper property characterization, such as land use, building square footage or other relevant property characterization; or 
e.  A roadway maintenance fee is assessed for a benefitted property unaffiliated to the utility customer's utility account. 
(4)  The City Manager or designee shall render a written decision on such appeals within a reasonable time after receipt of a timely written notice of appeal from the utility customer. This decision will be final. 
(5)  During all periods of appeal the utility customer shall be responsible for payment of roadway maintenance fee charges in full. 
(6)  A utility customer appealing the roadway maintenance fee may not receive a refund resulting from the appeal except for a road maintenance fee paid within six months of the date of the utility customer's notice of appeal. 
(l)  Periodic review of rates. The City Council will periodically review this section and the roadway maintenance fee and shall be obligated to review them no later than in the first month following the third anniversary date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3833, pt. 1(exh. A(11-14)), 11-10-2016) 
Sec. 40-5. - Deposits and administrative charges for utility service. 
(a)  Administrative charges. Any person desiring utility service from the City shall be required to pay an administrative charge covering the cost of labor for the connection of utility service. 
(b)  Deposits. Deposits will be required from all customers, unless they are exempt from such deposit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-1(B)) 
Sec. 40-6. - Residential service. 
(a)  Deposits required. Residential customers shall make a deposit in the amount of 1 1/2 times the estimated average monthly bill for their service location for the preceding year. 
(b)  Deposit exemptions. 
(1)  The owner of the location is exempt from a deposit, unless the account is paid late more than two times in a 12-month period or the account is disconnected for nonpayment. 
(2)  Any customer that enrolls in auto pay is exempt for a deposit, unless there is a returned payment. 
(c)  Deposit returned. Residential customers who have 24 consecutive months of service with not more than two late payments may request that the deposit be returned to them by the City. The deposit will be applied to their utility account. A subsequent failure to maintain a good payment history shall be deemed as just cause to require a subsequent cash deposit. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-1(C)) 
Sec. 40-7. - Commercial and industrial customers. 
(a)  Deposits required. Any commercial or industrial customer shall make a deposit with the City in an amount sufficient to cover the average utility bill for a two-month period. An average of the location's last 12 monthly bills, or an estimate of the annual bill amounts shall be used in computing the minimum deposit. Such deposit may be made in the form of cash, the pledging and assignment of a certificate of deposit, a valid non-documentary bank letter of credit, or placement of a surety bond with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State, with the best bond rating as accepted by the City. 
(b)  Deposit exemptions. Commercial and industrial customers who provide an acceptable letter of credit from a previous utility company showing at least 24 months of service with no late payments, no returned checks and no disconnects for nonpayment in the most recent 12-month period will be exempt from deposit. Failure to maintain a good payment record shall be deemed as just cause to require a deposit as outlined in Subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Deposit returned. Commercial and industrial customers who have 24 consecutive months of service and have no late payments in the last 12 months may request that their deposit be released by the City. A subsequent failure to maintain a good payment record shall be deemed as just cause to require a deposit as outlined in Subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-1(D)) 
Sec. 40-8. - Access to meters. 
(a)  The provision of utilities is a contract entered into by the City and its customers. The customer shall provide access to meters for reading and service; and in view of that fact, no authorized City representative shall be denied access to meters. Adequate access is a condition precedent to the receipt of utility service from the City. Access is also a requirement of continued service. Failure to provide access shall be the basis for termination of service. For the purposes of this section, the term "adequate access" is defined as the ability of an authorized City representative to get to a meter without visual aids or without the presence of the customer. Adequate access also requires the authorized City representative to be able to get to a meter without threat of bodily injury. 
(b)  If an authorized City representative determines that there is not adequate access, the representative will so notify the property owner by tagging the door of the premises. The representative will tag the premises no more than on three separate occasions. Utility usage will be estimated during these billing periods. On the fourth occasion access is denied, the City will notify the customer in writing, by certified letter, giving the customer ten days to provide access. Failure to come into compliance within the ten-day period shall be grounds for termination of service. In the event that the customer has not come into compliance within ten days, the customer will be charged the actual cost of disconnection and reconnection of service whether or not service is actually terminated. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-1(E)) 
Sec. 40-9. - Certain conduct affecting water meters prohibited. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. Unless written permission is first obtained from the City, it shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee of the City within the Utilities Department, to knowingly or intentionally, or otherwise: 
(1)  Tap onto or connect or cause to be tapped onto or connected any pipe with any water distribution main or line owned by said City; 
(2)  Disconnect or cause to be disconnected any such water meter from any such water distribution main or line owned by said City; 
(3)  Remove or cause to be removed the cover from any such water meter. 
(b)  Violation. A violation of any portion or provision of this section shall constitute prima facie evidence against the person having subscribed for water service or the person having the custody, control, or management of the building, room, or place for which such subscription is made. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-1(F); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-10. - Certain conduct affecting electrical meters prohibited. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an officer or employee of the City within the Utilities Department, Building Official or designee or Fire Department, to knowingly or intentionally, or otherwise: 
(1)  Remove or cause to be removed any electrical meter owned by said City from any electrical meter terminal box; 
(2)  Remove or cause to be removed the cover or any other part or portion from any such meter or terminal box, or loosen or cause to be loosened any part or portion thereof; 
(3)  Insert or cause to be inserted any foreign object or inject or cause to be injected any foreign substance into any such meter or terminal box; 
(4)  Make or cause to be made any adjustment in the mechanism of any such meter or terminal box; 
(5)  Tap onto or connect or cause to be tapped onto or connected any wire to the supply conductor of any such terminal box; 
(6)  To deny access at any time to any meter by enclosing the meter within a fence without available means of passage, or by enclosing the meter within any structure; 
(7)  To deny access at any time to any meter by harboring vicious or threatening animals in the vicinity of the meter. 
(b)  Defense to prosecution. In the prosecution of any offense charged under Subsection (a) of this section, it shall be a complete defense to such offense if the person charged shows to the court by legal and competent evidence that such meter was removed for purpose of protecting life or preserving property from being immediately threatened by a fire on the premises served by such meter; that such meter was removed for the purpose of preventing a fire to the structure served by it due to a short circuiting in the electrical conductor between the terminal box in which such meter was housed and a main line switch or fuse box; or that such meter was removed by a duly licensed electrician to facilitate the repair of defective electrical conductor or for checking supply voltage, and at a time when an employee of the City within College Station Utilities was not available to remove such meter. 
(c)  Removal by licensed electrician. In the event of the removal of any electrical meter by a duly licensed electrician under the circumstances enumerated in Division 1 of Article III of this chapter, the fact of such removal and the circumstances permitting the same must be reported to the Superintendent of the Electric Division of College Station Utilities by such electrician not later than one hour after the commencement of the work day of such municipal employee next following such removal. 
(d)  Violation. A violation of any portion or provision of this section shall constitute prima facie evidence against the person having subscribed for electric service or the person having the custody, control, or management of the building, room, or place for which such subscription is made. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-1(G); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-11. - Payment of bills. 
    Payments must be received at the Utility Customer Service Office on or before the due date to avoid late charges. Payments received after the due date will be assessed a penalty equaling ten percent of the current monthly charges with a minimum charge established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-1(I); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-12. - Returned check fee. 
    A fee established in Section 2-117 will be charged for each returned check used to pay any amount on a utility account. This fee is in addition to other fees owed to the City for utility services. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-1(J); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-13. - Disconnection and reconnections. 
(a)  When utility connections may be severed. 
(1)  All utility connections may be severed for any customer who fails to pay all or any part of the total bill by the due date. 
(2)  Any person found to be in violation of any section of this article shall be served a written notice stating the nature of the violation. The City is authorized to immediately disconnect the offending person's service upon such notice and to not reconnect the service as long as the violation continues. 
(b)  Restoration of services. 
(1)  When connections for services have been severed, or are considered to be severed, the same shall be restored only when all amounts past due to the City have been paid in full. 
a.  A delinquent fee established in Section 2-117 will be charged on each residential account. 
b.  A delinquent fee established in Section 2-117 will be charged on each commercial account. 
(2)  All connections, reconnections and disconnections shall be made only by an authorized representative of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-1(K); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-14. - Utility service to illegally subdivided lots. 
    The City will not serve or connect any lot or parcel with utility services if said lot or parcel has been illegally subdivided. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-1(L)) 
Sec. 40-15. - Account creation fee. 
    All customers creating a utility account or opening additional account numbers shall pay a fee for creating a utility account, regardless the number of services provided by the City for that account; established in Section 2-117. 
(Ord. No. 2017-3938 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-25-2017) 
Secs. 40-16-40-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-32. - Water and sewer connections. 
    All customers connecting to the water or sewerage system within or outside the corporate limits of the City will have connection, service and usage charges as established in this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-2(A)) 
Sec. 40-33. - Sewer connections required. 
(a)  Proximity to public sewer. Every owner of a building or part thereof occupied by people for any purpose, any part of the day or night, situated on any City block in the City where a public sewer is laid and maintained within 150 feet from the nearest lot line on which said building is located is required to install within said building or part of a building the plumbing fixtures as required in Article III of Chapter 34 and have them connected to the sewer. Owners of buildings coming within the terms of this subsection and located on acreage tracts shall be required to install the plumbing fixtures as required in Article III of Chapter 34 and connect same to the sewer if the said building at its nearest point is within 250 feet of the sewer. Said plumbing fixtures shall, when required, discharge into the sewer. 
(b)  Workmanship and materials. All workmanship and materials used in installing water closets required under this section shall comply with the requirements of Article III of Chapter 34. 
(c)  Written notice. Written notice shall be given by the City to property owners violating subsection (a) of this section, said notice to inform the property owner that the water closet shall be installed and sewer connection made not later than 60 days after date of the notice. 
(d)  Contractors to provide facilities. Contractors and others who employ workmen outside of buildings shall provide water closet facilities acceptable to the City, within 24 hours of time of notice of such requirement. Said facilities shall be maintained in sanitary condition. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-2(B)) 
Sec. 40-34. - Submetering. 
    All structures containing multiple residential units, manufactured home rental communities and multiple use facilities, as those terms are defined in the City Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A) and Texas Water Code ch. 13, subch. M (Texas Water Code  13.501 et seq.), on which construction began after January 1, 2003, that are located within the City's water service area shall provide for the measurement of the quantity of water, if any, consumed by the occupants of each unit through the installation of one of the following, as required by the State: 
(1)  Individual meters owned by the City for each unit. The City shall determine the feasibility of connecting individual water meters to the City's water lines for each unit. 
(2)  Submeters, owned by the property owner or manager and supplied by a City master water meter, for each residential unit or rental unit. Standard specifications applicable to regular meter sets shall apply to submeters; provided, however, that this requirement shall not apply if an exception under State law applies. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-2(C)) 
Sec. 40-35. - Private lateral lines. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Director means the Director of the City Water Services Department or designee. 
    Private lateral means the segment of privately owned sanitary sewer line typically located on private property and all related appliances, apparatus and interconnects that in turn ultimately connect to the City's sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  Owner maintenance required. The owner of a private lateral must operate, repair and maintain same so as to not detrimentally affect the City's sanitary sewer system nor impair the City's provision of sanitary sewer services. This includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Clearing the private lateral of obstructions; 
(2)  Maintaining and operating the private lateral so as to prohibit the introduction of extraneous flow, including stormwater, or debris into the City's public sanitary sewer system; 
(3)  Keeping manhole covers and clean-out caps in place, secure, and in good repair; 
(4)  Ensuring there is no discharge from or cause attributable to the condition of the private lateral that directly or indirectly obstructs, harms, violates applicable laws and regulations or that otherwise endangers the general public or the integrity of the City's sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  Right of entry. In accordance with applicable law, the Director or any duly authorized employees and agents of the City, when bearing proper credentials and identification, may enter properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing to determine if the private lateral is in compliance with the provisions herein. 
(d)  Repairs. City officials may direct the repair, abatement, removal, disconnection or destruction of all or portions of the private laterals as they reasonably determine necessary and appropriate to ensure the integrity of the City sanitary sewer system and to ensure the overall health, safety and welfare of the general public. City officials shall follow applicable law and procedures in enforcing the foregoing. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-2(E)) 
Sec. 40-36. - Fire lines. 
(a)  Fire line. A fire line is a potable water service line that is under the ownership and control of the City and dedicated to the support of a fire hydrant. All fire lines and fire hydrants shall be within City easements; owned, operated, and maintained by the City. All fire lines shall have an isolation valve. 
(b)  Fire suppression lines. A fire suppression line is a potable water customer service line that is privately owned, supports a fire suppression system, and is separate and apart from a fire line. The City's fire lines shall terminate at the isolation valve, at which point the fire suppression line begins. In the absence of an isolation valve, the City's fire line ends at the edge of either the easement in which the water main is located or street right-of-way, whichever is closer to the building. 
(1)  Isolation valve required. All fire suppression lines shall have a lockable lid on the City's isolation valve. The lockable lid shall, at a minimum, supply the equivalent protection as the AMPro USA, LL562 Locking Lid. Alternate lockable lids shall be approved by the College Station Utilities Director or designee. 
(2)  Taps prohibited. Taps are prohibited on all fire suppression lines. 
(c)  Design and construction. Design, construction and installation of all fire lines and fire suppression lines shall be in compliance with all applicable City codes and the Bryan College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Specifications and Details. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-11) 
Sec. 40-37. - Water Conservation Plan. 
    In accordance with the rules of the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Rules located in 30 T.A.C. 288, the City has adopted a Water Conservation Plan. A copy of the City's Water Conservation Plan will be maintained on file with the City Secretary. This Water Conservation Plan underlies the City's commitment to provide its customers a safe, reliable water supply. The City will evaluate the Plan on an annual basis in accordance with current Federal and State regulations and modify accordingly. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-8) 
Secs. 40-38-40-62. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES, USAGE CHARGES AND FEES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal jurisdiction over water and sewer utility rates, operations and services, Texas Water Code  13.042; water system in home rule municipality, Texas Local Government Code  552.017. 

Sec. 40-63. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-3938 , Pt. 2(Exh. B), adopted Sept. 25, 2017, repealed  40-63, which pertained to connection fees required for water service and derived from Code 2011 (Repub),  11-2(D)(1). 
Sec. 40-64. - Rates for water service. 
    All retail customers using water shall have a monthly service charge based on the water meter size and a monthly usage charge as follows: 
(1)  Service charge: Established in Section 2-117. 
(2)  Residential usage charge: Defined to be a domestic meter or irrigation meter serving a residence with one or two living units; established in Section 2-117. 
(3)  Commercial usage charge: Defined to be a meter serving three or more living units or any commercial location, providing water for domestic usage; established in Section 2-117. 
(4)  Commercial irrigation usage charge: Defined to be a meter serving a commercial customer dedicated for non-domestic usage; established in Section 2-117. 
(5)  Water services provided under contract: All customers receiving water service under contract where the water rates or surcharges, or both, are addressed in the contract shall pay the rates or surcharges or both, as specified in the contract. 
(6)  Residential and commercial customers in Brazos County Municipal Utility District #1 shall pay all established rates, with an additional fifty-percent (50%) surcharge; established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-2(D)(2); Ord. No. 2016-3832, pt. 1(exh. A), 11-10-2016; altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2017-3938 , Pt. 2(Exh. B), 9-25-2017) 
Sec. 40-65. - Rates for sewerage service. 
(a)  For customers using sewerage service for household purposes, where City water service is provided with a meter for each residential unit, the monthly charges shall be as follows: 
(1)  Service charge: Established in Section 2-117. 
(2)  Usage charge: Established in Section 2-117. 
(3)  Maximum billing: Established in Section 2-117. 
(b)  For customers using sewerage service for household purposes, multifamily residences with kitchen facilities in each residential unit where water service is provided without a meter for each residential unit shall pay a monthly charge per household unit as established in Section 2-117. 
(c)  For customers using sewerage service for household purposes, multifamily residences with more than 50 units without kitchen facilities in each unit shall pay a monthly charge as established in Section 2-117. 
(d)  For customers using sewerage service for household purposes, multifamily residences having 50 residential units or less without kitchen facilities in each residential unit, where water service is provided without a meter for each residential unit such as, but not limited to, fraternity houses, sorority houses, boardinghouses and privately owned student dorms, the monthly charges shall be as follows: 
(1)  Service charge as established in Section 2-117. 
(2)  Usage charge as established in Section 2-117. 
(e)  For customers using sewerage service for commercial and/or industrial business establishments, the monthly charges shall be as follows: 
(1)  Service charge as established in Section 2-117. 
(2)  Usage charge as established in Section 2-117. 
(f)  For customers outside the City water service area (where City water meters do not exist), using City sewerage service for commercial and/or industrial business establishments the customer will be charged a monthly rate, based on average rounded water use for the previous 12 months, the monthly charges shall be as follows: 
(1)  Service charge as established in Section 2-117. 
(2)  Usage charge as established in Section 2-117. 
(g)  For customers outside the City water service area (where City water meters do not exist), using City sewerage service for household purposes, the customer will be charged the monthly rate as set out in section 2-117 for 10,000 gallons per month, unless the customer establishes, as determined by the City Manager, that the average rounded water usage is less than 9,001 gallons per month in which case the customer will be charged the amount established in Section 2-117. 
(h)  For customers where sewerage service is provided through a satellite wastewater treatment plant not connected to the City's main sewer collection and treatment system (typically outside the corporate limits of the City) the monthly charge per residential unit is as established in Section 2-117. 
(i)  Subject to available capacity under present City demand requirements, present system capability, anticipated demand requirements, and anticipated system capability, the City Council may enter into contracts for the sale of sanitary sewer service to wholesale customers outside the City's corporate limits. 
(j)  All customers receiving sewer service under contract where the sewer rates are not addressed in the contract shall pay 1.15 times the amounts established in Section 2-117. 
(k)  Sewer services provided under contract. All customers receiving sewer service under contract where the sewer rates or surcharges, or both, are addressed in the contract shall pay the rates or surcharges, or both, as specified in the contract. 
(l)  Residential and commercial customers in Brazos County Municipal Utility District #1 shall pay all established rates, with an additional fifty-percent (50%) surcharge; established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-2(D)(3); Ord. No. 2016-3812, exh. A(11-2), 9-22-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3832, pt. 1(exh. A), 11-10-2016; altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2017-3938 , Pt. 2(Exh. B), 9-25-2017) 
Sec. 40-66. - Water and sewer service connection fees, and sewer inspection fees. 
    The City shall set-in all or direct the set-in of all water meters and shall inspect all water and sewer taps and connections to the City water and/or sewer system. All connections shall be made in accordance with the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines and Technical Specifications. 
(1)  Fee for water service connection. The City will charge a service charge to all customers connecting to the water system within or outside the corporate limits of the City. The service charge will be based on water meter size. 
a.  The water service connection fee shall apply to all connections to the water system, including meter set-ins. The service charge for water connection is as established in Section 2-117. 
b.  For three-inch and larger water meters, a service charge established in Section 2-117 will be assessed and includes only an inspection fee. Meters of this size must be purchased by the developer that meet current City specifications. The developer is responsible for contracting a licensed/bonded contractor, acquiring applicable permits to install the service connection in accordance with City specifications, and is to be inspected by the City before meter is placed into service. 
c.  Redevelopment and/or subdivision of property. When the use of an existing residential parcel is changed, such that the existing water service is no longer appropriate, the owner or developer is responsible for installing new taps and service stub outs for each new lot or building plot. All work must be performed by a licensed contractor, inspected by the City, and installed in accordance with the City's specifications and details. The City will install a water meter and meter enclosure once the owner completes the service line work and the respective service connection fee is paid. 
d.  Street crossing charge; water. For properties not being subdivided or redeveloped, requested water service connections which require crossing a street, thoroughfare, improved alley or any appurtenance or portion thereof, an additional charge will be assessed based on length, depth, site conditions, conflicts, etc. The owner will be required to be pay a determined amount before any work is to commence by the City. 
(2)  Fee for sewer service connection. All customers connecting to the sewerage system within or outside the corporate limits of the City will have a service charge based on sewer connection size. 
a.  The service charge for sewer connection is as established in Section 2-117. 
b.  For all six-inch/nonresidential sewer connections, the service charge includes only an inspection fee. Developer is responsible for contracting a licensed/bonded contractor, acquiring applicable permits to install the service connection in accordance with City specifications, and is subject to City inspection. 
c.  Redevelopment and/or subdivision of property. When the use of an existing residential parcel is changed, such that the existing wastewater service is no longer appropriate, the owner or developer is responsible for installing new taps and service stub outs for each new lot or building plot. All work must be performed by a licensed contractor, inspected by the City, and installed in accordance with the City's specifications and details. The City will install a clean-out with an enclosure once the owner completes the service line work and the respective service connection fee is paid. 
d.  Street crossing charge; sewer. For properties not being subdivided or redeveloped, requested sewer service connections which require crossing of a street, thoroughfare, improved alley or any appurtenance or portion thereof, an additional charge will be assessed based on length, depth, site conditions, conflicts, etc. The owner will be required to be pay a determined amount before any work is to commence by the City. 
(3)  Materials and equipment. All materials and equipment used in making any utility connection remains the property of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-2(D)(4); Ord. No. 2016-3812, exh. A(11-2), 9-22-2016; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-67. - Fire flow testing. 
    For customers requesting a fire flow test on the existing City water system, an additional charge established in Section 2-117 will be assessed. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-2(D)(5); Ord. No. 2016-3812, exh. A(11-2), 9-22-2016; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-68. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
    The City shall be notified of any new service locations or changes in service levels. The City can require changes in service levels at any location when the current service is inadequate or is causing a health or service problem. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-2(D)(6); Ord. No. 2016-3812, exh. A(11-2), 9-22-2016) 
Secs. 40-69-40-94. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXTENSIONS 

Sec. 40-95. - Standards for construction/reimbursement for the extension of water and sewer mains. 
(a)  Standards for construction. All extensions of water and sewer mains shall be constructed in accordance with the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines and Technical Specifications and all applicable Federal and State requirements. Where there is a conflict of standards, the more stringent standard as determined by the City Manager shall apply. The City shall accept for public use only water and sewer main extensions that comply with these standards for construction. 
(b)  Process for acceptance. 
(1)  The owner of a lot or tract of land who constructs a water and/or sewer main extension to extend service to their property (hereinafter referred to as the "developing owner") shall retain a licensed engineer to design and observe construction of the water and/or sewer main extension in accordance with the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines and Technical Specifications and all applicable Federal and State requirements. 
(2)  The developing owner's engineer shall identify lots or tracts that front on the water and/or sewer main extension and that can physically be served by the extension. Each lot or tract identified shall include the legal description, street address and name of the current owner and the total acreage of each tract. Said information shall be submitted to the City. Identification and suitability of service of lots or tracts shall be subject to final approval by the City. 
(3)  Design and construction documents must be reviewed and approved by the City prior to the beginning of construction. 
(4)  The water and/or sewer main extension must be inspected and approved by the City's inspector both during and upon completion of construction. 
(5)  The water and/or sewer main extension may not be made available for public use until the extension is accepted by the City as provided herein. 
(c)  Application for reimbursement. A developing owner who dedicates a water and/or sewer main extension to the City for public use as provided above may be reimbursed for the extension cost from other line users who connect to such extension provided: 
(1)  The developing owner shall file a complete application for reimbursement for costs expended for the design and construction of the water and/or sewer main extension on or before the commencement of construction of such extension with the City. 
a.  The application for reimbursement may be obtained at the Planning and Development Services Department. 
b.  The application shall not be considered complete unless all information requested on the application has been provided by the applicant. All incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant. 
(2)  The water and/or sewer main extension must be constructed and accepted as described in this section. 
(3)  The developing owner must provide an affidavit of bills paid for design and construction costs to the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-3(A)) 
Sec. 40-96. - Connection by subsequent users. 
(a)  After such line has been accepted by the City Engineer for public use, other property owners (hereinafter referred to as "line users") may connect to such line to obtain service, provided that each line user first pays the user's proportionate share for the cost of construction of the line to the City. 
(b)  Payment from each line user shall be due and owing at the time of the issuance of a permit for the connection to the sewer or water main. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-3(B)) 
Sec. 40-97. - Oversize participation. 
(a)  Prior to the construction of a proposed sewer or water main by the developing owner, the City may request that the main be oversized. If the City makes such a request, the developing owner shall be eligible for oversize participation in accordance with the City Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A) as it currently exists or as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Oversize participation payment shall be governed by the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-3(C)) 
Sec. 40-98. - Calculation of rate by acreage. 
(a)  The rate charged to line users shall allocate the cost of the extension on a per acre basis. 
(b)  The rate shall be calculated as follows: 
Rate = Engineering + Construction Costs / Total Acreage Served 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-3(D)) 
Sec. 40-99. - Total acreage charge payable by line users. 
(a)  The per acre rate shall apply to all property regardless of its depth or front footage. 
(b)  If a structure spans across more than one lot or tract of land, the total acreage amount due from that line user shall be based upon the total acreage of all lots occupied by the structure. 
(c)  Should an identified property be subdivided after the rate has been paid by line user, then the terms of this section shall not apply. 
(d)  The charge for line users shall be determined as follows: 
Charge = (Acreage Owned  Rate) 
(e)  The acreage charge for each property to be served by the line or main shall be determined by the City Engineer at the time an application is filed by a developing owner. 
(f)  This section shall be applied to all of the lots or tracts of land accepted for final designation by the City Engineer. 
(g)  The number of lots or tracts designated by the developing owner may not be amended after the City Engineer has calculated the acreage rate. Designated lots or tracts that do not connect to the line shall not be required to pay an acreage charge. 
(h)  Lots or tracts not identified by the developing owner's engineer shall not be subject to acreage charges nor shall the developing owner be reimbursed for undesignated lots or tracts. 
(i)  The developing owner shall not be reimbursed for lots or tracts he or she owns. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-3(E)) 
Sec. 40-100. - Trust fund. 
    The City shall establish a trust fund for the purpose of reimbursing a developing owner for constructing water or sewer mains. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-3(F)) 
Sec. 40-101. - Reimbursement from trust account. 
(a)  The total acreage charge received from subsequent line users for connection to the water or sewer main shall be deposited into the trust fund established for reimbursement of the developing owner by the City. 
(b)  After a line user connects to the sewer or water main, the acreage charge advanced for said tract shall be refunded to the developing owner from the trust account. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-3(G)) 
Sec. 40-102. - Notification. 
(a)  It is the developing owner's responsibility to notify the City Fiscal Department of any change of address or account number established by the developing owner for payment. 
(b)  Should the developing owner fail to notify the City and payment made by the City is returned, such reimbursements shall be retained in the trust account until such time that the developing owner contacts the City Fiscal Department either in person to collect any outstanding reimbursement or provides a new address in writing to which reimbursements may be mailed. 
(c)  The city will notify potential line users as identified by the developing owner of the water/sewer main installation as follows: 
(1)  Upon submittal by the developing owner of the engineer's cost estimate; and 
(2)  Upon the commencement of construction of said line. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-3(H)) 
Sec. 40-103. - Nonliability. 
    The City shall not be liable for its failure to collect any acreage charges from designated lots or tracts from line users. However, this shall not prevent any developing owner from pursuing the collection of these charges individually. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-3(I)) 
Sec. 40-104. - Applicability. 
    The above methods shall be available only for use by a property owner to secure water and/or sanitary sewer service for their property. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-3(J)) 
Sec. 40-105. - Foxfire and sandstone subdivisions sanitary sewer service master plan and enforcement. 
(a)  Master plan interpretation, implementation and enforcement. The master sanitary sewer plan for the Foxfire drainage basin as prepared by Municipal Development Group dated July 1987 shall be interpreted, implemented and enforced by the Office of the City Engineer for the purpose of providing an efficient sanitary sewer system to serve the area. 
(b)  Design of sewer lines. Sewer lines shall be designed and constructed with the approval and inspection of the City Engineer in accordance with all City standards. The design shall comply with the location, provide the same capacity (as a minimum) and serve the area as described in the Design Report for Master Sanitary Sewer Plan for Foxfire Area, College Station, Brazos County, Texas, July 1987. 
(c)  Compliance. Compliance shall be a prerequisite to the City maintaining the line extension as a part of its public infrastructure system and providing sanitary sewer service to the residents in the designated Foxfire drainage basin. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-3(K)) 
Secs. 40-106-40-123. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INDUSTRIAL WASTE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 40-124. - Title. 
    This division is and may be cited as the "City of College Station, Texas, Industrial Waste Regulations." 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(A)) 
Sec. 40-125. - Purpose. 
(a)  This division sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributions into the POTW for the City and enables the City to comply with all applicable Federal and State laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with their operation, or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will pass through the wastewater treatment plant, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with either the collection system or the treatment plant; 
(3)  To protect both collection system and treatment plant personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the treatment plant; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the collection system and the treatment plant; and 
(6)  To enable the City to comply with its Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other applicable Federal or State laws to which the City is subject. 
(b)  This division shall apply to all customers of the City's POTW. This division provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities, issuing permits, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs for the collection and treatment of wastewater. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(B)) 
Sec. 40-126. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this division, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD means biochemical oxygen demand. 
CFR means Code of Federal Regulations. 
COD means chemical oxygen demand. 
EPA means U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
FOG means fats, oils and greases. 
gpd means gallons per day. 
mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
NPDES means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
POTW means publicly owned treatment works. 
RCRA means Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
SIC means standard industrial classification. 
TPDES means Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
TSS means total suspended solids. 
USC means United States Code. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(C)) 
Secs. 40-127-40-150. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Prohibited Discharges 

Sec. 40-151. - General prohibitions. 
    No customer shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all customers of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(D)(1)) 
Sec. 40-152. - Specific prohibitions. 
    No customer shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 (Code of Federal Regulations Title 40 Protection of the Environment, Chapter I Environmental Protection Agency, Part 261, Identification and Listing of Hazardous waste); 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 10.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension; 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit per hour or to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); 
(6)  Oil and grease, petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through, but in no case shall the amount exceed 100 mg/L oil and grease; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the City in accordance with this subdivision; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the City's TPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable Federal or State regulations; 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the City; 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the City; 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Fats, oils, and greases (FOG) of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 200 mg/l. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(D)(2)) 
Sec. 40-153. - Processing or storage. 
    Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this subdivision shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(D)(3)) 
Sec. 40-154. - State pretreatment standards. 
    State pretreatment standards located in T.A.C. ch. 315 as amended are hereby incorporated. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(E)) 
Sec. 40-155. - Local limits. 
(a)  The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits: 
Pollutant Limit mg/l Arsenic 0.05 Benzene 0.0 Beryllium 0.0 BOD5 20 Boron 1.0 Cadmium 0.25 Chromium 3.0 Copper 1.0 Cyanide 1.0 FOG (animal/plant origin) 200 Lead 0.1 Mercury 0.005 Molybdenum 1.0 Nickel 1.0 Oil and grease (petroleum origin) 100 Selenium 0.02 Silver 0.1 Tin 1.0 Total phenols 12.0 Total suspended solids 200 Zinc 5.0  
(b)  The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The City may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(F)) 
Sec. 40-156. - Dilution. 
    No customer shall increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The City may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(G)) 
Sec. 40-157. - Pretreatment or equalization of waste flows. 
(a)  Design and installation. Customers shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this subdivision and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in this subdivision within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State, or the City, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the customer's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the City for review, and shall be acceptable to the City before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the customer from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions of this subdivision. All pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be completed and in operation no later than one year after the ordinance from which this subdivision is derived becomes effective. 
(b)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, the City may require customers to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the customer's compliance with the requirements of this subdivision. 
(2)  The City may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(3)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of regulated wastes, including, but not limited to, grease, oil, and sand. Interceptors shall not be required for residential customers. All interceptors shall be of type and capacity approved by the City and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt changes in temperature and shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(4)  Customers with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(c)  Maintenance of facilities. 
(1)  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner, at the owner's expense. 
(2)  Interceptors shall be inspected, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the customer, at the customer's expense. Additionally, interceptors shall be cleaned (pumped out) on a monthly basis unless size and volume require more frequent cleaning or specific permission for less frequent cleaning has been granted by the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(H)) 
Sec. 40-158. - Interceptors. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contributions and accumulation of wastes, including, but not limited to, fats, oils, greases, sand, and grit, into the City's sanitary sewer system from industrial or commercial customers, including, but not limited to, food preparation and serving facilities, car wash facilities, automotive repair and maintenance shops. 
(b)  Interceptor maintenance, recordkeeping, and grease removal. 
(1)  Grease interceptors shall be installed by all retail and wholesale food preparation establishments. The grease interceptors shall be installed at the customer's expense. Grease interceptors may also be required in non-cooking or cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs establishments and other industrial or commercial customers when they are deemed necessary by the City for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease. All grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated waste (grease cap and sludge pocket) as required to maintain the interceptor above its minimum design capability or effective volume, but not less often than every 30 days, unless a different schedule is established in writing by the City. Customers who are required to pass wastewater through a grease interceptor shall: 
a.  Provide a minimum hydraulic retention time of 24 minutes at actual peak flow or 12 minutes at calculated theoretical peak flow rate as predicted by the adapted plumbing code fixture criteria, between the influent and effluent baffles with 20 percent of the total volume of the grease interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate, identified hereafter as a "sludge pocket." 
b.  Ensure that the grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., which could settle into the sludge pocket and thereby reduce the effective volume of the grease interceptor. 
c.  Ensure that if any skimmed or pumped wastes or other materials are removed from the grease interceptor and treated in any fashion on-site, and then reintroduced back into the grease interceptor as an activity of and after said on-site treatment, the customer shall be responsible for the attainment of established grease numerical limits consistent with and contained in this subdivision on all discharges of wastewater from said grease interceptor discharged into the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. 
d.  Operate the grease interceptor in a manner so as to maintain said device such that attainment of the oil and grease limit is consistently achieved. The term "consistent" shall mean any grab sample taken from said grease interceptor discharge shall be subject to terms of numerical limit attainment described in this subdivision. If an establishment desires, because of documented space constraints, an alternate to an out-of-building grease interceptor, the request for an alternative location shall contain the following information: 
1.  Lot plat containing the building footprint, location of City sewer main and other utilities with their respective easements, and surveyed distances in relation to available exterior space outside of the building. 
2.  Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for all services at that site. 
e.  Keep the area around the grease interceptor free of accumulated fats, oils and greases, and the area around the trap shall not cause an odor or health hazard. 
f.  Maintain a written record (on-site) of interceptor maintenance for a three-year period. All such records, including liquid waste manifests, shall be available for inspection by the City during the normal work week (Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.). 
g.  Ensure that the grease interceptor is cleaned and maintained by a transporter registered with the State. The liquid waste collected shall be disposed of at a State-authorized processing or treatment facility, a liquid waste transfer station, or a municipal solid waste landfill. 
(2)  The use of biological additives as a grease degradation agent is conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval of the City. Any establishment using this method of grease abatement shall maintain the trap or interceptor in such a manner that attainment of the oil and grease discharge limit, as measured from the trap's outlet, is consistently achieved. 
(3)  The use of automatic grease removal systems is conditionally permissible, upon prior written approval of the Director of College Station Utilities, the City Building Official or designee, and the Brazos County Health Department Environmental Health Services. Any establishment using this equipment shall operate the system in such a manner that attainment of the oil and grease discharge limit, as measured from the unit's outlet, is consistently achieved. 
(4)  A 1,000-gallon interceptor shall be a minimum standard for all cooking or food processing establishments. The City reserves the right to make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and need, based on review of all relevant information regarding the proposed grease interceptor performance, facility site inspection and building plan review. The City may require an interceptor of larger capacity, or repairs, modification, or replacement of present traps. 
(5)  If a customer does not agree with the sample results taken by the City, the customer will have the option to have two separate samples collected and analyzed by an independent contractor at the customer's expense. All sampling shall be during the peak wash time for the cooking establishment. The average of the two samples will be accepted as the official discharge results. The City shall have a representative on-site during the sampling. 
(6)  Only sinks used for kitchen utensil and cookware washing, dishwashers, and floor drains in the kitchen area shall be connected to the grease interceptor. Outside covered areas, that are constructed as to exclude all stormwater, with floor drains utilized to wash kitchen vent filters and other grease laden kitchen fixtures may, with the City's approval, be connected to the grease interceptor. 
(7)  Except as provided herein, for a period of one year following adoption of the ordinance from which this subdivision is derived, although installation of grease interceptors shall be required at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this subdivision is derived, no enforcement actions will be taken under this subdivision for failure to achieve discharge limits from grease interceptors. If during this one-year period an obstruction of a City sewer main or lateral occurs and causes a sewer back-up and/or overflow and the back-up or overflow can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of grease or other wastes discharged by the customer into the City's sewer main or lateral, the person is responsible for any costs incurred from damage or stoppages caused by the sewer back-up and/or overflow. The City may bill the person for all direct and indirect costs incurred by the City due to the back-up and/or overflow. 
(8)  Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 30 inches, shall be provided over each grease chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finish grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, liquid waste removal, and discharge sampling activities. 
(c)  Oil, sand, and grit interceptors. 
(1)  If the City permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(2)  When a customer operates a facility whose wastewater is associated with discharges of oil, sand, grit and gravel an interceptor shall be installed. Oil, sand, and grit interceptors shall be installed by the customer as required by the City and at the customer's expense. Facilities required to install grit or grease interceptors include, but are not limited to, automatic and coin operated laundries, car washes, fueling stations, commercial garages or similar businesses having wash or grease racks. Customers who are required to pass wastewater through an oil, sand or grit interceptor shall: 
a.  Maintain ambient fluid temperatures of 40 to 70 degrees Fahrenheit at standard atmospheric conditions; 
b.  Maintain an oil/water specific gravity differential of 0.15; 
c.  Maintain the oil concentration in the wastewater so that it meets all Federal, State and local discharge limits; 
d.  Maintain a written record on-site of interceptor maintenance for three years. All such records, including liquid waste manifests, shall be available for inspection by the City during the normal workweek (Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.). 
(3)  Except as provided herein, for a period of one year following adoption of the ordinance from which this subdivision is derived, although installation of oil, sand, or grit interceptors shall be required at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this subdivision is derived, no enforcement actions will be taken under this subdivision for failure to achieve discharge limits from the interceptors. If during this one-year period an obstruction of a City sewer main or lateral occurs and causes a sewer back-up and/or overflow and the back-up or overflow can be attributed in part or in whole to an accumulation of waste discharged by the customer into the City's sewer main or lateral, the person is responsible for any costs incurred from damage or stoppages caused by the sewer back-up and/or overflow. The City may bill the person for all direct and indirect costs incurred by the City due to the back-up and/or overflow. 
(4)  Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 30 inches, shall be provided over each oil or grit chamber and sanitary tee. The access manholes shall extend at least to finish grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, liquid waste removal, and discharge sampling activities. 
(5)  The grit interceptor shall be cleaned and maintained by a transporter registered with the State. The liquid waste collected shall be disposed of at a State-authorized processing or treatment facility, a liquid waste transfer station, or a municipal solid waste landfill. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(I); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-159. - Surcharge for wastes of abnormal strength. 
    If the City permits the acceptance of wastes of abnormal strength or character for treatment, a surcharge calculated as follows shall be added to the basic sewer charge to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes: 
Surcharge = V[a(FOG - ) + b(BOD - 200) + c(SS - 200)] 
V = Volume discharge in millions of gallons. 
a = FOG surcharge factor (dollars per million gallons per parts per million by weight) based on the treatment costs attributable to the removal of FOG (fats, oils, greases). 
x = 200 when it pertains to an animal or vegetable oil. 
x = 100 when it pertains to petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin. 
b = BOD surcharge factor (dollars per million gallons per parts per million by weight) based on the treatment costs attributable to the removal of BOD (biological oxygen demand). 
c = SS surcharge factor (dollars per million gallons per parts per million by weight) based on the treatment costs attributable to the removal of SS (suspended solids). 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(J)) 
Sec. 40-160. - Industrial waste permit. 
(a)  Who must apply. Any person discharging or proposing to discharge into the public sewers industrial wastes which contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this subdivision shall make application for sewer connection to the City on a form to be furnished by the City. 
(b)  Application procedures and conditions. The following shall apply to new customers requesting wastewater taps to discharge industrial or commercial wastes to the public sewers after the effective date of the ordinance from which this subdivision is derived: 
(1)  Application shall be made for sewer service at the time the new customer applies for and pays the tap fees. 
(2)  Within 30 days of receipt of the application, the City will furnish the applicant an opinion as to acceptability of the wastes. 
(3)  If the wastes are not acceptable in the opinion of the City, the surcharge specified in Section 40-159 shall become effective 30 days from the date of the opinion furnished to the applicant. This surcharge shall continue until acceptable corrective measures are taken or sewer service is discontinued. 
(4)  If the City finds that the wastes should be rejected, or require pretreatment or flow equalization, the applicant will be allowed 18 months from the date of initiation of the surcharge to provide corrective measures to make the wastes acceptable. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(K)) 
Sec. 40-161. - Inspection, sampling, measuring, and testing industrial wastes. 
(a)  Control manholes. When required by the City, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the City. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(b)  Sampling procedures. 
(1)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this subdivision shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample should be taken. 
(2)  The City shall take samples of waste discharges from an establishment as often as is determined necessary to adequately monitor and control the discharges. If an owner desires additional samples, the City may require the owner to pay the cost of the additional service. 
(c)  Inspections. Duly authorized employees of the City shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this subdivision during such times as the business has personnel on-site and equipment in operation. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(L)) 
Sec. 40-162. - Authority to disconnect service. 
    Any person found to be discharging into public sewers any of the prohibited industrial wastes set out in this subdivision shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation. The City is authorized to immediately disconnect the offending person's sewer and water service upon such notice and to not reconnect it as long as the violation continues. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(M)) 
Sec. 40-163. - City of Bryan wastewater. 
    The City adopts and incorporates by reference into this Code: Chapter 122 "Utilities," Article IV "Wastewater System," Division 2 "Sewer Use," Division 3 "Industrial Pretreatment Ordinance," and Division 5 "Industrial Discharge Limits" of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Bryan as adopted by the City of Bryan as of November 25, 2013. This section only applies to the area shown on CCN Map 11-6(N). 

(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-6(N)) 
Secs. 40-164-40-194. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY AND WATER EMERGENCY PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted April 25, 2019, amended Ch. 40, Art. II, Div. 5,  40-195-40-208, in effect repealing and reenacting said article as set out herein. Former Div. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 2011 (Repub),  11-9(A)-(N). 

Sec. 40-195. - Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent. 
    Safe, high quality drinking water is a precious resource in the Bryan-College Station region. This Drought Contingency and Water Emergency Plan (the "Plan") requires that the available water resources of the City of College Station be put to the most beneficial use possible. The Plan also requires that the waste, unreasonable use, or unreasonable method of use of water be prevented, and that conservation of water be extended with a view to reasonable and beneficial use in the interests of public health and welfare of the College Station community. Emergency conditions resulting from equipment or system failures are also addressed in this Plan. The Plan will be reviewed and updated as necessary, at a minimum of every five years. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(A)), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 40-196. - Authorization. 
    The City Manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this Plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The City Manager or his/her designee shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought stages or water supply emergency response measures as described in this Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(B)), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 40-197. - Application. 
    The provisions of this Plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing potable water provided by the City of College Station. The terms "person" and "customer" as used in the Plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities. Utilization of a water source other than City of College Station potable water is exempt from the provisions of this Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(C)), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 40-198. - Coordination with regional water planning group. 
    The water service area of the City of College Station is located within the Brazos Region G Regional Water Planning Group. The City of College Station has provided a copy of this Plan to the Brazos Region G Regional Water Planning Group. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(D)), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 40-199. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Plan, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Aesthetic water use means water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and water gardens. 
    Commercial and institutional water use means water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and non-profit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and office buildings. 
    Conservation means those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
    Customer means any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the City. 
    Domestic water use means water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution. 
    Even number address means street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8 and locations without addresses. 
    Industrial water use means the use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value. 
    Landscape irrigation use means water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way and medians. 
    Non-essential water use means water uses that are neither essential nor required for the protection of public, health, safety, and welfare, including: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscaped areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except as otherwise provided under this Plan; 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle; 
(3)  Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas; 
(4)  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(5)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
(6)  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type pools; 
(7)  Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
(8)  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); and 
(9)  Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than firefighting. 
    Non-potable Water means water that has not been treated to public drinking water standards. 
    Odd numbered address means street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9. 
    Recycled or Reclaimed Water means domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for a beneficial use. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(E)), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 40-200. - Public education. 
    The City will periodically provide the public with information about the Plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the Plan is to be initiated or terminated, and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of press releases, utility bill inserts, public events, social media, and similar methods. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(F)), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 40-201. - Public involvement. 
    Opportunity for the public to provide input into the preparation of the Plan was provided by the City of College Station at various public events and at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(G)), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 40-202. - Notification. 
(a)  Notification of the public. Public notification of the initiation or termination of drought response stages shall be by means of online publication, as allowed by state or local laws and ordinances, or publication in a newspaper widely circulated in College Station, and public service announcements on local television and/or cable service. Additional methods of public notification may include signs posted in public places, utility bill inserts, and other means to be determined by the City. 
(b)  Executive Director notification. When mandatory restrictions are enacted with the initiation of Stage 1, Stage 2, and/or Stage 3, the Executive Director of TCEQ will be notified, at a minimum via telephone, within five business days. When any particular stage is rescinded, the Executive Director of TCEQ will again be notified, at a minimum via telephone, within five business days. 
Sec. 40-203. - Year-round water use management and conservation. 
    This section establishes year-round water use management practices and applies year-round regardless of drought stage. The purpose of year-round water use management is to raise public and customer awareness of water demand conditions. 
(1)  Voluntary water conservation guidelines. The peak season for water use in College Station is the period from May 1 to September 30 and thus attention to water conservation in this period is critical to protecting valuable drinking water resources. During this time, water customers are requested to voluntarily conserve water and limit non-essential water uses. Water conservation practices are discussed in more detail in the City of College Station's Water Conservation Plan. 
(2)  Permanent water use restrictions. In order to minimize water lost to evaporation and leaks, the following water use restrictions apply year-round: 
a.  Landscape irrigation using automatic in-ground or hose-end sprinkler systems is prohibited between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
b.  The time restrictions in (1) above do not apply to: 
1.  The irrigation of commercial plant nurseries. 
2.  Irrigation using reclaimed water or other non-potable water sources. 
3.  New landscape installation during planting and the first ten days after planting. 
4.  The testing of new irrigation systems or existing irrigation systems being tested or under repair. 
5.  Irrigation using a hand-held bucket or hose equipped with a positive pistol grip nozzle, pressure-washing system, or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being held by the water user. 
6.  Irrigation by drip irrigation or soaker hoses. 
c.  The following uses constitute a waste of water and are prohibited: 
1.  Allowing water to run off a property or allowing water to pond in the street or parking lot. 
2.  Operating an irrigation system with sprinkler heads that are broken or out of adjustment. 
3.  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s). 
4.  Ornamental fountains or ponds for aesthetic or scenic purposes must be equipped with a recirculation device. This restriction does not apply to ornamental fountains or ponds that use reclaimed water, non-potable water, or water provided by sources other than the City. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(H)), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 40-204. - Trigger conditions. 
    The City Manager or his/her designee shall monitor daily water supply and/or demand conditions. The City Manager, on recommendation of College Station Water Services, shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the Plan, that is, when the specified trigger conditions are reached. The triggering criteria described below are based on emergency situations caused by high daily average water demand, equipment or system failure, or a natural disaster. The trigger conditions also recognize that the City of College Station uses groundwater as its water supply, and therefore, will likely be constrained by system capacity before shortage of supply. 
    Water system interconnections are in place between the City of College Station, City of Bryan and Texas A&M University that may be utilized to provide water in emergency conditions, provided there is not an additional emergency situation created by any water transfer. These shared water resources shall be evaluated and/or implemented prior to initiation of each stage of the Plan. 
(1)  Stage 1 - High Water Demand. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on non-essential water uses, as outlined herein in Responses to Trigger Conditions, Stage 1, when: 
1.  Average daily water consumption for three consecutive days reaches 85 percent of production/distribution capacity of the City water system; or 
2.  Emergency water supplied to the City of College Station by contractual agreement through system interconnections with Texas A&M University or the City of Bryan is curtailed or interrupted; or 
3.  A mechanical failure occurs in the water production or distribution system that reduces water production/delivery capacity. 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of the Plan may be rescinded by the City Manager when water demand drops below 85 percent of production/distribution capacity for a period of three consecutive days, or the water system is returned to fully operational conditions. Upon termination of Stage 1, the standard condition of Year-Round Water Use Management becomes operative. 
(2)  Stage 2 - Severe Water Shortage. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on non-essential water uses, as outlined herein in Responses to Trigger Conditions, Stage 2, when: 
1.  The City average daily water consumption for three consecutive days reaches 90 percent of production/distribution capacity of the system, or 
2.  The City daily water consumption will not enable storage levels to be maintained. 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the Plan may be rescinded by the City Manager when the condition(s) listed above as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days. Upon termination of Stage 2, Stage 1 becomes operative as directed by the City Manager. 
(3)  Stage 3 - Water Supply Emergency. 
a.  Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on non-essential water uses, as outlined herein in Responses to Trigger Conditions, Stage 3, when: 
1.  The City water system is contaminated, whether accidentally or intentionally. A Water Supply Emergency condition is reached immediately upon detection, or 
2.  The City water system fails for any reason. A Water Supply Emergency condition is reached immediately upon detection. 
b.  Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the Plan may be rescinded by the City Manager when the condition(s) listed above as triggering events have ceased to exist. Upon termination of Stage 3, the previously initiated stage becomes operative as directed by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(I)), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 40-205. - Responses to trigger conditions. 
    The City shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and, in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth herein, shall determine that a voluntary, moderate or severe water shortage condition exists and shall implement the following actions upon notice as provided herein: 
(1)  Stage 1 - High Water Demand - Water Demand Exceeds 85 percent of system capacity. The goal for Stage 1 of the Plan is to achieve a five percent reduction in daily water demand and maintain average daily water demand below 85 percent of system capacity. 
In the event that the City Manager enacts Stage 1, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all customers using water provided by the City, in addition to the year-round water use restrictions: 
a.  Water customers are required to participate in the Watering Schedule for non-essential water use. Non-essential water use shall only occur on a designated outdoor watering day(s), which will be no more than twice each week. The Watering Schedule will be determined and distributed each year by the City. 
b.  Non-essential water use is permitted: 
1.  From 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and from 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on a customer's designated watering day; or 
2.  Anytime, by the use of hand-held hoses equipped with a positive pistol grip nozzle or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being held by the water user, by drip irrigation, by soaker hose, or by hand-held buckets. 
c.  The time restrictions do not apply to: 
1.  The irrigation of commercial plant nurseries. 
2.  Irrigation using reclaimed water. 
3.  New landscape installation during planting and the first ten days after planting. 
4.  The testing of new irrigation systems or existing irrigation systems being tested or under repair. 
d.  The washing of automobiles, trucks, motorbikes, boats, trailers, airplanes or other vehicles is permitted: 
1.  On designated watering days, from 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and from 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
2.  Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. 
3.  The washing of individual vehicles may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. 
4.  Further, this restriction does not apply to the washing of vehicles or any other type of mobile equipment (such as garbage trucks and vehicles to transport food and perishables) when the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing. 
e.  Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools, or Jacuzzi-type pools is permitted only on designated watering days from 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and from 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
f.  Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is permitted only on designated watering days. Such irrigation shall only occur from 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and from 6:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. These restrictions do not apply to the irrigation of any golf course that uses reclaimed water, or other non-potable water sources. 
g.  Charity car washes are prohibited. 
h.  Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life. This restriction does not apply to ornamental fountains or ponds that use reclaimed water, non-potable water, or water sources other than the City water system. 
i.  Use of water from fire hydrants shall be limited to firefighting and related activities, or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare. Use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed when a variance has been approved by the City Manager. 
j.  The following uses constitute a waste of water and are prohibited in Stage 1: 
1.  Washing sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, patios or other hard-surfaced areas except with a pressure-washing system or to alleviate immediate health or safety hazards. 
2.  Use of water for dust control. 
3.  Washing an automobile, truck, trailer, boat, airplane, or other mobile equipment with a hand-held hose not equipped with a pistol grip nozzle or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being held by the water user. 
(2)  Stage 2 - Severe Water Shortage. Water Demand Exceeds 90 percent of System capacity. The goal for Stage 2 of the Plan is to achieve a five percent reduction in daily water demand, maintaining average daily water demand at or below 90 percent of system capacity. 
In the event that the City Manager enacts Stage 2, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons: 
a.  Supply Management Measures. The City will cease the flushing of water mains except when necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare. All City departments will discontinue irrigating public landscaped areas except when such areas are irrigated with reclaimed water, or water source other than that provided by the City water system. 
b.  Water Use Restrictions. All requirements of Stage 1 shall remain in effect during Stage 2, with these additional water use restrictions: 
1.  The use of permanently installed irrigation systems, drip irrigation systems, and hose end irrigation is prohibited. 
2.  Non-essential water use is restricted to use of hand-held buckets, or hand-held hoses equipped with a positive pistol grip nozzle, or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being held by the water user. 
3.  Such water use may occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. on designated non-essential water use days. 
4.  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and other types of mobile equipment not occurring on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or a commercial service station and not in the immediate interest of the public health, safety, and welfare are prohibited. The washing of such vehicles under public safety and health situations may only occur between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m. on designated non-essential water use days. 
5.  Commercial plant nurseries may use only hand-held buckets, or hand-held hoses equipped with a positive pistol grip nozzle, or other device that automatically shuts off water flow when the hose is not being held by the water user. 
6.  The filling, refilling, or adding of potable water to swimming or wading pools is prohibited. 
7.  No new landscapes of any type may be installed. 
c.  All variances granted under a previous stage shall be invalid during Stage 2. The use of water under variances granted by the City Manager is to be discontinued. 
(3)  Stage 3 - Water Supply Emergency. The goal for Stage 3, Water Supply Emergency, is to rectify the emergency and return to normal operating conditions as soon as possible. 
In the event of an imminent or actual water supply emergency due to either loss of water supply source (including contamination) and/or system failure, the City Manager has the authority to initiate the following Water Supply Emergency Responses: 
a.  The City Manager may request assistance from the City of Bryan and Texas A&M University in maintaining distribution system volume and pressure during the emergency conditions. 
b.  Effective immediately upon initiation of Stage 3, all non-essential water use shall be discontinued. 
c.  In the event that water shortage or water emergency conditions threaten public health, safety, and welfare, the City Manager, upon recommendation of the Water Services Director, may order water rationing and/or terminate service to selected users of the system in accordance with the following sequence: 
1.  Recreational users, 
2.  Commercial users, 
3.  School users, 
4.  Residential users, and 
5.  Hospitals, public health, and safety facilities. 
d.  Public notification. In the event that minimum health and safety standards for drinking water are not met during emergency conditions, public service announcements on local television and radio stations will be utilized to notify the public of the emergency conditions and response measures. These response measures may include notifying the public of the need to boil water, use bottled water, or use a designated alternate water source, as appropriate. 
e.  Emergency management assistance. The City may seek assistance through the local and/or State Emergency Management Program. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(J)), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 40-206. - Wholesale agreements/contracts provision. 
    In the event that the trigger conditions specified by Stage 2 - Severe Water Shortage, or Stage 3 - Water Supply Emergency, of this Plan have been met, the City Manager is hereby authorized to initiate allocation of water supplies to wholesale customers on a pro rata basis. This stipulation applies to all existing and future wholesale water supply contracts or agreements made with the City. The pro rata basis for water allocation to wholesale customers will be made in accordance with the V.T.C.A. Texas Water Code  11.039 and as specified in 30 Texas Administrative Code  288.22(a)(7). 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(L)), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 40-207. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of potable water from the City for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this Plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by the City Manager in accordance with provisions of this Plan. 
(b)  If a person is convicted of three or more distinct violations of this Plan, the City shall provide written notice to the person of possible termination of service. The notice shall apprise the person of the possible termination of service, the reasons for such possible termination, and afford the person an opportunity to present his/her objections to termination in a hearing before the City Manager or the City Manager's designee. The person shall have not less than ten days to present his/her objections. The notice shall also contain the notice requirements described in TCEQ Commission Rules located in 30 Texas Administrative Code  291.88(a), as it currently exists or as amended from time to time. If after such hearing, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee determines that service will be terminated, services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of the reconnection charge, as established by City's Code of Ordinances, and any other costs incurred by the City in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the City Manager or the City Manager's designee, that the same action shall not be repeated while the Plan is in effect. Compliance with this Plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in a Texas district court. 
(c)  Any person who violates this Plan is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more than $500.00 or more than $2,000.00 for a violation of fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation ordinances, other than the dumping of refuse. Each day that one or more of the provisions in this Plan is violated shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three or more distinct violations of this Plan, the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a re-connection charge, as established by the City's Code of Ordinances, and any other costs incurred by the City in discontinuing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the City Manager or the City Manager's designee that the same action shall not be repeated while the Plan is in effect. Compliance with this plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in a Texas district court. 
(d)  A City of College Station police officer Code Enforcement Officer or other authorized employee designated by the City Manager may issue a citation to a person he/she reasonably believes to be in violation of this division. The citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known, the date or dates of the violation, the location of the violation, the offense or offenses charged, and shall direct the alleged violator to appear in the City of College Station Municipal Court on the date shown on the citation, for which the date shall not be less than three days nor more than five days from the date the citation was issued. The alleged violator shall be served a copy of the citation either by hand-delivery or certified United States Postal Service mail, with return receipt confirmation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon delivery of the citation to the alleged violator, to an agent or employee of an alleged violator, or to a person over 14 years of age who is a member of the alleged violator's immediate family or is a resident of the alleged violator's residence. The alleged violator shall appear in municipal court to enter a plea of guilty, no contest, or not guilty for the violation of this Plan. If the alleged violator fails to appear in municipal court, a warrant for the alleged violator's arrest may be issued. A summons to appear may be issued in lieu of an arrest warrant. These cases shall be expedited and given preferential setting in municipal court before all other cases. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(M)), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 40-208. - Presumptions. 
(a)  Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the City, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates, shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that they did not commit the violation. 
(b)  Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children and proof that a violation, committed by a child, occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation. Any such parent may be excused if they prove that they had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in violation of this Plan and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(N)), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 40-209. - Variances. 
(a)  The City Manager or the City Manager's designee may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this Plan if it is determined that failure to grant such a variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such variance, or if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Compliance with this Plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the Plan is in effect. 
(2)  Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
(b)  Persons or entities requesting an exemption from the provisions of this division shall file a petition for variance with the City within five business days after the Plan or a particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the petitioner(s), 
(2)  Location and purpose of water use, 
(3)  Specific provision(s) of the Plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief, 
(4)  Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the Plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this Plan, 
(5)  Description of the relief requested, 
(6)  Period of time for which the variance is sought, 
(7)  Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of this Plan and the compliance date, 
(8)  Estimated water savings, as a percentage of normal monthly water use, while operating under the variance requested, and 
(9)  Other information reasonably requested by the City. 
(c)  Variances granted by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee: 
(1)  Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance, and 
(2)  Variances granted in a particular stage shall expire upon advancing to a more restrictive stage of the Plan. 
(3)  Petitioners shall prominently display the variance granting document where it can be read by the general public at all location(s) for which the variance applies, and make said variance available to the public. 
(4)  Variances granted may be revoked by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee if the petitioner fails to meet the specific requirements set forth in the variance. 
(5)  No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this Plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
(Ord. No. 2019-4088 , Pt. 1(Exh. A(O)), 4-25-2019) 
Secs. 40-210-40-239. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 

Sec. 40-240. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. If a word or term used in this division is not contained in the following list, or in section 40-1, its definition, or other technical terms used, shall have the meaning or definitions listed in the most recent adopted edition of the International Plumbing Code as amended and/or the most recent Manual of Cross-Connection Control published by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USC FCCCHR). 
    Air gap means a physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or appurtenance and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An "approved air-gap separation" shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device in no case less than one inch. 
    Atmospheric vacuum breaker backflow prevention device or atmospheric vacuum breaker or AVB means a device used to prevent back-siphonage. This device cannot be tested but can be field inspected to verify proper operation. This device cannot prevent back-pressure backflow. 
    Auxiliary supply means any water source or system other than the public water system, that may be available in the building or on the property, including groundwaters or surface waters used for industrial, irrigation or any other purpose. 
    Backflow means the flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases, or substances into the water system. 
    Backflow prevention assembly or assembly means an assembly to counteract back pressure or prevent back-siphonage. 
    Back-pressure means any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow. 
    Back-siphonage means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system. 
    Boresight or boresight to daylight means providing adequate drainage for backflow prevention assemblies installed in vaults through the use of an unobstructed drain pipe. 
    Contaminants means any foreign material, solid, liquid or gaseous, that is not common to the potable water supply which makes the water unfit or undesirable for human or animal consumption. 
    Contamination means the admission of contaminants into the potable water supply system. 
    Cross-connection means any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it is possible for any non-potable, used, unclean, polluted and/or contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions. 
    Cross-connection control device means any approved or recognized device placed upon any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, which is designed to prevent non-potable, used, unclean, polluted and/or contaminated water, or other substances, from entering into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions. 
    Customer service inspection means an inspection designed to inspect and detect any actual or potential cross-connection hazards and/or exceedance of the lead action level in solder or flux, pipe or pipe fittings. 
    Degree of hazard means the low or high hazard classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential cross-connections. 
    Health hazard means an actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the customer's potable water system that would be a danger to health. 
    High hazard means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that potentially could allow a substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable water supply. 
    Low hazard means the classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that potentially could allow a substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to one's health to backflow into the potable water supply. 
    Pollution hazard means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability of the public or the customer's potable water system, but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as defined. The maximum degree of intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances. 
    System hazard means an actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or customer's potable water supply or of a pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
    Double check detector backflow prevention assembly or double check detector or DCDA means an assembly composed of a line-size approved double check assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow. 
    Double check valve backflow prevention assembly or double check assembly or double check or DC means an assembly which consists of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. 
    Fire line tester means a tester who is employed by a State-approved fire line contractor and is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on fire lines. 
    General tester means a tester who is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on any domestic, commercial, industrial or irrigation service except fire lines. 
    Manual of Cross-Connection Control means the latest edition as published by the University of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (abbreviated as USC FCCCHR). 
    Mobile unit means any operation which may have the potential to introduce contaminants into a potable water system from a mobile source. These include, but are not limited to, carpet cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles, street-cleaning vehicles, liquid-waste vehicles, power-wash operations and pest-control vehicles. 
    Nonresidential use means water used by any person other than a residential customer of the water supply and includes all uses not specifically included in residential use as defined herein. 
    Point-of-use isolation means the appropriate backflow prevention within the customer's water system at the point at which the actual or potential cross-connection exists. 
    Potable water supply means any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use. 
    Premises isolation means the appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water system and the water user. 
    Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly or pressure vacuum breaker or PVB means an assembly which provides protection against back-siphonage, but does not provide adequate protection against back-pressure backflow. The assembly is a combination of a single check valve with an AVB and can be used with downstream resilient seated shutoff valves. In addition, the assembly has suction and discharge gate valves and resilient seated test cocks which allows the full testing of the assembly. 
    Public water system or system means any public or privately owned water system which supplies water for public domestic use. The system includes all services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment used in the process of producing, treating, storing, or conveying water for public consumption. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure principle assembly or RP assembly or RP means an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically-operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located resilient seated test cocks and a tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valve at each end of the assembly. 
    Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure detector or RPDA means an assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow. 
    Representative of the water system means a person designated by the City to perform cross-connection control duties that shall include, but are not limited to, cross-connection inspections and water use surveys. 
    Residential use means water used by any residential customer of the water supply and includes single-family dwellings, duplexes, multiplexes, housing and apartments where the individual residential units are each on a separate meter or in cases where two or more units are served by one meter, the residential units are fulltime dwellings. 
    Service connection means the point of delivery where the water purveyor loses control of the water. 
    Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker or SPVB means an assembly containing an independently operating, internally loaded check valve and independently operating, loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. This assembly is to be equipped with a properly located resilient seated test cock and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly. 
    Tester means a person that is a certified backflow prevention assembly technician approved by and registered with the City and the TCEQ. 
    Thermal expansion means heated water that does not have the space to expand. 
    Used water means water supplied by a public water system to a water user's system after it has passed through the service connection. 
    Water use survey means a survey conducted or caused to be conducted by the City designed to identify possible sources of pollution and/or contamination to the potable water supply. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(B); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-241. - Penalty. 
    The City is entitled to pursue all criminal and civil remedies available for violations of this division. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(V)(2)) 
Sec. 40-242. - Violations. 
    A person commits an offense if: 
(1)  The person fails to maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this division. 
(2)  The person fails to comply with a repair order issued by the City. 
(3)  Backflow from premises owned, operated or managed by the person enters the public water supply system. 
(4)  The person fails to pay any fees required by this division. 
(5)  The person violates any part of this division. 
(6)  The person reinstates water service to a premises discontinued or disconnected under this division, except as directed by the City. 
(7)  The person allows an unregistered tester to perform testing work at the person's establishment. 
(8)  The person tests a backflow prevention assembly within the City without being registered with the City. 
(9)  The person tests a backflow prevention assembly within the City without being certified by the TCEQ. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(V)(1)) 
Sec. 40-243. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  Property owner. It is the responsibility of all property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises to comply with the following: 
(1)  Payment of all costs associated with this division and the purchase, installation, testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(2)  To install and maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in accordance with this division and acceptable industry practice. 
(3)  All commercial customers shall cause to have all backflow prevention assemblies on their premises tested annually. Such testing must be conducted by a certified tester who is registered with the City. 
(4)  Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in proper working order at all times, including repairs as required. 
(5)  Maintain all backflow prevention assemblies in a manner that allows them to be tested by a method that has been approved by the City. 
(6)  All records related to backflow prevention assembly installation, testing, and repair shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of three years. 
(b)  Certified backflow prevention assembly testers. Certified backflow prevention assembly testers shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Annually register with the City and pay the required fee. 
(2)  Maintain testing equipment in proper working condition/calibration. 
(3)  Maintain the design or operation characteristics of an assembly. 
(4)  Ensure that devices are tested according to accepted industry practice and TCEQ rules and regulations. 
(5)  Enter required testing data, including test gauge serial numbers, on backflow prevention device test forms that have been approved by the City. 
(6)  Report test results to the City within 30 days of testing. 
(7)  Provide a copy of the completed test report to the property owners and/or persons in charge of any premises. 
(8)  Maintain testing and/or repair records for a minimum of three years. 
(c)  Other provisions. The City shall ensure the inspection and testing of all backflow prevention assemblies installed pursuant to the requirements of this division. For new facilities, permanent water service shall not be provided until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. Except in cases where the testing of backflow prevention assemblies must be delayed until the installation of internal production or auxiliary equipment, the City shall not approve a certificate of occupancy until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational. The City shall not be liable for damage caused to any backflow prevention assembly as a result of the inspection or testing. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(Q)) 
Sec. 40-244. - Cross-connection control program fees. 
(a)  Backflow prevention assembly registration fee. There is a nonrefundable registration fee for each nonresidential backflow prevention assembly device established in Section 2-117. 
(b)  Certified backflow prevention device tester registration fee. Annual registration fee for approved testers shall be a nonrefundable fee established in Section 2-117. 
(c)  Testing form booklet fee. The fee for a testing form booklet of 30 test forms shall be established in Section 2-117. Other forms may be used with prior approval from the City. 
(d)  Deposit fee for fire hydrant water meter with backflow prevention device. There shall be a refundable deposit fee for fire hydrant meters with backflow prevention devices established in Section 2-117. This fee shall be refunded when the meter/device is returned in good working order. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(S); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-245. - Cross-connection standards. 
    Every source of contamination or possible contamination from any contaminant which originates from or is located at a residential or commercial customer, that is connected to any public water supply or that provides water to the public, shall be equipped with the protection required under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(A)) 
Sec. 40-246. - Compliance for lawn irrigation. 
    All lawn irrigation system installations shall obtain a permit issued by the City for such installations. Installation requirements must comply with the International Plumbing Code as amended and guidelines for the appropriate device found in this division. Interconnections of the potable water supply with an alternate water source are prohibited unless appropriate backflow protection is installed. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(T); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-247. - Right-of-way encroachment. 
    No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon or within any City right-of-way except as provided in this division. 
(1)  A backflow prevention assembly required by the City may be installed upon or within any City right-of-way only if the owner proves to the City that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, and installing it in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic or utilities. The City retains the right to approve the location, height, depth of enclosure, and other requisites of the assembly prior to its installation. 
(2)  All permits and inspections required by this Code to perform work in the right-of-way shall be obtained. 
(3)  The assembly shall be installed below or flush with the surrounding grade except when it is not practicable to install it in this manner. Any assembly or portion of an assembly that extends above ground shall be located no closer than 18 inches to the face of the curb. 
(4)  The City shall not be liable for any damage done to or caused by an assembly installed in a right-of-way. 
(5)  A property owner shall, at the request of the City and at the owner's expense, relocate a backflow prevention assembly which encroaches upon any City right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for street or utility construction or repairs for purposes of public safety. 
(6)  A person commits an offense if, after receiving a written order from the City, the person fails to relocate a backflow prevention assembly located in or upon any City right-of-way. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(C)) 
Sec. 40-248. - Multiple connections. 
    Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply and/or fire protection will be required to install a backflow assembly on each of the service lines to the premises. The type of assembly will be determined by the degree of hazard that could occur in the event of an interconnect between any of the water systems on the premises. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(D)) 
Sec. 40-249. - Protection required; installation. 
(a)  The backflow prevention assembly protection which is required under this division shall be any of the USC FCCCHR recognized and approved backflow prevention assemblies, or as approved by the City. The City, prior to installation, must have approved each backflow prevention assembly. Failure to obtain such approval prior to installation of the backflow prevention assembly may result in the backflow prevention assembly failing to meet final approval by the City. The City shall determine the type and location of backflow assembly to be installed within the area served by the City. An assembly will be required in each of the following circumstances, but the customer is in no way limited to the following circumstances: 
(1)  The nature and extent of any activity of the premises, or the materials used in connection with any activity of the premises, or materials stored on the premises, if said activity or material could contaminate or pollute the potable water supply. 
(2)  Premises having any one or more cross-connections and the cross-connection is protected by an atmospheric vacuum breaker device (AVB). 
(3)  Internal cross-connections are present that are not correctable. 
(4)  Intricate plumbing arrangements are present which make it impractical to ascertain whether cross-connections exist. 
(5)  There is unduly restricted entry so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be made with sufficient frequency to ensure that cross-connections do not exist. 
(6)  Installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed to be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations in the judgment of the City. 
(7)  An appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been filed with College Station Utilities upon request of the City. 
(8)  A fire suppression system that is connected to the City's water system. 
(9)  All new construction if deemed necessary in the customer service inspection. The type of assembly required will be determined by the degree of hazard. 
(10)  When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of such building is not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly may be installed at the service connection that supplies water for public domestic use. 
(11)  Any used water return system. 
(12)  In the event a point-of-use assembly has not had the testing or repair done as required by this division, a premises isolation assembly will be required. 
(13)  If it is determined that additions or alterations have been made to the plumbing system without obtaining proper permits, premises isolation may be required. 
(14)  All multistory buildings or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank. 
(15)  Retrofitting will be required on all high hazard connections and wherever else the City deems necessary to meet the intent of this division. 
(b)  All backflow prevention assemblies installed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall be installed in a manner designed to facilitate ease of inspection and testing by the City or its chosen representative. Any currently installed backflow prevention assemblies which are located in inaccessible locations or where the tester is subject to physical danger shall be relocated to approved locations. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(E)) 
Sec. 40-250. - Testing/inspection of devices and assemblies. 
(a)  The City shall require all backflow prevention devices and assemblies to be both field inspected and tested in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Immediately after installation. 
(2)  Whenever the device or assembly is moved. 
(3)  A minimum of once a year for all commercial applications other than lawn irrigation systems. 
(4)  For premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for one year, prior to re-occupancy. 
(5)  Immediately after repairs. 
(6)  Once every five years for residential and commercial lawn irrigation systems. 
The AVB shall be excepted from the requirement in this subsection that such device be both field inspected and tested. The City shall require that the AVB be field inspected in each of the circumstances listed in this subsection. 
(b)  All assembly testing shall be performed by a State certified backflow prevention assembly tester, approved by the City. 
(c)  Duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this division. Persons and occupants of premises which are provided water service by the City, either directly or indirectly, shall allow the City or its representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, testing, records examination, or in the performance of any of its duties. Where persons or occupants of premises have security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the persons and occupants of the premises shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the City will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(d)  The City is not liable for damage to a backflow prevention assembly which may occur during testing. 
(e)  The City may cause a water use survey to be conducted at any establishment located in the City which is served by a public water supply or which provides water to the public. Upon determination by the City that the establishment falls under the provisions of this division and requires a backflow prevention assembly, the City shall issue a notice to abate the condition or order the establishment to install the proper backflow prevention assembly. 
(f)  It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls property to have all assemblies tested annually in accordance with this section. Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the City deems necessary. 
(g)  All results from assembly testing by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester shall be placed on a form that has been approved by the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(F)) 
Sec. 40-251. - Thermal expansion. 
    It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls property to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion if a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow prevention assembly. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(G)) 
Sec. 40-252. - Pressure loss. 
    Any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly is not the responsibility of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(H)) 
Sec. 40-253. - Residential service connections. 
    Any person who owns or controls any residential property which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross-connection will be required to eliminate the actual or potential cross-connection or have an approved backflow prevention assembly installed in accordance with this division. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(I)) 
Sec. 40-254. - Rental properties. 
    Any person who owns or controls property is responsible for the installation, testing and repair of all backflow assemblies on their property. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(J)) 
Sec. 40-255. - Water distribution infrastructure. 
(a)  All water distribution infrastructure must be constructed, installed and tested in accordance with TCEQ Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems, as amended. 
(b)  Permanent water service shall not be supplied to any newly constructed infrastructure until after the City has received the results of the bacteriological test and the results show that no bacteria is present. 
(c)  Permanent water service shall not be supplied to any newly constructed infrastructure until an inspection is completed by the City to ensure that all State regulations and local codes have been met. 
(d)  Temporary water services which pose a potential cross-connection threat to the potable water supply shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(K)) 
Sec. 40-256. - Customer service inspection. 
(a)  Pursuant to TCEQ Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems, a customer service inspection for cross-connection control shall be completed by the City prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following circumstances: 
(1)  Newly constructed facility or previously non-existent premises. 
(2)  After any material improvement to building or premises. 
(3)  Any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises. 
(4)  The City deems it necessary. 
(b)  Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a newly constructed facility until after the customer service inspection is completed by the City. 
(c)  Temporary water service which poses a potential cross-connection threat to the potable water supply shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(L)) 
Sec. 40-257. - Installation guidelines and requirements for backflow prevention assemblies. 
    To ensure proper operation and accessibility of all backflow prevention assemblies, the most current guidelines contained in the Manual of Cross-Connection Control, which is adopted hereto by reference and incorporated herewith, shall apply to the installation of these assemblies. Additionally, the following shall also be required: 
(1)  All premises that require continuous, uninterrupted water service and are required to have a backflow assembly must make provisions for the parallel installation of assemblies of the same type so that testing, repair and maintenance can be performed. 
(2)  The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damage resulting from installation, operation, and/or maintenance of a backflow assembly. The owner shall be responsible for keeping all backflow prevention assembly vaults reasonably free of silt and debris. 
(3)  Upon completion of installation, the City shall be notified and all assemblies must be inspected and tested. All assemblies must be registered with the City and shall provide the date of installation, manufacturer, model, type, size, serial number of the backflow assembly, physical location and initial test report. 
(4)  Assemblies must be sized and flow characteristics must be sufficient to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being served. 
(5)  Assemblies must be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and must be located in an area where water damage to building or furnishings would not occur from water discharge. The property owner assumes all responsibility for any damage caused by water discharge from an assembly. An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RP assemblies. 
(6)  No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be submerged in water or installed in a location subject to flooding. RPs are typically installed above grade in well-drained areas, but may be installed below grade (ground level) if a boresight drain to daylight is provided. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow of the assembly and shall be screened on both ends. 
(7)  Reduced pressure principal detector backflow prevention assemblies (RPDA) may be utilized in all installations requiring a reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly and detector metering. 
a.  RPDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for reduced pressure principal backflow assemblies. 
b.  The line-size RP assembly and the bypass RP assembly must each be tested. The certified tester must complete a separate test report for each assembly. 
(8)  Vertical installations of DCs are allowed only on sizes up to and including four inches that meet all of the following requirements: 
a.  Internally spring-loaded check valves. 
b.  Flow is upward through assembly. 
c.  Approved for vertical installation by the USC FCCCHR. 
d.  Approved by the City. 
(9)  Double check detector backflow prevention assemblies (DCDA) may be utilized in all installations requiring a double check valve assembly and detector metering. 
a.  DCDAs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for double check valve assemblies (DCs). 
b.  The line-size DC assembly and the bypass DC assembly must each be tested. The certified tester must complete a separate test report for each assembly. 
(10)  Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (PVB) may be utilized as point-of-use protection against back-siphonage only and shall not be installed where there is potential for back-pressure. PVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from water discharge. 
(11)  Spill resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (SVB) may be utilized in all installations requiring a pressure vacuum breaker. SVBs shall comply with the installation requirements applicable for pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(M)) 
Sec. 40-258. - Air gap separation. 
    Air gaps provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and should be utilized at all locations where hazardous substances are at risk of entering the potable water system. 
(1)  An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel and in no case less than one inch. If splashing is a problem, tubular screens may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a 45-degree angle. The air gap distance is measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses are not allowed. 
(2)  Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way without prior approval from the City and must be available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(3)  Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps when spaced from the inside edge of the spout opening a distance greater than three times the diameter of the effective opening for a single, or a distance greater than four times the effective opening for two intersecting walls. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(N)) 
Sec. 40-259. - Fire suppression systems. 
(a)  All new installations of fire suppression systems which utilize the City's potable water supply shall have installed approved backflow prevention devices according to the degree of hazard. 
(b)  An approved double check detector backflow prevention assembly (DCDA) or reduced pressure detector assembly (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable water use and/or that does not provide for periodic flow-through during each 24 hour period, unless a variance has been issued in writing from the City. An RPDA must be installed if any solution other than potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system. 
(1)  It is the responsibility of all property owners and persons in charge of any premises to abide by the conditions of this division. In the event of any changes to the fire suppression system, it is the responsibility of the property owners to notify the City. All costs associated with the purchase, installation, testing and repair of DCDA or RPDA devices are the responsibility of the property owner and persons in change of any premises. 
(2)  Upon the approved installation of the DCDA or RPDA device, a device test report completed by a licensed fire line tester must be sent to the City and include the information required by this division. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(O)) 
Sec. 40-260. - Fire hydrant protection. 
    An approved double check device backflow prevention assembly (DCD) or reduced pressure detector assembly (RPDA) shall be the minimum protection for fire hydrant water meters which are being used for a temporary water supply during any construction or other times which would pose a potential hazard to the public water supply. An RPDA must be installed if any solution other than potable water can be introduced into the system. 
(1)  It is the responsibility of all persons engaging in the use of a fire hydrant water meter to abide by the conditions of this division. All fire hydrant water meters shall meet the current requirements as provided for by College Station Utilities. 
(2)  Only City fire hydrant water meters with approved backflow prevention assemblies are allowed to be used within the potable water system. 
(3)  A refundable deposit is required to ensure the return of all water meter and backflow assemblies to the City. Failure to return or any misuse of the assemblies can result in the forfeiture of deposit and/or enforcement action being taken against the responsible party. 
(4)  All non-approved fire hydrant meters which are found to be in use in the City will be confiscated and enforcement action taken against the responsible party. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(P)) 
Sec. 40-261. - Mobile units. 
    The connection of a mobile unit to any potable water system is prohibited unless an air gap or an approved backflow prevention assembly protects such connection. Prior approval and annual device testing of any backflow prevention assembly must be received from the City before connecting to any potable water system. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(U)) 
Sec. 40-262. - Backflow prevention assembly tester certification, registration required. 
    Only approved TCEQ licensed backflow prevention assembly testers are permitted to conduct tests in the City. Testers must register annually with the City, provide proof of TCEQ certification, and provide proof that testing equipment is able to maintain a calibration of plus or minus 0.2-psid accuracy and pay an annual, non-refundable, tester registration fee. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(R)) 
Sec. 40-263. - Registration revocation. 
    A certified tester's registration may be reviewed and revoked by the City if the City determines that the tester: 
(1)  Has falsely, incompletely, or inaccurately reported assembly test reports; 
(2)  Has used inaccurate gauges; 
(3)  Has used improper testing procedures; or 
(4)  Has created a threat to public health or the environment. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-10(V)(3)) 
Secs. 40-264-40-289. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRIC SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-290. - Risk management policy. 
(a)  Authority for staff participation in the ERCOT CRR Market. 
(1)  The City has the authority to participate in any Electric Reliability Council of Texas' (ERCOT) Congestion Revenue Rights (CRR) auction in accordance with ERCOT protocols and the City's policies to cover any congestion risks associated with delivery of energy associated with any wholesale power agreements the City has in place. The City Manager shall be responsible for market participation and may delegate this authority to any appropriate staff member as necessary. 
a.  Any representative of the City participating or evaluating the City's participation in the CRR auction must be able to demonstrate reasonable knowledge of CRRs and the auction process. 
b.  The City Manager shall adopt procedures for administering the City's market participation. 
(2)  The City Council and individual Council Members are prohibited from trading or purchasing CRRs. 
(b)  Management of risk exposure. 
(1)  The City Council shall oversee all risk undertaken by the City. 
(2)  The City Manager must report to the City Council the following electric-related transactions on at least a quarterly basis: 
a.  Any participation in the ERCOT CRR auction; 
b.  Any other transactions that expose the City to significant congestion risk. 
(3)  The City Council shall be notified of any congestion risk exposure in the initial report referenced in Subsection (b)(2) of this section and shall be informed of the level of exposure to the risk as additional information becomes available. 
(4)  The City Manager shall issue a report on the status of participation in the CRR auction to the City Council on at least a quarterly basis. The report shall include performance of the previous period's CRRs against not participating in the market. Performance includes total monies spent on CRR purchases and total monies earned on CRR revenue. 
(5)  Should the City Council find that the City is acting in a manner contrary to the risk profile that the City Council had previously established, the City Council may: 
a.  Order the City to cease the offending risk exposing activities. 
b.  Issue guidelines for the risk exposing activities to follow. 
c.  Allow the City to continue acting as it had previously. 
(c)  Maintenance of records. The City shall maintain records of all monetary transactions and transfers related to participation in the CRR market and of all bid prices and amounts placed in the CRR auction for a minimum of five years or in accordance with the City's records retention policy, whichever is longer. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-4(B)) 
Secs. 40-291-40-313. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATE SCHEDULES 

Sec. 40-314. - Established. 
    The monthly rates to be charged customers for electrical service shall be in accordance with the provisions in this division. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-4(A)(intro. )) 
Sec. 40-315. - Electric Rate Schedule R (residential customers). 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established Electric Rate Schedule R, which shall be applicable to residential customers for all domestic usage where all energy is taken through a single meter. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the City covering this type of service. 
(b)  Character of service. A.C., 60 cycles per second, single phase, 120/240 volts. At City's discretion, apartments may be served at single phase, 120/208 volts for multifamily developments served from three-phase transformation. 
(c)  Rate. 
(1)  Service charge, as established in Section 2-117; plus 
(2)  Energy charge, as established in Section 2-117. 
(d)  Rates for existing units. Existing residential units where served under one master meter shall be billed under Rate Schedule R-1. No new master metered residential installations will be allowed, and all new installations will be individually metered. 
(e)  Transmission delivery adjustment. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a transmission delivery adjustment calculated in accordance with Schedule TDA; provided, however, that the adjustment shall never be less than zero. 
(f)  Automatic-leave-on-service. Customers who qualify for automatic-leave-on service will be billed at the above rate except the monthly service charge will be deleted. Customers will be required to contract with the City for this service provision. 
(g)  Electric rider: Wind Watts Wind Energy Rider. 
(1)  Availability. This optional service shall be available to all residential customers who select wind-generated energy as a source of electricity under the City's Wind Watts Program, in lieu of electricity provided from traditional generation. Wind Watt's energy is available to customers on a first-come, first-served basis subject to available supply. 
(2)  Application. Eligible customers may select service under this rider at three levels of participation: 
a.  Ten percent of monthly energy requirements. 
b.  50 percent of monthly energy requirements. 
c.  100 percent of monthly energy requirements. 
(3)  Rate. Same rate as for residential customers plus the monthly Wind Watts charge for the appropriate participation level established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-4(A)(2); Ord. No. 2016-3811, exh. A(11-4), 9-22-2016; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-316. - Electric Rate Schedule R-1 (master metered residential units). 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established Electric Rate Schedule R-1, which shall be applicable to existing residential units for all domestic usage where all energy is taken through one master meter. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the City covering this type of service. 
(b)  Character of service. A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 volts; three-phase 120/240, 120/208, 240/480, 227/480, 2400/4160, 7200/12,470 volts as available at point of service. Three-phase customers served via underground primary to pad mounted transformers will be furnished only 120/208 or 277/480 volt service. 
(c)  Rate. The monthly rate charge for service under this schedule shall be determined as follows: 
(1)  The average kilowatt-hour usage per month per residential unit shall be determined by dividing the total monthly kilowatt-hours purchased as determined by the City's master meter, by 85 percent of the total number of permanently constructed residential units. 
(2)  The individual energy charge per residential unit shall thence be computed on the basis of the average kilowatt-hour usage per month per residential unit figured at the rate established in Section 2-117. 
(3)  The total monthly bill shall thence be determined by multiplying the energy charge per residential unit computed under the rate by 85 percent of the number of permanently constructed residential units, and thence adding the service charge established in Section 2-117. 
(d)  Transmission delivery adjustment. The monthly charge under this rate schedule shall be increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a transmission delivery adjustment calculated in accordance with Schedule TDA; provided, however, that the adjustment shall never be less than zero. 
(e)  Submetering. Where electric service is submetered, the words "residential unit" in Subsection (c) of this section and minimum bill clauses shall be replaced with the word "submeter." 
(1)  The customer operating the submetering system shall provide electric service to tenants and render bills therefore in strict accordance with the electric submetering rules and regulations as established and amended by the Public Utility Commission of Texas in Substantive Rule No. 25.142, a copy of which is on file in the Office of the City Secretary and on the Internet at: 
https://www.puc.texas.gov/agency/rulesnlaws/subrules/electric/25.142/25.142.pdf. 
(2)  All records and reports provided for in these rules and regulations, other than those specified below, shall be made available to the City upon request. 
(3)  The customer shall not impose any additional charges on tenants over and above those charges that are billed by the City. For verification purposes, the customer shall, within five days after receipt of request, file a report with the Utilities Office Manager of the City showing a reconciliation of billing to tenants plus the billing for owner-used energy with the charges that are billed by the City. This report shall provide as a minimum the following information: 
(4)  A calculation of the average cost per kilowatt-hour for the current month. 
(5)  A listing of all submeter readings and billings, including kilowatt-hour usage metered and total rate charge, for the current month. 
(f)  Electric rider: Wind Watts Wind Energy Rider. 
(1)  Availability. This optional service shall be available to all master metered customers who select wind generated energy as a source of electricity under the City's Wind Watts Program, in lieu of electricity provided from traditional generation. Wind Watt's energy is available to customers on a first-come, first-served basis subject to available supply. 
(2)  Application. Eligible customers may select service under this rider at three levels of participation: 
a.  Ten percent of monthly energy requirements. 
b.  50 percent of monthly energy requirements. 
c.  100 percent of monthly energy requirements. 
(3)  Rate. Same rate as for small commercial customers plus the monthly Wind Watts charge for the appropriate participation level established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-4(A)(3); Ord. No. 2016-3811, exh. A(11-4), 9-22-2016; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-317. - Electric Rate Schedule SC (small commercial customers). 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established Electric Rate Schedule SC, which shall be applicable to nonresidential customers billed through a single meter whose monthly kilowatt demand does not exceed 15 kW. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the City covering this type of service. 
(b)  Character of service. A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 volts; three-phase 120/240, 120/208, 240/480, 277/480 volts as available at point of service. Three-phase customers served via underground primary to pad mounted transformers will be furnished only 120/208 or 277/480 volt service. 
(c)  Rate. 
(1)  Service charge. Established in Section 2-117; plus 
(2)  Energy charge. Established in Section 2-117. 
(d)  Billing demand. Demand meters will be installed on all commercial customers. A customer on this schedule whose metered demand is equal to or greater than 15 kW for any billing period shall be billed under the appropriate billing schedule for that demand for the next 12-month period beginning with the current month. 
(e)  Transmission delivery adjustment. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a transmission delivery adjustment calculated in accordance with Schedule TDA; provided, however, that the adjustment shall never be less than zero. 
(f)  Electric rider: Wind Watts Wind Energy Rider. 
(1)  Availability. This optional service shall be available to all commercial customers who select wind-generated energy as a source of electricity under the City's Wind Watts Program, in lieu of electricity provided from traditional generation. Wind Watt's energy is available to customers on a first-come, first-served basis subject to available supply. 
(2)  Application. Eligible customers may select service under this rider at three levels of participation: 
a.  Ten percent of monthly energy requirements. 
b.  50 percent of monthly energy requirements. 
c.  100 percent of monthly energy requirements. 
(3)  Rate. Same rate as for small commercial customers plus the monthly Wind Watts charge established in Section 2-117 for the appropriate participation level. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-4(A)(4); Ord. No. 2016-3811, exh. A(11-4), 9-22-2016; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-318. - Electric Rate Schedule LP-1 (medium commercial customers). 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established Electric Rate Schedule LP-1, which shall be applicable to all commercial or industrial customers where service is taken through one meter at one point of delivery and where the monthly kilowatt demand is equal to or greater than 15 kW and less than 300 kW. Before service is furnished hereunder, an individual service agreement contract between the customer and the City may be required outlining all details of the service to be supplied, the terms of the contract, and the obligations of each party. 
(b)  Character of service. A.C., 60 cycles per second, single-phase, 120/240 volts; three phase 120/240, 120/208, 240/480, 277/480 volts as available at point of service. Three-phase customers served via underground primary to pad mounted transformers will be furnished only 120/208 or 277/480 volt service. 
(c)  Rate. 
(1)  Service charge. Established in Section 2-117; plus 
(2)  Demand charge. Established in Section 2-117; plus 
(3)  Energy charge. Established in Section 2-117. 
(d)  Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge under this rate schedule shall be the highest one of the following charges: 
(1)  The amount established in Section 2-117 per month, plus applicable transmission delivery adjustment on the kilowatt-hours used. 
(2)  The sum of service, demand and energy charges under the above rate, plus applicable transmission delivery adjustment on the kilowatt-hours used. 
(3)  The minimum monthly charge specified in the customer's service contract with the City, plus applicable transmission delivery adjustment on the kilowatt-hours used. 
(e)  Billing demand. The billing demand shall be in the maximum 15-minute measured kilowatt demand in the billing period, but not less than 50 percent of the peak demand measured in the 12-month period ending with the current month. Unless otherwise specified in a firm electric service contract agreement, if at any time a customer billed under this schedule continues for a period of 12 consecutive months without a metered demand equal to or greater than 15 kW, Schedule SC shall apply beginning with the first month succeeding such 12-month period. Likewise, a customer on this schedule whose metered demand is equal to or greater than 300 kW for any billing period shall be billed under Schedule LP-2 for the next 12-month period beginning with the current month. 
(f)  Power factor. Should the power factor be lower than 0.90 lagging, the City may adjust the measured demand by multiplying by the ratio of 0.90 to the actual power factor. 
(g)  Primary service. Where service is taken by the customer at the City's available primary voltage and where the customer owns, operates, and maintains all service facilities, except metering equipment, required to take service at such voltage, a credit of two percent of the base rate charges will be allowed. Metering may be primary or secondary (corrected for the transformer losses) at the City's option. 
(h)  Transmission delivery adjustment. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a transmission delivery adjustment calculated in accordance with Schedule TDA; provided, however, that the adjustment shall never be less than zero. 
(i)  Electric off-peak rider. 
(1)  This rider is used in lieu of demand fees when the off-peak demand exceeds the on-peak demand. 
(2)  This off-peak rider shall apply in computing the customer's monthly electric bill. Under this rider, the demand for billing purposes shall be adjusted to be as follows: 
Off-peak rider =  (X+Y)  
  2   
Where: 
X = The peak demand measured during the on-peak period. 
Y = The peak demand measured during the off-peak period. 
(3)  However, in no case shall the billing demand in any month be less than 50 percent of the peak demand measured in the 12-month period ending with the current month. 
(4)  The periods for application of this rider are defined as follows: 
a.  On-peak period: 6:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday. 
b.  Off-peak period: 11:00 p.m. through 6:00 a.m. on Monday through Friday and 11:00 p.m. on Friday through 6:00 a.m. on Monday. 
(j)  Electric rider: Wind Watts Wind Energy Rider. 
(1)  Availability. This optional service shall be available to all commercial customers who select wind generated energy as a source of electricity under the City's Wind Watts Program, in lieu of electricity provided from traditional generation. Wind Watt's energy is available to customers on a first-come, first-served basis subject to available supply. 
(2)  Application. Eligible customers may select service under this rider at three levels of participation: 
a.  Ten percent of monthly energy requirements. 
b.  50 percent of monthly energy requirements. 
c.  100 percent of monthly energy requirements. 
(3)  Rate. Same rate as for medium commercial customers plus the monthly Wind Watts charge established in Section 2-117 for the appropriate participation level. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-4(A)(5); Ord. No. 2016-3811, exh. A(11-4), 9-22-2016; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-319. - Electric Rate Schedule LP-2 (large commercial). 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established Electric Rate Schedule LP-2, which shall be applicable to all commercial or industrial customers where service is taken through one meter at one point of delivery and where the monthly kilowatt demand is equal to or greater than 300 kW and less than 1,500 kW. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the City covering this type of service. Before service is furnished hereunder, an individual service agreement contract between the customer and the City may be required outlining all details of the service to be supplied, the terms of the contract, and the obligations of each party. 
(b)  Character of service. A.C., 60 cycles per second, three phase 120/208, 240/480, 277/480 volts as available at point of service. Three-phase customers served via underground primary to pad mounted transformers will be furnished only 120/208 (up to 1,000 kVA of load) or 277/480 volt service. 
(c)  Rate. 
(1)  Service charge: Established in Section 2-117; plus 
(2)  Demand charge: Established in Section 2-117; plus 
(3)  Energy charge: Established in Section 2-117. 
(d)  Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge under this rate schedule shall be the highest one of the following charges: 
(1)  The amount established in Section 2-117, plus applicable transmission delivery adjustment on the kilowatt-hours used. 
(2)  The sum of service, demand and energy charges under the above rate, plus applicable transmission delivery adjustment on the kilowatt-hours used. 
(3)  The minimum monthly charge specified in the customer's service contract with the City, plus applicable transmission delivery adjustment on the kilowatt-hours used. 
(e)  Billing demand. The billing demand shall be in the maximum 15-minute measured kilowatt demand in the billing period, but not less than 50 percent of the peak demand measured in the 12-month period ending with the current month. Unless otherwise specified in a firm electric service contract agreement, if at any time a customer billed under this schedule continues for a period of 12 consecutive months without a metered demand greater than or equal to 300 kW, Schedule LP-1 shall apply beginning with the first month succeeding such 12-month period. 
(f)  Power factor. Should the power factor be lower than 0.90 lagging, the City may adjust the measured demand by multiplying by the ratio of 0.90 of the actual power factor. 
(g)  Primary service. Where service is taken by the customer at the City's available primary voltage and where the customer owns, operates and maintains all service facilities, except metering equipment, required to take service at such voltage, a credit of two percent of the base rate charges will be allowed. Metering may be primary or secondary (corrected for the transformer losses) at the City's option. 
(h)  Transmission delivery adjustment. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a transmission delivery adjustment calculated in accordance with Schedule TDA; provided, however, that the adjustment shall never be less than zero. 
(i)  Electric on-peak/off-peak rider. Upon the customer's request, this rider shall be made available to customers billed under the rate schedule LP-2, whose monthly demand is greater than 300 kW, and who can reduce their load during the City's on-peak time between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. Under this rider, the demand for billing purposes shall be adjusted to be as follows: 
(1)  Rate. The applicable rate schedule demand charges shall be replaced by the following on-peak/off-peak rates: 
a.  On-peak demand charge: Established in Section 2-117; plus 
b.  Off-peak demand charge: Established in Section 2-117. 
(2)  However, in no case shall the off-peak billing demand in any month be less than 50 percent of the off-peak demand measured in the 12-month period ending with the current month. 
(3)  The periods for application of this rider are defined as follows: 
a.  On-peak period: 5:00 p.m. through 8:00 p.m., daily. 
b.  Off-peak period: 8:00 p.m. through 5:00 p.m., daily. 
(j)  Electric rider. Wind Watts Wind Energy Rider. 
(1)  Availability. This optional service shall be available to all commercial customers who select wind generated energy as a source of electricity under the City's Wind Watts Program, in lieu of electricity provided from traditional generation. Wind Watt's energy is available to customers on a first-come, first-served basis subject to available supply. 
(2)  Application. Eligible customers may select service under this rider at three levels of participation: 
a.  Ten percent of monthly energy requirements. 
b.  50 percent of monthly energy requirements. 
c.  100 percent of monthly energy requirements. 
(3)  Rate. Same rate as for large commercial customers plus the monthly Wind Watts charge established in Section 2-117 for the appropriate participation level. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-4(A)(6); Ord. No. 2016-3811, exh. A(11-4), 9-22-2016; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-320. - Electric rate Schedule LP-3 (industrial). 
(a)  Established. There is hereby established Electric Rate-Schedule LP-3, which shall be applicable to all industrial customers where service is taken through one meter at one point of delivery and where the monthly kilowatt demand is greater than or equal to 1,500 kW. Service will be furnished subject to the established rules and regulations of the City covering this type of service. Before service is furnished hereunder, an individual service agreement contract between the customer and the City may be required outlining all details of the service to be supplied, the terms of the contract, and the obligations of each party. 
(b)  Character of service. A.C., 60 cycles per second, 277/480, 2400/4160, 7200/12,470 volts as available at point of service. 
(c)  Rate. 
(1)  Service charge: Established in Section 2-117; plus 
(2)  Demand charge: Established in Section 2-117; plus 
(3)  Energy charge: Established in Section 2-117. 
(d)  Minimum monthly charge. The minimum monthly charge under this rate schedule shall be the highest of the following charges: 
(1)  The amount established in Section 2-117, plus applicable transmission delivery adjustment on the kilowatt-hours used. 
(2)  The sum of service, demand and energy charges under the above rate, plus applicable transmission delivery adjustment on the kilowatt-hours used. 
(3)  The minimum monthly charge specified in the customer's service contract with the City, plus applicable transmission delivery adjustment on the kilowatt-hours used. 
(e)  Billing demand. The billing demand shall be in the maximum 15-minute measured kilowatt demand in the billing period, but not less than 50 percent of the peak demand measured in the 12-month period ending with the current month. Unless otherwise specified in a firm electric service contract agreement, if at any time a customer billed under this schedule continues for a period of 12 consecutive months without a metered demand in equal to or greater than 1,500 kW, Schedule LP-2 shall apply beginning with the first month succeeding such 12-month period. 
(f)  Power factor. Should the power factor be lower than 0.90 lagging, the City may adjust the measured demand by multiplying by the ratio of 0.90 of the actual power factor. 
(g)  Primary service. Where service is taken by the customer at the City's available primary voltage and where the customer owns, operates and maintains all service facilities, except metering equipment, required to take service at such voltage, a credit of two percent of the base rate charges will be allowed. Metering may be primary or secondary (corrected for the transformer losses) at the City's option. 
(h)  Transmission delivery adjustment. The monthly charges under this rate schedule shall be increased or decreased as necessary to reflect the application of a transmission delivery adjustment calculated in accordance with Schedule TDA; provided, however, that the adjustment shall never be less than zero. 
(i)  Electric on-peak/off-peak rider. Upon the customer's request, this rider shall be made available to customers billed under the rate schedule LP-3, whose monthly demand is 300 kW or greater, and who can reduce their load during the City's on-peak time between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. Under this rider, the demand for billing purposes shall be adjusted to be as follows: 
(1)  Rate. The applicable rate schedule demand charges shall be replaced by the on-peak/off-peak rates established in Section 2-117. 
(2)  However, in no case shall the billing demand in any month be less than 50 percent of the peak demand measured in the 12-month period ending with the current month. 
(3)  The periods for application of this rider are defined as follows: 
a.  On-peak period: 5:00 p.m. through 8:00 p.m., daily. 
b.  Off-peak period: 8:00 p.m. through 5:00 p.m., daily. 
(j)  Electric rider: Wind Watts Wind Energy Rider. 
(1)  Availability. This optional service shall be available to all industrial customers who select wind-generated energy as a source of electricity under the City's Wind Watts Program, in lieu of electricity provided from traditional generation. Wind Watt's energy is available to customers on a first-come, first-served basis subject to available supply. 
(2)  Application. Eligible customers may select service under this rider at three levels of participation: 
a.  Ten percent of monthly energy requirements. 
b.  50 percent of monthly energy requirements. 
c.  100 percent of monthly energy requirements. 
(3)  Rate. Same rate as for industrial customers plus the monthly Wind Watts charge established in Section 2-117 for the appropriate participation level. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-4(A)(7); Ord. No. 2016-3811, exh. A(11-4), 9-22-2016; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-321. - Electric Rate Schedule SL (security lights). 
(a)  There is hereby established Electric Rate Schedule SL, which shall be applicable to all security lights installed and maintained by the City for customers at their request. The customer will be required to contract for security light service for a minimum period of three years. Service will be furnished under this rate schedule subject to the established rules and regulations of the City covering this type of service. 
(b)  Additional construction costs for installing security lights. The standard security light monthly fee includes installation of the security light on existing City-owned utility poles with available 120-volt service. No other facilities or poles shall be installed by the City or customer for the installation of security lights. 
(c)  The rates per month per light are established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-4(A)(8); Ord. No. 2016-3811, exh. A(11-4), 9-22-2016; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-322. - Electric Rate Schedule TDA (transmission delivery adjustment). 
(a)  There is hereby established Electric Rate Schedule TDA, which shall be electric service billed under all applicable rate schedules and shall be subject to the application of a transmission delivery adjustment (TDA) charge determined by multiplying the billing kilowatt-hours for the current month times a Transmission Delivery Adjustment Factor (TDAF). The TDAF shall be calculated on an annualized basis in accordance with the following formula: 
TDAF = TC - (P) (K) - CF / S 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    CF means correction factor adjustment to be applied to correct for any variance between actual TDA costs and revenues. The calculation of CF shall be performed on a monthly basis with the results of this reconciliation applied to the TDAF on an as-needed basis to maintain TDA revenues and costs in close proximity. ($) 
    TC means total estimated transmission delivery cost including congestion fees, ERCOT fees, ancillary costs, QSE fees and any other costs associated with delivery of wholesale power to the City on an annualized basis from City's wholesale energy supplier and other transmission entities. ($) 
    TDAF means transmission delivery adjustment factor, rounded to the nearest $0.0001 per kWh. 
    K means base transmission delivery cost included in the City's retail electric rate schedules. ($0.003 per kWh) 
    P means total estimated wholesale energy purchases on an annualized basis from City's wholesale energy supplier. (kWh) 
    S means total estimated kilowatt-hours energy sales to City customers on an annualized basis. (kWh) 
(c)  The formula for the calculation of the CF shall be as follows: 
CF = (A) - (B) 
Where: 
(A) = The actual transmission delivery adjustment revenues received from the application of the Transmission Delivery Adjustment Factor for the subject reconciliation period. ($) 
(B) = The actual transmission delivery adjustment costs which should have been recovered from the application of the Transmission Delivery Adjustment Factor for the subject reconciliation period. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-4(A)(9)) 
Sec. 40-323. - Electric Rate Schedule PQF. 
    Schedule PQF (purchases from qualifying small power production and cogeneration facilities less than or equal to 100 kw excluding customers qualifying for the Electric Rate Schedule SRE). 
(1)  There is hereby established Electric Rate Schedule PQF, which shall be applicable to qualifying small power production and cogeneration facilities (QFs) with a design capacity of 100 kW or less who contract, under mutually agreeable terms, with the City for the sale of energy and for any necessary interconnections. A QF is defined as a small power production or cogeneration facility that qualifies under Subchapter K, Part 292, Subpart B of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's Regulations that implement Section 201 and 210 of the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978. Such facilities must fully comply with the City's Electric Service Rules and Regulations in reference to QFs to qualify for purchases to be made under this rate. 
(2)  Interconnections costs. Each QF producer shall be obligated to pay interconnection costs directly related to the installation of the physical facilities necessary to permit interconnected operations with the qualifying facility. Interconnection costs shall be determined in accordance with the City's Electric Service Rules and Regulations applicable to QFs, and such costs shall be paid by the QF producer prior to any purchase of energy by the City. 
(3)  Rate. The City will pay the QF producer for all power purchased at the following rates: 
a.  Capacity. No payment shall be made, except by separate firm power contract between the producer and the City. 
b.  Energy. Based upon their current electric service rate for the kilowatt-hours used from the City's electric distribution system. The excess kilowatt-hours that are passed back to the system from their on-site generation will be purchased at a rate equal to the average base wholesale kilowatt-hour energy cost for power paid by the City. This average base wholesale kilowatt-hour energy cost will be calculated based upon the past year's average wholesale cost and will be updated once a year (in October) to update this value. 
(4)  Metering and payment options. The available revenue metering arrangements for QFs and the payment options to the producer for energy purchases to be made by the City therefrom shall be as defined in the City's Electric Service Rules and Regulations pertaining to qualifying small power production and cogeneration facilities. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-4(A)(10); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-324. - Electric Rider HED (higher education discount). 
    In accordance with Texas Utilities Code  36.351, a 20 percent discount will be given to any four-year state university, upper-level institution, Texas State Technical College or college that qualifies for such discount under the statute. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-4(A)(11)) 
Sec. 40-325. - Electric Rate Schedule SRE. 
    Schedule SRE (small renewable energy customers connecting single phase distributed generation from renewable sources less than or equal to 20 kW). 
(1)  There is hereby established Electric Rate Schedule SRE, which shall be applicable to any retail customer receiving single phase electric service under a City electric rate schedule who owns and operates an on-site generating system powered by a renewable energy technology capable of producing not more than 20 kW of power and who interconnects with the City's electric distribution system. Renewable energy technology is any technology that exclusively relies on an energy source that is naturally regenerated over a short time and derived directly from the sun, indirectly from the sun, or from moving water or other natural movements and mechanisms of the environment. Renewable energy technologies include those that rely on energy derived directly from the sun, wind, geothermal source, hydroelectric source, wave or tidal energy; or on biomass or biomass-based waste products including landfill gas. A renewable energy technology does not rely on energy resources derived from fossil fuels, waste products from fossil fuels, or waste products from inorganic sources. This section applies to a retail customer-owned generation system that primarily offsets part or all of the customer's electric service provided by the City. 
(2)  All charges, character of service, and terms and conditions of the City's Electric Rate Schedule under which the retail customer receives service apply except as expressly altered by this section. 
(3)  The retail customer shall comply with the current City technical requirements for distributed generation interconnection for facilities under 20 kW and any revisions to the requirements. The retail customer shall obtain approval from the City before the customer energizes the customer's on-site generating system or interconnects it with the City's electric distribution system. The retail customer shall submit to the City a completed interconnection application and signed agreement on a form approved by the City Manager or designee. The minimum term of an agreement under this section shall be one year, extended automatically unless terminated by either party with a 60-day written notice. 
(4)  The retail customer is responsible for the material and labor costs of interconnecting with the City's electric distribution system including transformers, metering, service lines, and other equipment determined necessary by the City for the safe installation and operation of the customer's equipment with the City's system. The customer is also responsible for the material and labor cost of all equipment required and/or installed on their side of the meter. 
(5)  Metering. Metering under this section shall be performed by a single meter capable of registering and recording the flow of electricity in two directions (delivered and received) to separately measure the customer's usage from the City's electric distribution system and the amount of the customer's surplus energy that was passed to the City's electric distribution system. 
(6)  Rate. In a billing month after the retail customer receives approval to interconnect their on-site generating system to the City's electric distribution system, the customer will be billed: 
a.  Based upon their current electric service rate for the kilowatt-hours used from the City's electric distribution system. The excess kilowatt-hours that are passed back to the system from their on-site generation will be purchased at a rate equal to the average base wholesale kilowatt-hour energy cost for power paid by the City. This average base wholesale kilowatt-hour energy cost will be calculated based upon the past year's average wholesale cost and will be updated once a year (in October) to update this value. 
b.  The calculated amount for the excess kilowatt-hours passed back to the system will be credited to the current balance of the retail customer's utility account. If a credit exists at any time on the account, the customer may request in writing a refund for the credit amount. If the customer closes the account with a credit remainder in their account, they will be refunded this amount. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-4(A)(12)) 
Secs. 40-326-40-353. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal regulation of sanitation, Texas Health and Safety Code  342.001 et seq.; Solid Waste Disposal Act, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 361; littering, Texas Health and Safety Code ch. 365. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-354. - Occupied units defined. 
    A residential or commercial unit shall be deemed to be occupied when either water or electric service is supplied thereto. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(f)) 
Sec. 40-355. - Compliance. 
    The storage, collection or disposal of any solid waste in any manner other than those designated by ordinance is expressly prohibited. The collection of municipal solid waste within the limits of the City is hereby prohibited except as franchised by the City Council pursuant to the City Charter. All franchised contractor containers shall be marked with franchised company name, address and telephone number. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(c), (r)) 
Sec. 40-356. - Littering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw, or otherwise deposit upon or along any drain, gutter, alley, sidewalk, street, street right-of-way, median strip, drainage easement or other public place of travel or any private property, any municipal solid waste of any type. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(bb)) 
Sec. 40-357. - Property maintenance. 
    All owners or occupants shall maintain the real property owned or occupied by them in a clean and litter-free condition. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting the storage of refuse or litter in authorized containers for solid waste collection pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(dd)) 
Secs. 40-358-40-387. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WASTE COLLECTION GENERALLY 

Sec. 40-388. - Service level and appeal. 
    The City may upon notice and hearing require replacement of containers and/or changes in container type or the service levels at any location when the current service level is deemed to be inadequate causing a health, sanitation or litter problem. The decision may be appealed to the City Manager by the customer. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(D)) 
Sec. 40-389. - Residential collection generally. 
(a)  Residential units with less than four attached units. Each single-family detached residential unit in a building with less than a total of four attached residential units not required by the City's Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A) solid waste minimum standard to provide dumpster enclosures will each be provided with a 70-gallon, City-owned, automated solid waste collection container. Service shall be once per week. All containers must be placed out for collection by 8:00 a.m. on the scheduled service day and removed from the designated pick up place within 12 hours after scheduled collection. The utility customer, owner and occupant are responsible for placing the container out for collection and removing the container after collection. 
(1)  Seventy gallon containers. Each single-family detached residential unit or housing unit with less than four attached residential units that has been assigned a 70-gallon, City-owned, automated solid waste container will be provided with once per week garbage, brush, rubbish, and recycling collection. 
(2)  Automatic solid waste container. Each single-family detached residential unit or housing unit with less than four attached residential units that has been assigned a city-owned automated solid waste container will be provided with once per week garbage, brush, rubbish, and every other week recycling collection. 
(b)  Residential units with four or more attached units. Each residential unit with four or more attached residential units in a complex not been identified as a multi-family apartment complex by the City that has been assigned a shared large City-owned automated solid waste collection container, will be provided with twice per week garbage collection, once per week brush/rubbish collection, and every other week recycling collection. 
(c)  Residential refuse only. Only residential refuse is to be placed in containers. Construction demolition waste, tires, dead animals, hazardous substances and stable matter such as dirt, brick and rock will not be accepted. 
(d)  Waste not in container is customer's responsibility. Any garbage or waste not contained in the automated container provided will not be picked up or hauled by City services and shall remain the responsibility of the customer/generator for disposal. The cleanup of any spillage caused by overfilling a container will be the responsibility of the customer/generator. 
(e)  Container lid closed, no items on lid. When storing the container or when the container has been set out for collection, the lid must be kept closed at all times to prevent any accumulation of water. No bags, boxes or other items shall be placed on the top of the closed container lid so as to hinder servicing of the container. 
(f)  Container replacement. If the container is lost by theft or damaged beyond use by any means other than by the occupant's own neglect or misuse, the container shall be replaced by the City at no cost to the occupant. If the container is lost or damaged beyond use as a result of the occupant's neglect or misuse, the cost of a replacement container will be charged. The occupant shall promptly notify the City in the event of the need for repair or replacement of the container. 
(g)  Additional containers. Any customer generating more waste than one container will hold may request an additional container and shall pay an additional fee as established in Section 2-117. 
(h)  Authorized container pick-up only. Only authorized automated containers provided by the City will be serviced on collection day, no other containers, boxes, or bags placed at the collection site will be picked up by the automated system. 
(i)  Container assignment. Automated containers are assigned and issued to the location of the utility user and will not be removed, transferred, or replaced by the customer. 
(j)  Prohibited waste. It shall be unlawful for customers to put construction demolition waste, hot ashes, oil, corrosive solvents, pool chemicals, lead acid batteries or any other hazardous substances in the residential container. 
(k)  Container and bulky waste placement. Each residential automated container, bag, or bundle shall be placed at curbside for solid waste collection. Each residential customer shall place bulky waste at a location that is acceptable to the City for solid waste collection. Items shall be placed as close to the paved or traveled portion of the roadway as practicable without interfering with or endangering the movement of vehicles or pedestrians. When construction work is being performed in the right-of-way, items shall be placed as close as practicable to an access point for the City collection vehicle. 
(l)  Container placement time. Automated containers shall not be placed curbside before 5:00 a.m. the day of which collection is scheduled. Automated containers shall be removed from the designated pickup point and placed either adjacent to their dwelling or at a location designated by the City within 12 hours of their scheduled collection day. Under no circumstances, shall an automated container be placed for normal daily use within an area defined by the edge of the street, pavement, or curb and the building set back line. 
(m)  Prohibited parking. It shall be unlawful to park, place, allow, permit, or cause to be parked or placed any motor vehicle, trailer, boat, or similar obstruction ("obstructing item") within 15 feet of, or obstruct in any manner, the collection of solid waste contained in a City-owned container larger than 90 gallons. If an obstructing item prevents the collection of a City-owned solid waste container larger than 90 gallons, the City shall be authorized to order the removal of the obstructing item. The cost of the removal shall be the responsibility of the owner of the obstructing item. All City-owned solid waste containers larger than 90 gallons shall be marked with a sign and/or label that states: "Do Not Block or Park Within 15 Feet of Container - Tow Away Zone." 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(g), (j)-(l), (1)(jj), (2); Ord. No. 2017-3866,  11-5(B)(1)(j), (1)(k), (1)(l), 3-23-2017; Ord. No. 2019-4093 , Pt. 1(Exh. A0, 5-23-2019) 
Sec. 40-390. - Handicapped persons. 
    City and city's contractor shall provide door-side solid waste and recycling collection service for qualified handicapped households. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(h); Ord. No. 2017-3866,  11-5(B)(1)(h), 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 40-391. - Commercial collection. 
(a)  All commercial units shall utilize automated or roll-off commercial-type containers as designated by the City for the collection of commercial refuse. 
(b)  Upon request for solid waste collection service, the City shall designate the service level requirements for that location. The City will provide for the removal of garbage and/or trash under the rates established for commercial containerized collection. Automated collection containers will be provided by the City and roll-off compacting containers shall be provided by the customer. The customer shall be responsible for providing container screening to comply with the City's Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
(c)  When it is beneficial for small businesses that generate low volumes of waste to jointly use a container set for their convenience, the basic charge will be divided between the businesses. However, this charge shall not be lower than the minimum charge for any commercial location. The size and number of containers provided shall be determined by the City. 
(d)  Containers shall not be set out unless an all-weather access route capable of supporting the container service truck is available. The City will not be responsible for damage done to private drives and parking areas by service trucks servicing containers. 
(e)  The owner or occupant of the premises shall be responsible for keeping the area around the container clean and clear of all garbage and trash. 
(f)  If a container is unserviceable, such as being blocked or containing prohibited items, the City truck shall return to empty the container only after the container is clear from other vehicles and/or prohibited items are removed from the container for a fee as established in Section 2-117. 
(g)  No person shall place any refuse or refuse container on, in or over any drainage system. 
(h)  The City may, upon notice, require replacement of containers and/or changes in container type or the service levels at any location when the City deems the current service level to be inadequate and thereby causing a health, sanitation, or litter problem. The decision may be appealed to the City Manager by the customer. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(4)) 
Sec. 40-392. - Collection limits. 
    Not more than 20 total units of bags or bundles of refuse shall be placed at the curbside, at one time, for solid waste collection service. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(i)) 
Sec. 40-393. - Weight limitations. 
    The total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 50 pounds. Bags shall be sealed, having no punctures, tears or undesigned openings. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(e)) 
Sec. 40-394. - Container lids and doors. 
    Lids and doors of all containers shall be kept closed at all times except when the container is being filled. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(m)) 
Sec. 40-395. - Unprepared solid waste. 
    The City's Sanitation Division shall cause the clean-up of the improperly or unprepared waste, litter or debris that constitutes a health or nuisance to the community. The fee established in Section 2-117 or the actual cost of cleanup, whichever is greater, shall be paid by the responsible party. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(v)) 
Sec. 40-396. - Leaves and grass. 
    Leaves and grass shall be placed at the curb in plastic bags which shall not weigh more than 50 pounds each. Brush shall be totally separated from all other waste, including metals, lumber, paper, plastics, furniture, appliances, concrete and any other solid materials and shall be cut in sections not exceeding eight feet in length and placed at the curb for solid waste collection. Any waste, regardless of quantity or size, mixed with brush constitutes a violation of this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(a)) 
Sec. 40-397. - Garbage and household waste. 
    Garbage and household waste must be bagged in plastic bags and placed curbside in city-owned automated and commercial containers. Bulky waste and brush shall be exempt from this requirement. Plastic bags shall be of sufficient strength and puncture resistance to prevent the contents from spillage before and during collection. All bags shall be securely tied or otherwise fastened or closed so as to prevent spillage or entry by vector and vermin. Only garbage and household waste is to be placed in plastic bags. Construction demolition waste, tires, hazardous substances and stable matter such as dirt, brick, and rock will not be accepted. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(b); Ord. No. 2017-3866,  11-5(B)(1)(b), 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 40-398. - Pointed or sharp objects. 
    Pointed or sharp objects, including, but not limited to, broken glass, jagged metal, razors, needles, and wire, shall be sufficiently wrapped in paper and securely taped or tied before bagging or bundling so as to prevent injury when handled. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(d)) 
Sec. 40-399. - Small animals. 
    Upon notice, the City will remove and dispose of small dead animals, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, chickens, ducks and geese, either from private property or public rights-of-way, excluding animal clinics. Customers requesting removal from private property shall place the animal in a plastic bag and place the bag curbside before notification of pick up. Removal and disposal of small dead animals from private animal clinics shall be for a fee as established in Section 2-117. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(n)) 
Sec. 40-400. - Bulky wastes. 
    Residential customers paying for and needing collection and disposal of bulky waste shall contain the waste to prevent wind-blown litter and place the waste at the curb or right-of-way no longer than 48 hours prior to their designated collection day. Commercial and residential locations that have been identified as multifamily apartment complexes by the City, will be responsible for the collection and disposal of all bulky waste. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(o)) 
Sec. 40-401. - Construction site or cleanup waste. 
(a)  Construction demolition waste shall be contained on-site. Rubbish that may be wind-blown must be confined in a container or temporary holding pen. The construction site must be free from accumulations of rubbish which may act as a harborage for vermin and vectors. 
(b)  Rock, construction demolition waste, building materials, or other refuse resulting from building or remodeling operations or resulting from a general cleanup of vacant or improved property, will not be removed by the city. Such waste shall be removed by the building contractor, owner, or occupant of the property at his own expense. The city will remove said refuse for the contractor, owner, or occupant, utilizing roll-off containers only, for a fee as established herein. The city will not remove hot ashes or fire coals. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(p), (q); Ord. No. 2017-3866,  11-5(B)(1)(q), 3-23-2017) 
Sec. 40-402. - Brush and lumber. 
    It shall be unlawful to place items such as brush and lumber or other materials in a bag, receptacle, sanitary container and City-supplied container of any type which may cause damage to the container or collection truck. In the event such items are placed in a container, the occupant of the premises for which such container has been furnished is responsible for the removal of these items prior to unloading into the container truck. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(z)) 
Sec. 40-403. - Tires. 
    Scrap/used tires will not be allowed to accumulate on any property, residential or commercial. All scrap tires will be stored so that there will be no accumulation of water and that the tire will not be in direct contact with the ground. Businesses engaged in the sale or repair of tires will store tires in a manner so as not to be visible from any right-of-way. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(cc)) 
Sec. 40-404. - Infectious or pathological waste; medical waste. 
(a)  Public health hazards. No infectious wastes or pathological refuse or any other refuse that may cause a public health hazard shall be placed in any container used for solid waste collection by the City or collection by any private agency. The following are several types of special refuse items which shall be given special care and preparation before disposing of the same in any refuse container. 
(1)  Hypodermic instruments and other sharp articles. No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections without prior placement in a puncture-resistant container for disposal so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the solid waste collection personnel. 
(2)  Ashes. Ashes that are to be collected by the City must have been wetted and cooled to the touch prior to solid waste collection. Ashes shall not be placed with the normal refuse unless separately wrapped, so that they will not cause injury to the solid waste collection personnel. 
(b)  Collection of medical waste. The City shall provide collection of medical waste from customers/generators by an approved, franchised medical waste collection contractor. The rate to be charged by the contractor to the customer/generator for the collection of medical waste shall be set by contract and approved by the City Council. Customers disposing of medical waste shall comply with all applicable Federal and State law. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(ff), (ii)) 
Sec. 40-405. - White goods. 
    White goods must be totally separated from all other waste to allow for separate collection. All white goods containing CFCs shall not be collected until such time that the CFCs have been removed. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(hh)) 
Sec. 40-406. - Miscellaneous prohibited materials. 
    No person shall dispose of or place for collection and disposal prohibited materials, as designated under any applicable Federal and State laws. Hazardous and/or prohibited waste shall not be placed in solid waste collection containers. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(aa), (ee)) 
Sec. 40-407. - Unauthorized use of containers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or business, other than the owner or occupant of the premises for whom the container has been furnished and who is currently paying a garbage pickup charge, to place anything in such container. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to make a fire or burn any material in a sanitation container furnished by the City, or to paint or mark upon or to place any poster, placard or sign upon the same. Any customer having a container that is burned will be charged replacement costs equal to the actual costs involved. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(w), (x)) 
Sec. 40-408. - Unauthorized removal of container or contents; tampering with containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner to remove any material from any receptacle, bag or sanitary container, or the said bag, receptacle, or sanitary container itself. No person, other than employees of the City charged with such duty, shall tamper with the contents of any refuse container set out for removal by the City or any private solid waste collection agency. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(y), (gg)) 
Secs. 40-409-40-429. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RECYCLING 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 40-430. - Residential curbside recycling collection. 
(a)  Customers participating in the curbside recycling collection program will be furnished with an automated container for all recyclable items placed for collection. 
(b)  Only designated recyclable items can be placed in the automated container. Any other items or garbage will not be accepted. 
(c)  In the event a customer places any other item or garbage in an automated container designated for recycling, the customer or property owner shall be responsible for removing the other items or garbage from the container or scheduling an extra collection. Fees are outlined in section 40-496(3). 
(d)  In the event the city's contractor intends to terminate curbside recycling to any customer, contractor must send a written request and state the reason for termination to the public works director or their designee. The public works director or their designee shall have five business days to review the request. The public works director or their designee shall make decisions regarding any customer's curbside recycling termination and send written notice of the decision to the customer and to the city's contractor. The customer may appeal the public works director or their designee's decision to the city manager in writing. The city manager shall have five business days to review the customer's appeal and send written notice of the decision to the customer and the city's contractor. There is no appeal from the city manager. The customer may reapply for curbside recycling six months after the date of the last decision. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(3); Ord. No. 2017-3866,  11-5(B)(3), 3-23-2017) 
Secs. 40-431-40-458. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Recycling Centers 

Sec. 40-459. - Generally. 
    All recycling drop-off centers must be approved by the City Manager pursuant to the regulations set forth in this subdivision before receiving such recyclables. Approval shall be subject to compliance with the following performance standards, as determined by the City Manager: 
(1)  That issuance will be in the best interest of public health and safety; 
(2)  That issuance will not cause a traffic safety hazard impeding traffic flow on or off the recycling drop-off center. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(s)) 
Sec. 40-460. - Temporary recycling centers. 
    A temporary permit may be obtained for operation of a temporary recycling drop-off center, subject to compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  A written application, on a form provided by the Department of Public Works, must be filed in the Office of the Director of Public Works at least 30 days prior to the proposed collection of recyclable materials at the temporary recycling facility. The term of the permit shall not exceed seven consecutive days. Permits for temporary recycling activities shall be granted for small recycling drop-off centers, which shall only recycle newsprint, paper, glass bottles, metal cans, plastic containers, or any combination of these materials. 
(2)  Temporary permits shall only be issued to organizations holding a certificate of exemption from Federal income tax or State sales tax or franchise taxes or to any other person or entity who conveys any profits derived from their recycling activity to a tax-exempt organization. In no case shall a temporary permit be issued to any person or business entity for whom recycling is a regular part of their business activity. 
(3)  No bond or insurance will be required for the issuance of a temporary permit. 
(4)  The permittee shall service the recycling drop-off center regularly to prevent overflow, accumulation and deter pilferage of recyclables. The area surrounding receptacles for collection and storage of recyclable materials, waste materials, processing materials or other material shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. No recyclable materials, waste material, trash, processing material or other matter shall be allowed to accumulate around any receptacle or to overflow from any receptacle. The permittee shall ensure that materials delivered to a recycling facility shall be handled and managed in such a manner so as to prevent, at all times, wind-blown materials. The permittee shall not dump or discard any matter on the ground on the premises of the recycling drop-off center at any time, or allow any person to do so. The permittee shall be solely responsible for the proper storage and disposal of non-recyclables deposited at the recycling facility. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(C)(1)) 
Sec. 40-461. - Permanent recycling drop-off centers. 
    A permit for operation of a permanent recycling drop-off center may be obtained subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  A written application on a form provided by the Department of Public Works must be filed in the Office of the Director of Public Works at least 30 days prior to the proposed collection of recyclable materials at the permanent recycling facility. 
(2)  An application fee for a permanent recycling drop-off center may be set by the City Council. 
(3)  A permit may be denied if the required information is incomplete, incorrect or shows that a person is not otherwise entitled to conduct a permanent recycling drop-off center. 
(4)  Every permit shall be visibly displayed where it can be read by the general public utilizing the recycling drop-off center. 
(5)  A bond of not less than $1,000.00 executed by the applicant with two or more good and sufficient sureties, satisfactory to the City, shall be made payable to the City, for the use and benefit of any person entitled thereto, and on condition that the principal and sureties shall pay all damages to persons caused by or arising from or growing out of any action of the applicant, or the employees, agents, successors or assigns thereof, while operating the permitted recycling drop-off center. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the operation of the recycling center and the permittee shall be responsible for the submission of a new bond no less than ten days prior to the expiration of any current bond. In the event that the permittee fails to do so, then the permittee shall immediately cease operation of the recycling drop-off center and shall prevent the public from utilizing the facility. 
(6)  An applicant for a permanent recycling drop-off center shall provide the following information on the application form: 
a.  Name of the applicant. 
b.  Legal name of the business entity, if any, address, telephone number, state of incorporation or filing of a partnership or articles of association. 
c.  Sales tax number or evidence of tax-exempt status. 
d.  A description of the property intended to be utilized as the recycling drop-off center, sufficient to permit City employees to identify the proposed location of the recycling facility. 
e.  The site plan to be submitted for review pursuant to the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A), which shall show the location and type of receptacles. 
f.  A listing of the materials to be collected for recycling. 
(7)  All recycling activities shall conform to the requirements of this subdivision, as well as Federal and State laws and regulations. 
(8)  The permittee shall service the recycling drop-off center regularly to prevent overflow, accumulation and deter pilferage of recyclables. The area surrounding receptacles for collection and storage of recyclable materials, waste material, processing material or other materials shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner at all times. No recyclable materials, waste material, trash, processing material or other matter shall be allowed to accumulate around any receptacle or to overflow from any receptacle. The permittee shall ensure that materials delivered to a recycling facility shall be handled and managed in such a manner so as to prevent, at all times, wind-blown materials. The permittee shall not dump or discard any matter on the ground on the premises of the recycling drop-off center at any time or allow any person to do so. The permittee shall be solely responsible for the proper storage and disposal of non-recyclables deposited at the recycling facility. 
(9)  The City shall have the authority to enter onto premises permitted hereunder and inspect for compliance with the terms and conditions imposed herein and under the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
(10)  A permit may be revoked for non-conformity with the provisions herein and/or with the provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). In the event that the City determines that there is a violation of the permit or the conditions imposed, then the City shall give the permittee ten days' written notice at the address provided by the permittee on the application or supplemented by him or her to come into compliance. In the event that the permittee disputes the violations alleged, then the permittee must give written notice to the City of a requested hearing within the ten-day time period. If the permittee fails to request a hearing within that time period, then the permittee will be conclusively considered to have acknowledged that the violation does in fact exist. If the permittee does request a hearing, it shall be held before the City Manager. Should the City Manager find that the permittee is in violation of the permit, the City Manager will provide the permittee with a reasonable time period to come into compliance. A determination by the City Manager shall be final. Any determination of noncompliance under this subsection shall not operate to deprive the City of any other remedy it may have under the laws of the State or this Code. 
(11)  In the event that the City finds that there are immediate serious health or safety violations that endanger the public or that the order to come into compliance with the permit, as provided above, has not been met, then the City shall immediately provide notice of hearing to the permittee, at the address provided or supplemented by the permittee. The hearing shall take place in not less than ten working days from the date of notice. 
(12)  The City shall have the authority to revoke or suspend a permit where it is determined that the health or safety of the public is in danger or where it is determined that there has not been compliance with notices or orders to comply as provided herein. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(C)(2)) 
Sec. 40-462. - Recordkeeping requirements. 
    Every operator of any permitted recycling drop-off center, temporary or permanent, shall maintain on the premises, available for inspection by the City during regular business hours, records of the center's activities, including: 
(1)  The amount of each type of recyclable material received in each month. 
(2)  Each shipment of recyclable material received from any other recycling drop-off center. 
(3)  Each shipment of recyclable material received from a scrap dealer or junk dealer. 
(4)  Any materials transferred to the recycling drop-off center but rejected upon submission for acceptance. Such record of the rejection shall indicate the date and place of rejection, the type and amount of each material rejected, and the reason for rejection. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(C)(3)) 
Sec. 40-463. - Collection and sale of recyclables. 
    No person shall engage in the business of collecting and selling of residential recyclables in the City, and no person shall use the public streets, alleys and thoroughfares within the corporate limits of the City for the purpose of engaging in such business, other than a person who has executed a contract or franchise with the City providing for this collection. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(C)(4)) 
Secs. 40-464-40-494. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 40-495. - Generally. 
    Solid waste collection rates are applied based on both the method and number of services provided. Except as otherwise provided in this division, the charges for solid waste collection and disposal shall be established in Section 2-117. 
Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(E)(1); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-496. - Commercial collection rates. 
    The monthly per container garbage collection and disposal charge for commercial locations shall be established in Section 2-117. 
Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(E)(2); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-497. - Additional charges. 
    Additional charges established in Section 2-117 will be assessed and collected upon the performance of the following described service or the occurrence of the described use or condition: 
(1)  Per cycle fee for usage of the Northgate Promenade Commercial Compactor. The minimum monthly charge as described in Section 40-495 for small businesses that jointly use a commercial-type refuse container will apply until usage exceeds five cycles per calendar month. 
(2)  Daily rental fee for the use of any City-owned, 20-cubic yard roll-off container. 
(3)  Daily rental fee for the use of any City-owned, 30-cubic yard roll-off container. 
(4)  Daily rental fee for the use of any City-owned, 40-cubic yard roll-off container. 
(5)  Per carcass fee for one to 19 animal carcasses collected from a commercial veterinarian, plus a flat rate service charge of $20.00. The flat rate service charge is waived for 20 or more animal carcasses collected at one time. 
(6)  Additional fee for collection service requested by customer in addition to the scheduled service on a 90-gallon container. 
(7)  Additional fee for any location (other than residential) where the container was blocked and the collection vehicle must return to provide service. 
(8)  Additional fee for collection service requested by customer in addition to the scheduled service on a 300-gallon or 400-gallon container. 
(9)  Additional fee for delivery and set-up on any City-owned, roll-off container. 
(10)  Additional fee for collection service requested by customer in addition to the scheduled service on a two-cubic yard container. 
(11)  Additional fee for collection service requested by customer in addition to the scheduled service on a two-cubic yard compactor. 
(12)  Additional fee for collection service requested by customer in addition to the scheduled service on a four-cubic yard container. 
(13)  Additional fee for collection service requested by customer in addition to the scheduled service on a four-cubic yard compactor. 
(14)  Additional fee for collection service requested by customer in addition to the scheduled service on an eight-cubic yard container. 
(15)  Additional fee for collection service requested by customer in addition to the scheduled service on a six-cubic yard compactor. 
(16)  Unprepared solid waste minimum charge. 
(17)  All roll-off container service per load plus current per-ton landfill charge. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(E)(3); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 40-498. - Assessed monthly. 
    The charges fixed herein for the collection, removal and disposal of all solid waste shall be entered on the customer's monthly utility bill. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(t)) 
Sec. 40-499. - Failure to pay. 
    Any customer who fails or refuses to pay the monthly charge when due shall no longer receive garbage collection service from the City until such charges are paid in full. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-5(B)(1)(u)) 
Secs. 40-500-40-521. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DRAINAGE UTILITY 

Sec. 40-522. - Classification of real property. 
    The real property benefiting from this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Commercial; and 
(2)  Residential. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-7(A)) 
Sec. 40-523. - Exemptions. 
    Any person owning real property in the jurisdictional limits of the City shall be exempt from the Municipal Drainage Utility System when one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly sufficient and privately owned drainage system; 
(2)  Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time that the property is developed and all of the public infrastructure constructed has been accepted by the City for maintenance; 
(3)  A subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the City; and 
(4)  The following governmental entities: 
a.  Texas A&M University. 
b.  College Station Independent School District. 
c.  City of Bryan. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-7(B)) 
Sec. 40-524. - Rates. 
    All charges shall be made in accordance with the classification of properties by the following categories: 
(1)  Residential service shall be charged on the basis of a set fee per residential unit. 
a.  Each single-family detached residential unit and each duplex residential unit: Established in Section 2-117. 
b.  Each residential unit with two or more attached residential units and all residential units in a complex identified as a multifamily apartment complex: Established in Section 2-117. 
(2)  All other lots, tracts and parcels of land within the City shall be considered and charged on the basis of commercial use in accordance with the schedule of drainage charges established in Section 2-117 which are hereby levied against all such remaining lots, tract or parcels of land within the City unless covered by exemptions listed herein. Commercial service shall be calculated on the basis of building square footage. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  11-7(C); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES 
Chapter 101 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 101-1. - Application of Chapter 1. 
    The provisions of Chapter 1 apply to this subpart. 
(Added in 2017 recodification) 
Secs. 101-2-101-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD 

Sec. 101-21. - Created; functions. 
    Subject to the like provisions being made by the City Council of Bryan, Texas, the Commissioners' Court of Burleson County, Texas, by proper order, duly promulgated and entered on their minutes, and as authorized by Texas Transportation Code  241.014, there is hereby created a Joint Airport Zoning Board, to be known as the Easterwood Field Joint Airport Zoning Board, which shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in Texas Transportation Code  241.011 and 231.012. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-3) 
Sec. 101-22. - Membership. 
    The Easterwood Field Joint Airport Zoning Board shall be composed of nine members, two to be appointed by the City Council of College Station, Texas, and two to be appointed by the City Council of Bryan, Texas, two members to be appointed by the Commissioners' Court of Brazos County, Texas, and two members to be appointed by the Commissioners' Court of Burleson County, Texas. The ninth member shall be elected by a majority of the members so appointed and said ninth member shall serve as Chairperson of the said Easterwood Field Joint Airport Zoning Board. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  8-3) 
Chapter 103 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 103-1. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this chapter or the technical codes, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing or fire protection system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing or fire protection system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be punished as provided in Section 1-7. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the technical codes is committed or continued. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(E)) 
Secs. 103-2-103-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 103-21-103-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS; APPEALS AND VARIANCES 

Sec. 103-44. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a board to be called the "Construction Board of Adjustment and Appeals". 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(A)(1)) 
Sec. 103-45. - Membership and conflicts of interest. 
(a)  Construction. The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall consist of five members appointed by City Council. The City Council shall appoint one member as Chairperson. The Board shall be composed of individuals with knowledge and experience in the technical codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. In addition to the regular members, the City Council may appoint up to four alternate members. A Board member shall not act in a case in which the member has any conflict of interest. 
(b)  Terms. The term of office is three years, provided, however, that (a) two of the members whose terms expire January 2020 shall be appointed to a one year term and two of the members whose terms expire January 2020 shall be appointed to a two year term; and (b) the two alternates whose terms expire January 2020 and January 2021 shall be appointed to a two year term. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three years. The alternates shall serve in the absence of one or more of the regular members. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the Board shall, at the discretion of the City Council, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(A)(2)(a), (b); Ord. No. 2018-4030 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 7-26-2018; Ord. No. 2019-4089 , Pt. 3(Exh. B), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 103-46. - Secretary of Board. 
    The Building Official or designee shall appoint a Secretary to record minutes of the meetings of the Board and to make a detailed record of all of its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(A)(2)(d)) 
Sec. 103-47. - Quorum and voting. 
    All cases heard by the Board shall be heard by at least four members. The concurring vote of four members of the Board is necessary to take any action. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members shall vote. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(A)(2)(c)) 
Sec. 103-48. - Powers. 
    The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall have the power, as further defined in this chapter, to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the Building Official or designee and to consider variances to the terms of the technical codes. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(A)(3)) 
Sec. 103-49. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  Decision of the Building Official or designee. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the Building Official or designee to the Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The Building Official or designee rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of this Code or the technical codes do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  An equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of this Code or the technical codes, or any of the regulations thereunder, have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. 
(1)  The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this Code or the technical codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this Code or the technical codes or the public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist that are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and that are not applicable to others. 
b.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Code or the technical codes to other buildings, structures or service system. 
d.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
e.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this Code or the technical codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  In granting the variance, the Board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed, or both. In addition, the Board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Code or the technical codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(c)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the Building Official or designee. The notice of appeal shall be in a form acceptable to the Building Official or designee. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(A)(4)) 
Sec. 103-50. - Procedures. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The Board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code or the technical codes. The Board shall meet on call of the Chairperson. The Board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(b)  Decisions. The Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the Board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the Board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the Building Official or designee or varies the application of any provision of this Code, the Building Official or designee shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the Office of the Building Official or designee and shall be open to public inspection as required by State law. An official copy of the decision shall be sent by certified mail or by hand delivery to the applicant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the Office of the Building Official or designee for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the Board shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(A)(5)) 
Secs. 103-51-103-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS COMMISSION 

Sec. 103-74. - Creation and purpose. 
    There shall be appointed by the City Council a Building and Standards Commission to hear and determine cases concerning violations of the Building Code. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(B)(1)) 
Sec. 103-75. - Membership. 
(a)  The Commission shall consist of five members appointed by City Council for two-year terms and four alternate members who shall serve in the absence of one or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the Mayor or City Manager. The alternate Commission Members serve for the same period and are subject to removal in the same manner as the regular members. 
(b)  The City Council may remove a Commission Member for cause on a written charge. Before a decision regarding removal is made, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the matter if requested by the Commission Member subject to the removal action. Any member shall be automatically removed, without the necessity of charges and a hearing, in the event that said member is absent from 25 percent or more of the regularly scheduled meetings in a 12-month period. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(B)(1)(a), (c)) 
Sec. 103-76. - Chairperson. 
    City Council will appoint one member of the Commission to serve as Chairperson and one member to serve as Vice-Chairperson on an annual basis. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(B)(1)(b)) 
Sec. 103-77. - Hearings. 
(a)  Quorum. All cases heard by the Commission shall be heard by at least four members. 
(b)  Rules. The Commission may adopt rules and establish procedures for use in hearings, providing ample opportunity for presentation of evidence and testimony by persons opposing charges brought by the municipality through the Building Official or designee or the Fire Marshal relating to alleged violations. The Commission shall appoint a Chairperson and an Acting Chairperson to act in the Chairperson's absence. 
(c)  Meetings. The meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at other times established by the Commission. The meetings shall be open to the public. 
(d)  Minutes. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or fails to vote. The Commission shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes and records shall be filed immediately in the Office of the Commission as public records. 
(e)  Vote. The concurring vote of four members of the Commission is necessary to take any action. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(B)(2)) 
Sec. 103-78. - City representative. 
    The Building Official or designee or the Fire Marshal is hereby designated as the representative of the Municipality before the Building and Standards Commission. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(B)(3)) 
Sec. 103-79. - Functions. 
    The Commission may hear cases concerning violations of ordinances that regulate: 
(1)  The preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or methods used to construct a building or improvement, including the foundation, structural elements, electrical wiring or apparatus, plumbing and fixtures, entrances and exits; 
(2)  Relating to the fire safety of a building or improvement, including provisions relating to materials, types of construction or design, warning devices, availability of water supply for extinguishing fires, or location, design or width of entrances or exits; 
(3)  Relating to dangerously damaged or deteriorated buildings or improvements; 
(4)  Relating to conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation or other matter that creates a breeding ground for insects and rodents. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(B)(4)) 
Secs. 103-80-103-101. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL CODES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 103-102-103-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING CODES 

Sec. 103-131. - International Building Code adopted. 
    A booklet entitled International Building Code 2018 Edition as amended and as hereafter may be amended, at least one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the Building Official of the City of College Station, Texas, is hereby adopted and designated as the Building Code of the City of College Station, Texas. In addition, Appendix D of the 2018 International Building Code is hereby adopted. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-6; Ord. No. 2019-4075 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
State Law reference- International Residential Code and International Building Code adopted as municipal residential and commercial electrical code, Texas Local Government Code  214.212, 214.216. 
Sec. 103-132. - International Building Code amended. 
    The above referenced International Building Code is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 105 (Permits) is amended by adding Section 105.1.3 to read as follows: 
105.1.3 Registration of Contractors. 
It shall be the duty of every individual who makes contracts to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, and every individual making such contracts and subletting the same or any part thereof, to first register with the Building Official, giving full name, residence, name and place of business, and in case of removal from one place to another to have made corresponding change to the Building Official. 
Exception: Homeowner permits as provided per local amendment by added Section R105.2.4, International Residential Code. 
Plumbing Contractors - Plumbing contractors shall be licensed as prescribed by the State of Texas and shall register their license with the City of College Station before a plumbing permit is issued by the City. 
Air Conditioning, Refrigeration and Heating Contractors - Air Conditioning, Refrigeration and Heating Contractors shall be licensed by the State of Texas and shall register their license with the City of College Station before a mechanical permit is issued by the City. 
Licensed Irrigators - Irrigation Contractors shall be licensed Irrigators by the State of Texas shall register their license with the City of College Station before a lawn irrigation permit is issued by the City. 
Electrical Contractors - Electrical Contractors shall be licensed by the State shall register their license with the City of College Station before an electrical permit is issued by the City. 
Electrical Sign Contractors - Electrical Sign Contractors shall be licensed by the State shall register their license with the City of College Station before a permit is issued. 
Before any license is registered with the City, the applicant shall have adequate insurance coverage for general liability as provided for by State law for the respective trade. 
(2)  Section 105.2 (Work exempt from permit) is amended by deleting item #2 under "Building" and replacing with the following: 
2.  Fences of wood, chain link, or similar material, and less than eight feet in height, and walls of brick, stone, concrete, or similar material, and less than six feet in height, shall not be construed to be a structure, nor shall they require a building permit. 
(3)  Section 105.2 (Work exempt from permit) is amended by adding the following under 
"Electrical": 
Replacing Fuses : No permit shall be required for replacing fuses of like rating. 
Replacing Flush or Snap Switches : No permit shall be required for replacing flush or snap switches, receptacles, lamp sockets, the installation of lamps, or minor repairs on permanently connected electrical appliances. 
Conveying Signals : No permit shall be required for the installation, maintenance or alteration of wiring, poles and down guys, apparatus, devices, appliances or equipment for telegraph, telephone, signal service or central station protective service used in conveying signals or intelligence, except where electrical work is done on the primary side of the source of power at a voltage over 50 volts and of more than 500 watts. 
Wiring by Electric Public Service Company : No permit shall be required for the installation, maintenance or alteration of electric wiring, apparatus devices, appliances or equipment to be installed by an electric public service company for the use of such company in the generation, transmission, distribution, sale or utilization of electrical energy. However, an electric public service company shall not do any wiring on a customer's distribution system, including metering equipment wherever located and transformer vaults in which customer's transformers are located, nor shall any of its employees do any work other than done for said company as hereinbefore provided for by virtue of this exception. 
Temporary Wiring : No permit shall be required for the installation of temporary wiring, apparatus, devices, appliances or equipment used by a recognized electrical training school or college. 
Railway Crossing Signal Devices : No permit shall be required for the installation and maintenance of railway crossing signal devices, when such is performed by due authority of the railroad and in accordance with the standards of the American Railroad Association, and in collaboration with and approval of the Department of Public Services of the City of College Station. 
(4)  Section 107.1 (General) is amended to include the following at the end of the section and before the exception: "The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered and in compliance under the laws of Texas and shall affix his official seal to the construction documents for the following: 
1.  All group A, E and I occupancies. 
2.  Building and structures three or more stories in height 
3.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet or more in total area 
Exception: "Group R-3 buildings, regardless of size" 
(5)  Section 109.4 (Work commencing before permit issuance) is amended by deleting the existing text in its entirety and replacing it with the following: 
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of 100% of the usual fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(6)  Section 109.6 (Refunds) is amended by deleting the existing text in its entirety and replacing it with the following: 
The City Manager or his designee is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
(7)  Section [A] 110.3.1 (Footing and foundation inspection) is amended by adding the following to the end of said section: 
The Building Official shall have the authority to require a form survey to verify building setbacks. Such survey shall be provided to the Building Official prior to placement of concrete and prepared by a surveyor licensed to perform work in the State of Texas. 
(8)  Section 110.3.5 (Lath and gypsum board inspection) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(9)  Section 111.2 (Certificate issued) is amended by deleting items number 4, 5, 7, 10, and 11. 
(10)  Section 113 (Board of Appeals) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(11)  Section 116.1 (Conditions) is amended by deleting the sentence, "Unsafe structures shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems necessary and as provided for in this section." and replacing it with the following: "Unsafe structures shall be taken down, removed or made safe as provided for in Section 1 (C), Chapter 3, Code of Ordinances." 
(12)  Section 202 (Definitions) is amended by adding "Porte-Cocheres" 
1.  A passageway through a building or screen wall designed to let vehicles pass from street to an interior courtyard. 
2.  A roofed structure extending from the entrance of a building over an adjacent driveway and sheltering those getting in or out of vehicles. 
(13)  Section 202 (Definitions) is amended by deleting the Townhouse definition and replacing it with the following: 
Townhouse. A single family dwelling unit constructed in a group of attached units separated by property lines in which each unit extend from foundation to roof and with open space on at least two sides. 
(14)  Section 303.1 (Assembly Group A-3) is amended by adding "tutorial services". 
(15)  Section 502.1 (Address identification) is amended by deleting the existing text in its entirety and replacing it with the following: 
502.1 Address identification. An official address, assigned by the Building Official or his designee, shall be provided and placed pursuant to this section in such a position as to be clearly visible from the public street or roadway fronting the property. Addresses placed pursuant to this section shall be a minimum four (4) inches in height and stroke of minimum one-half (1/2) inch, composed of a durable material and of a color that provides a contrast to the background itself. The official address shall be placed a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches and a maximum of thirty (30) feet in height measured from the ground level. Buildings or structures located more than fifty (50) feet from the street curb shall have an official address at least five (5) inches in height. Durable materials used for the official address shall include, but not be limited to, wood, plastic, metal, weather resistant paint, weather resistant vinyl, or weather resistant material designed for outside use on a glass surface. For single family residences, the requirement of this section may be met by providing a minimum of two (2) inch high numbers on both sides of a U. S. mailbox located near the curb in front of the house, or a freestanding structure with numbers at least four (4) inches in height. 
A building complex composed of multiple structures or dwellings shall have an official suite or unit number assigned to each building, suite or tenant as well as a street address number. If there is sufficient street frontage, each building, suite or tenant may also be assigned an official street address number. The official street address number of each structure must be prominently posted on the building so that it is visible from the nearest public street or designated fire lane. Each number designated by the Building Official, or his designee, for each individual suite or unit must be conspicuously posted on each suite or unit. 
Commercial buildings with side or rear access in addition to the main entrance, shall also display the business name and official address on each side or rear door with characters at least two (2) inches in height. Residential structures which provide for rear vehicular access from a dedicated public alley, street or designated fire lane shall conspicuously post an official address at least two (2) inches in height so that it is visible from the public alley, street or designated fire lane. 
The owner or manager of a building complex, which contains an enclosed shopping mall, shall submit to the Fire Official four (4) copies of diagrams acceptable to the Fire Marshal of the entire complex, indicating the location and number of each business. When a change in a business name or location is made, the owner or manager shall so advise the Fire Marshal in writing of the change. 
When required by the Fire Code Official, address numbers shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. 
(16)  Table 803.13 (Interior Wall And Ceiling Finish Requirements by Occupancy) is amended by deleting the existing text in footnote "d" and replacing it with the following: 
Class A interior finish material shall be required in all areas of all assembly occupancies, whether sprinklered or not, except as provided for in notes e and f below. 
(17)  Section 902.1.2 (Marking on access doors). Is amended by replacing 2 inches with 4 inches. 
(18)  Section 903.1 (General) is amended by adding the following text at the end of said section: 
For the purpose of this section, the term "fire area" shall be replaced with "building area." 
(19)  Section 903.2 (Where Required) is amended by adding the following text at the end of the section: 
In addition to the requirements of this section, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout all new buildings and structures as follows: 
1.  Where the total building area exceeds 12,000 square feet in area. 
2.  Where the height exceeds two stories, regardless of area. 
(20)  Section 903.2.1.6 (Assembly Occupancies on Roofs) is amended by deleting the exception in its entirety. 
(21)  Section 903.2.3 (Group E) is amended by deleting the exception in its entirety. 
(22)  Section 903.2.4 (Group F-1) is amended by deleting items "2" and "3." 
(23)  Section 903.2.7 (Group M) No. 2 is amended by replacing "three stories above grade" with "two stories in height" and by deleting No. 3 in its entirety. 
(24)  Section 903.2.8 (Group R) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(25)  Section 903.2.9 (Group S-1) is amended by replacing "three stories above grade" with "two stories above grade" in item "2" and by replacing "24,000 square feet" with "12,000 square feet" in item "3." 
(26)  Section 903.2.10 (Group S-2 Enclosed Parking Garage) is amended by deleting the exception in its entirety. 
(27)  Section 903.2.13 (Porte-cocheres). All porte-cocheres shall be protected with fire sprinklers. 
Exception: Porte-cocheres of non-combustible construction or a distance of 10 foot or greater. 
(28)  Section 903.3.1.2.3 (Attics). is amended by deleting items 3.4 and 4.5 
(29)  Section 903.4 (Sprinkler systems supervision and alarms) is amended by adding the following: 
Exceptions: 8. Valves located outside buildings or in a vault that are sealed or locked in the open position. 
(30)  Section 904.3.5, (Monitoring). is amended by deleting the section and replacing it with: 
904.3.5 (Monitoring). Where a building fire alarm or sprinkler monitoring system is installed, automatic fire-extinguishing systems shall be monitored by the building fire alarm or sprinkler monitoring system. 
(31)  Section 905.1, (General). is amended by adding Section 905.1.1, Safety factor, as follows: 
905.1.1 (Safety factor). All standpipe systems with the exception of manual standpipes shall be designed with a minimum safety factor of 5 PSI or 10% of required pressure (whichever is greater) taken at the source for the hydraulically most demanding system and/or outlet. 
(32)  Section 905.4, (Location of Class I standpipe hose connections), is amended as follows with all other code text to remain as written: 
905.4 (Location of Class I standpipe hose connections). Class I standpipe hose connections shall be provided in all of the following locations: 
1.  In every required interior exit stairway, a hose connection shall be provided for each story above and below grade plane. Hose connections shall be located at [the main] an intermediate [floor] landing between stories unless otherwise approved by the fire code official. 
Exception: A single hose connection shall be permitted to be installed in the open corridor or open breezeway between open stairs that are not greater than 75 feet (22 860 mm) apart. 
(33)  Section 906.1 (Where required) is amended by deleting exception 1 and 2 all others remain the same. 
(34)  Section 907.2.1 (Group A) is amended by adding the following section: 
907.2.1.3 Group A-2. An automatic alarm system shall be provided for fire areas containing Group A-2 occupancies that have an occupant load of 100 or more. 
(35)  Section 907.2.7.1, (Occupant notification). is repealed in its entirety. 
(36)  Section 907.2.8.2, (Automatic smoke detection system), is hereby amended to read as follows: 
907.2.8.2 (Automatic smoke detection system). An automatic smoke detection system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed throughout all interior corridors serving sleeping units. The automatic smoke detection system requirement is met only by the installation of smoke or beam detectors whenever possible. If environmental conditions do not allow the installation of smoke detectors, fire alarm heat detectors may be used on a limited basis when approved by the fire code official. 
Exception: An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units and where each sleeping unit has a means of egress door opening directly to an exit or to an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit. 
Exception: An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units and where each sleeping unit has a means of egress door opening directly to an exit or to an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit. 
(37)  Section 907.2.12.2, (Fire department communication system), is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(38)  Section 907.2.12.1.2, (Duct smoke detection), is amended to read as follows: 
907.2.12.1.2 (Duct smoke detection). Duct smoke detectors complying with Section 907.3.1 shall be located in accordance with the NFPA 90A: Standard for the Installation of Air-Conditioning and Ventilating Systems or as follows: 
1.  In the main return air and exhaust air plenum of each air-conditioning system having a capacity greater than 2,000 cubic feet per minute (cfm) (0.94 m3/s). Such detectors shall be located in a serviceable area downstream of the last duct inlet. 
2.  At each connection to a vertical duct or riser serving two or more stories from a return air duct or plenum of an air-conditioning system. In Group R-1 and R-2 occupancies, a smoke detector is allowed to be used in each return air riser carrying not more than 5,000 cfm (2.4 m3/s) and serving not more than 10 air-inlet openings. 
(39)  Section 907.2, (Where required) - new buildings and structures, is amended by adding Section 907.2.24, Fire alarm systems for property protection, to read as follows: 
907.2.24 (Fire alarm systems for property protection). Fire alarm systems dedicated solely to the protection of property are permitted to be installed in facilities where a fire alarm system is not required by other sections of this code or the International Building Code provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Any and all automatic detection is installed, located and maintained in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 72 and a documentation cabinet as required by NFPA 72 is provided and installed. 
2.  The installed system is monitored by a supervising station which provides remote and central station service. 
3.  One manual means of activation is installed in an approved location 
4.  Where the fire alarm system control unit is located in an area that is not readily accessible to response personnel, a remote fire alarm system annunciator panel is installed. 
(40)  Section 907.2, (Where Required) - is amended by adding Section 907.2.25, Fire alarm systems for property protection, to read as follows: 
907.2.25 (Group R-4) Fire alarm systems and smoke alarms shall be installed in Group R-4 occupancies as required in Sections 907.2.10.1 through 907.2.10.3. Section 907.2.10.1 Manual fire alarm system. A manual fire alarm system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in Group R-4 occupancies. 
Exceptions: 
1.  A manual fire alarm system is not required in buildings not more than two stories in height where all individual sleeping units and contiguous attic and crawl spaces to those units are separated from each other and public or common areas by not less than 1-hour fire partitions and each individual sleeping unit has an exit directly to a public way, egress court or yard. 
2.  Manual fire alarm boxes are not required throughout the building where all of the following conditions are met: 
2.1.  The building is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. 
2.2.  The notification appliances will activate upon sprinkler water flow. 
2.3.  Not fewer than one manual fire alarm box is installed at an approved location. 
3.  Manual fire alarm boxes in resident or patient sleeping areas shall not be required at exits where located at all nurses' control stations or other constantly attended staff locations, provided such stations are visible and continuously accessible and that the distances of travel required in Section 907.4.2.1 are not exceeded. 
907.2.10.2 Automatic smoke detection system. An automatic smoke detection system that activates the occupant notification system in accordance with Section 907.5 shall be installed in corridors, waiting areas open to corridors and habitable spaces other than sleeping units and kitchens. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Smoke detection in habitable spaces is not required where the facility is equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1. 
2.  An automatic smoke detection system is not required in buildings that do not have interior corridors serving sleeping units and where each sleeping unit has a means of egress door opening directly to an exit or to an exterior exit access that leads directly to an exit. 
907.2.10.3 Smoke alarms. Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in accordance with Section 907.2.11. 
(41)  Section 907.3.1, (Duct smoke detectors), is amended to read as follows: 
907.3.1 (Duct smoke detectors). Smoke detectors installed in ducts shall be listed for the air velocity, temperature and humidity present in the duct. Duct smoke detectors shall be connected to the building's fire alarm control unit where a fire alarm system is required by Section 907.2. Activation of a duct smoke detector shall initiate a visible and audible supervisory signal at a Central monitoring station and shall perform the intended fire safety function in accordance with this code, NFPA 90A: Standard for the Installation of Air-Conditioning and Ventilating Systems and the International Mechanical Code. In facilities that are required to be monitored by a supervising station, duct smoke detectors shall report only as a supervisory signal and not as a fire alarm. They shall not be used as a substitute for required open area detection. 2018 International Building-Related Codes 
Exceptions: 
1.  In occupancies not required to be equipped with a fire alarm system, actuation of a smoke detector shall activate a visible and an audible signal in an approved location. Smoke detector trouble conditions shall activate a visible or audible signal in an approved location and shall be identified as air duct detector trouble. 
2.  For fire alarm systems which cannot be programmed for supervisory signals, duct detectors shall be allowed to activate the alarm signal. 
(42)  Section 907.3., (Fire safety functions), is amended by adding 907.3.5, Fire alarm systems - emergency control, as follows: 
907.3.5 (Fire alarm systems - emergency control). At a minimum, the following functions, where provided, shall be activated by the fire alarm system: 
1.  Elevator capture and control in accordance with ASME/ANSI A17.1b, Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators. 
2.  Release of automatic door closures and hold open devices 
3.  Stairwell and/or elevator shaft pressurization. 
4.  Smoke management and/or smoke control systems. 
5.  Initiation of automatic fire extinguishing equipment. 
6.  Emergency lighting control. 
7.  Unlocking of doors. 
8.  Emergency shutoff of gas and fuel supplies that may be hazardous provided the continuation of service is not essential to the preservation of life. 
9.  Emergency shutoff of audio systems for sound reinforcement or entertainment (i.e. music systems, systems for announcement and broadcast which are separate from public address systems) provided that such systems are not used to issue emergency instructions. 
10.  Emergency shutoff of systems used for the creation of displays or special effects (i.e. lighting effects, laser light shows, projection equipment). 
(43)  Section 907.4.2.1, (Location), is amended to add the Exception to read as follows: 
907.4.2.1 (Location). Manual fire alarm boxes shall be located not more than 5 feet (1524 mm) from the entrance to each exit. In buildings not protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2, additional manual fire alarm boxes shall be located so that the distance of travel to the nearest box does not exceed 200 feet (60 960 mm). 
Exception: Where construction of the building prohibits the proper installation of a pull station (e.g. glass walls, interior brick or rock walls), a pull station shall be allowed to be located in the normal path of egress, where approved by the Fire Marshal or his/her designee. 
(44)  Section 907.5.1, (Presignal feature), is amended to read as follows: 
907.5.1 (Presignal feature and positive alarm sequences). A presignal feature or Positive Alarm Sequence as defined in NFPA 72 shall not be installed unless approved by the fire code official. Request to use a presignal feature or a Positive Alarm Sequence must be submitted in writing to the Fire Marshal and approval granted before installation. Where a presignal feature or Positive Alarm Sequence is provided, a signal shall be annunciated at a constantly attended location approved by the fire code official, so that occupant notification can be activated in 2018 International Building-Related Codes the event of fire or other emergency. When approved by the fire code official, the presignal feature or Positive Alarm Sequence shall be implemented in accordance with the requirements of NFPA 72. 
(45)  Section 907.5.2.1, (Audible alarms), is amended by adding Section 907.5.2.1.3, Testing of audible alarms in occupancies other than Group R, and Section 907.5.2.1.4, Testing of audible alarms in Group R occupancies, as follows: 
907.5.2.1.3 (Testing of audible alarms in occupancies other than Group R). Audibility levels for all occupancies other than Group R shall be in accordance with the public mode requirements of NFPA 72, and shall be tested utilizing the following criteria: 
1.  A UL listed sound pressure level meter, which has been calibrated within the last calendar year, and supplied by the fire alarm system installing contractor, shall be utilized to obtain readings. The sound pressure level meter will be held five feet above floor, pointed in the direction of the audible device. 
2.  All doors within the occupancy, including the bathroom and balcony doors shall be in the closed position. 
3.  Measurements shall be taken in the most remote areas of the occupancy first, including bathrooms and balconies. 
4.  Initial measurements to confirm the average ambient sound level in each area shall be taken. 
5.  The fire alarm system shall be activated and measurements in the tested areas shall be retaken and compared with the requirements. 
907.5.2.1.4 (Testing of audible alarms in Group R occupancies). Audibility levels for all Group R occupancies shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 907.5.2.1.1, and shall be tested utilizing the following criteria: 
1.  A UL listed sound pressure level meter, which has been calibrated within the last calendar year, and supplied by the fire alarm system installing contractor, shall be utilized to obtain readings. The sound pressure level meter will be held five feet above floor, pointed in the direction of the audible device. 
2.  All doors within the occupancy, including the bathroom and balcony doors shall be in the closed position. 
3.  Ambient sound level shall be established with the television set at 50% of maximum volume, showers running, bathroom exhaust systems running, and air conditioning units running. 
4.  Measurements shall be taken in the most remote area of the dwelling or sleeping unit first, including bathrooms and balconies. 
5.  Initial measurements to confirm the ambient sound level in each area shall be taken. 
6.  The fire alarm system shall be activated and measurements in the tested areas shall be retaken and compared with the requirements. 
(46)  Section 907.5.2.2, (Emergency voice/alarm communication systems), is amended to read as follows: 
907.5.2.2 (Emergency voice/alarm communication systems). Emergency voice/alarm communication systems required by this code shall be designed and installed in accordance with NFPA 72. The operation of any automatic fire detector, sprinkler waterflow device or manual fire alarm box shall automatically sound an alert tone followed by voice instructions giving approved information and directions for a general or staged evacuation in accordance with the building's fire safety and evacuation plans required by Section 404 of the International Fire Code. In high-rise buildings, the system shall operate on at least the alarming floor, the floor above and the floor below. If the system is not reset after five minutes, the building shall sound the general evacuation signal 2018 International Building-Related Codes and message in all zones unless an alternative Positive Alarm Sequence has been approved by the Fire Marshal. Speakers shall be provided throughout the building by paging zones. At a minimum, paging zones shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Elevator groups. 
2.  Interior exit stairways. 
3.  Each floor. 
4.  Areas of refuge as defined in Chapter 2. 
Exception: In Group I-1 and I-2 occupancies, the alarm shall sound in a constantly attended area and a general occupant notification shall be broadcast over the overhead page. 
(47)  Section 907.5.2.2.4, (Emergency voice/alarm communication captions), is repealed in its entirety. 
(48)  Section 907.5.2.3, (Visible alarms), is amended by adding a subsection 907.5.2.3.4, Group R-2 sleeping areas, and Section 907.5.2.3.5, Combination devices, to read as follows: 
907.5.2.3.4 (Group R-2 sleeping areas). Living rooms in Group R-2 occupancies shall have audible notification appliances that meet the sleeping area audible requirements of NFPA 72, Chapter 18, Section 18.4.5, and Subsection 18.4.5.1. When such units are required to be equipped with visible notification for the hearing impaired or when such units are designated as accessible in accordance with ICC/ANSI A117.1, combination audible and visible notification appliances that meet both the sleeping area audible requirements of NFPA 72, Chapter 18, Section 18.4.5, Subsection 18.4.5.1 and the effective intensity settings of NFPA 72, Chapter 18.5.5.7.2 shall be installed. 
907.5.2.3.5 (Combination devices). Combination 120 VAC single or multiple-station smoke detectors with an onboard visible notification appliance if utilized to meet the requirements of Section 907.2.11, will not be given credit for meeting the visible alarm notification requirements of Section 907.5.2.3.3 if these devices do not have the capability of supplying backup power for the visible notification appliance portion of the device. Should such devices be utilized to comply with Section 907.2.11, the visible appliance side of the device shall flash in synchronization with the notification appliances required in the unit. 
(49)  Section 907.5.2.3.1 (Public Use Areas and Common Use Areas) is amended by deleting the exception and adding Section 907.5.2.3.1.1 to read as follows: 
Section 907.5.2.3.1.1 (Employee Work Areas). Where a fire alarm and detection system is required, employee work areas shall be provided with devices that provide audible and visible alarm notification. 
(50)  Section 907.6.3, (Initiating device identification), is amended to read as follows with exceptions to remain as written: 
907.6.3 (Initiating device identification). The fire alarm system shall identify the specific initiating device address, location, device type, and floor level where applicable and status including indication of normal, alarm, trouble and supervisory status, to the fire alarm panel, annunciator panel and to the supervising station as appropriate. 
(51)  Section 912, (Fire Department Connections), is amended by adding Section 912.8, Location and type, as follows: 
912.8 (Location and type). Sprinkler system and standpipe fire department hose connections shall be as follows: 
1.  Any riser 4" in diameter or larger are required to have a five inch "Storz" connection. 
2.  Within 40 feet of a public street, approved fire lane, or access roadway. 
3.  Within 100 feet of an approved fire hydrant measured per hose lay. 
4.  Minimum of two feet above finished grade and a maximum of four feet above finished grade for standard inlets and minimum of 30 inches at lowest point above finished grade and maximum of four feet above finished grade for the five inch "Storz" inlet. 
5.  Freestanding FDCs shall be installed a minimum of one foot and a maximum of seven feet from the gutter face of the curb. 
6.  The Fire Code Official shall approve the location of freestanding fire department connections. Freestanding FDCs must be physically protected against impact per the requirements of Section 312 or other approved means. 
7.  Where provided, the five inch "Storz" inlet shall be installed at a 30 degree angle pointing down. 
8.  Fire department connections for H occupancies shall be freestanding, remote and located as determined by the fire code official. 
9.  Fire department connections for systems protecting fuel storage tanks shall be freestanding, remote and located as determined by the fire code official. 
10.  There shall be no more than one "Storz" connection per riser in any configuration. 
11.  One (1) 2.5 inch inlet is required for all systems designed per NFPA 13R. If the system demand is greater than 250 GPM, two (2) 2.5 inch inlets are required to be installed. No FDC is required for projects designed per NFPA 13D. 
(52)  Section 912.2.1, (Visible location), is amended by adding the following sentence to the end of that section to read as follows: 
912.2.1 (Visible location). Fire department connections shall be located on the street side of buildings or facing approved fire apparatus access roads, fully visible and recognizable from the street, fire apparatus access road or nearest point of fire department vehicle access or as otherwise approved by the fire code official. The fire department connection shall be identified by a sign installed above the connection with the letters "FDC" not less than 6 inches high and mounted at least 3 feet above the FDC to the bottom edge of the sign unless approved by the fire code official and if multiple FDC's a sign identifying the corresponding riser. 
(53)  Section 912.2.2, (Existing buildings), is amended to read as follows: 
912.2.2 (Existing buildings). On existing buildings, wherever the fire department connection is not visible to approaching fire apparatus, the fire department connection shall be indicated by an approved sign mounted on the street front or on the side of the building. Such sign shall have the letters "FDC" not less than 6 inches (152 mm) high and words in letters not less than 2 inches (51 mm) high or an arrow to indicate the location. Signs shall be mounted no lower than 7 feet from grade to the bottom edge of the sign and are subject to the approval of the fire code official. 
(54)  Section 912.2 (Location), is amended to add the following: 
Section 912.2.3 (Distance). Fire department connection shall not be located further than 100 feet from the fire hydrant measured by lay of hose from the engine. 
(55)  Section 912.4.1, (Locking fire department connection caps), is amended to read as follows: 
912.4.1 (Locking fire department connection caps). Locking caps are required on all fire department connections for water-based fire protection systems including but not limited to FDC's and standpipes. 
(56)  Section 1004.5.1 (Increased occupant load) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(57)  Section 1004.9 (Posting of occupant load) is amended by adding the following text to the end of said section: 
For the purposes of this section, the occupant load shall be the number of occupants computed at the rate of one occupant per unit of area as prescribed in Table 1004.5. 
(58)  Section 1612.3 (Establishment of flood hazard areas) is amended by inserting "Brazos County" for name of jurisdiction and "July 2, 1992 or February 9, 2000" for the date of issuance. 
(59)  Section 1907 (Minimum slab provisions) is amended by adding Section 1907.2 to read as follows: 
Section 1907.2 Minimum foundation standard. All slabs-on-grade with turned-down footings shall comply with the Minimum Foundation Standard as shown in figure 1. 

(1)  APPENDIX D (FIRE DISTRICTS) is hereby adopted. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-6(A); Ord. No. 2016-3845, exh. A, 12-8-2016; Ord. No. 2019-4075 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 103-133. - Fire limits. 
    The fire district referenced in any code or ordinance adopted by the City shall be construed to be the following described area. 
(1)  Beginning at the south corner of Farm Highway No. 60 and Old Highway No. 6, Block 8 Boyett Addition; 
Thence northeast along center of Farm Highway No. 60 through Blocks 8,1, and 2 to east corner of Tauber Street and Farm Highway No. 60; 
Thence northwest approximately 189 feet; 
Thence southwest to east corner of Block 1, Lot 21, to corner of Main and Patricia Streets; 
Thence northwest approximately 50 feet; 
Thence southwest approximately 190 feet which includes Lots 21 to 26 inclusive, also Block 1, Boyett Addition; 
Thence northwest approximately 150 feet to the Church Avenue; 
Thence southwest approximately 52 feet to Patricia Street which includes Lots 18 to 27 and 28, Block 1, Boyett Addition; 
Thence southwest on Patricia Street to Old Highway No. 6; 
Thence southeast approximately 200 feet along center of Old Highway No. 6 to the place of beginning. 
(2)  Save and except the area described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the northwest right-of-way line of the University Drive and the northeast right-of-way line of Boyett Street; 
Thence northwest along the northeast right-of-way line of Boyett Street to the southeast right-of-way line of Patricia Street; 
Thence northeast along the southeast right-of-way line of Patricia Street approximately 235 feet; 
Thence southeast through Lot. No. 11, Block No. 1, Boyett addition, 25 feet from and parallel to the line between Lot No. 11 and Lot No. 12 to the northwest right-of-way line of University Drive; 
Thence southwest along the northwest right-of-way line of University Drive to the place of beginning and being all of Lot No. 13, all of Lot No. 12, and the southwest 25 feet of Lot No. 11, Block No. 1, Boyett Addition. 
(3)  Beginning at the corner of George Bush Drive and Montclair Street, Block 8, West Park Addition; 
Thence southwest along centerline to Highlands Street, which includes Lots 1 to 13 inclusive; 
Thence southeast along centerline of Highlands Street, 100 feet to alley; 
Thence northeast to east corner of Lot No. 1, Block No. 8, Montclair Avenue; 
Thence northwest 100 feet to place of beginning. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  6-2(A); Ord. No. 2016-3767, exh. A, 4-28-2016) 
Sec. 103-134. - Amendments to the International Residential Code. 
    The International Residential Code adopted by reference in Section 101.2, 2018 International Building Code, is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section R102.4 (Referenced codes and standards) is amended by adding the following to said section: 
Any reference to the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the City of College Station. 
(2)  Section R105.2 (Work exempt from permit) is amended by deleting number one under "Building" and replacing it with the following: 
1.  One detached accessory structure per residential lot, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet and the structure complies with all of the following: 
a.  The accessory structure is not located in a surface drainage easement. 
b.  The accessory structure is not permanently affixed to the ground. 
c.  The accessory structure is located in the rear yard. 
d.  The accessory structure is not provided with utilities (sewer, water, gas or electricity). 
(3)  Section R105.2 (Work exempt from permit) is amended by deleting number ten under "Building" and replacing with the following: 
10.  Uncovered decks, patios or other raised floor surfaces located not more than 30 inches above adjacent grade and are not attached to a dwelling. 
(4)  Section R105.2.4 is added to read as follows: 
R105.2.4 Homeowner permit. A property owner may obtain a building permit to perform work on a building owned and occupied by him as his homestead without registering with the City as a contractor. However, work involving the electrical, plumbing and mechanical systems must be permitted and installed by licensed contractors. 
(5)  Section R106.3.1 (Approval of construction documents) is amended by deleting the last sentence in said section. 
(6)  Section R108.3 (Building permit valuations) is amended by adding the following to said section: 
If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation is underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Final permit valuation shall be set by the building official. 
(7)  Section R108.5 (Refunds) is amended by deleting the text in said section and replacing it with the following: 
The City Manager or his designee is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
(8)  Section R109.1.1 (Foundation Inspection) is amended by adding the following to the end of said section: 
The Building Official shall have the authority to require a form survey to verify building setbacks. Such survey shall be provided to the Building Official prior to placement of concrete and prepared by a surveyor licensed to perform work in the State of Texas. 
(9)  Section R112 (Board of Appeals) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(10)  Section R202 (Definitions) is also amended by adding the following definitions: 
Air Gap, Irrigation System . A complete physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel. 
Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker . An assembly containing an air inlet valve, a check seat, and an air inlet port. The flow of water into the body causes the air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the air inlet valve falls and forms a check against back-siphonage. At the same time it opens the air inlet port allowing air to enter and satisfy the vacuum. Also known as an Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker Back- Siphonage Prevention Assembly. 
Backflow Prevention, Irrigation System . The mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or back siphonage, of nonpotable water from an irrigation system into the potable water source. 
Backflow Prevention Assembly . Any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of assembly used is based on the existing or potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition. 
Completion of Irrigation System Installation . When the landscape irrigation system has been installed, all minimum standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly. 
Consulting, Irrigation System . The act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendations related to landscape irrigation systems. 
Cross-Connection . An actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an irrigation system that may contain contaminates or pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in the treatment process. 
Design, Irrigation System . The act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be limited to, elements such as collecting site specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying any local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of the various components will result in an irrigation plan. 
Design Pressure, Irrigation System . The pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly. Design pressure is calculated by adding the operating pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses accumulated from an emission device to the water source. 
Double Check Valve . An assembly that is composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closed resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly. 
Emission Device . Any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to apply water. Common emission devices in an irrigation system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler heads, and drip irrigation emitters. 
Employed, Irrigation Systems . Engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity relating to the sale, design, installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person is in an employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal Revenue Code, 26 United States Code Service, 3212(d) based on the behavioral control, financial control, and the type of relationship involved in performing employment related tasks. 
Head-to-Head Spacing, Irrigation System . The spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer's published radius of the head. 
Health Hazard, Irrigation System . A cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system that involves any substance that may, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects. 
Hydraulics . The science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of determining pressure losses and pressure requirements of an irrigation system. 
Installer, Irrigation System . A person who actually connects an irrigation system to a private or public raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, who is licensed according to Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations). 
Irrigation Inspector . A person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations). 
Irrigation Plan . A scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required information, the scope of the project, and represents the changes made in the installation of the irrigation system. 
Irrigation Services . Selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing, permitting, providing consulting services regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water supply. 
Irrigation System . An assembly of component parts, including the backflow device and all equipment downstream, that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution and conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or control erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by Texas Agricultural Code,  251.002. 
Irrigation Technician . A person who works under the supervision of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair, service or supervise installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system in or to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations). 
Irrigation Zone . A subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based on plant material type (such as turf, shrubs, or trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features (such as slope) and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or combination) or for hydrological control. 
Irrigator . A person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services or supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30. 
Irrigator-in-Charge . The irrigator responsible for all irrigation work performed by an exempt business owner, including, but not limited to obtaining permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators or irrigation technicians, and installing, selling, maintaining, altering, repairing, or servicing a landscape irrigation system. 
Landscape Irrigation . The science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or sustain healthy growth of plant material or turf. 
Irrigation License . An occupational license that is issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 to an individual that authorizes the individual to engage in an activity that is covered by Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30. 
Mainline, Irrigation System . A pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the individual zone valves. 
Maintenance Checklist, Irrigation System . A document made available to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative that contains information regarding the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including, but not limited to: checking and repairing the irrigation system, setting the automatic controller, checking the rain or moisture sensor, cleaning filters, pruning grass and plants away from irrigation emitters, using and operating the irrigation system, the precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the system, any water conservation measures currently in effect from the water purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested seasonal or monthly watering schedule based on current evapotranspiration data for the geographic region, and the minimum water requirements for the plant material in each zone based on the soil type and plant material where the system is installed. 
Major Maintenance, Alteration, Repair, or Service (Irrigation System) . Any activity that involves opening to the atmosphere the irrigation main line at any point prior to the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes, but is not limited to, repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe, replacing a zone control valve, or repairing a zone control valve in a manner that opens the system to the atmosphere. 
Master Valve, Irrigation System. A remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that controls the flow of water to the irrigation system mainline. 
Matched Precipitation Rate . The condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation zone apply water at the same rate. 
New Installation, Irrigation System . An irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously exist. 
Pass-through Contract . A written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed irrigator or exempt business owner to perform part or all of the irrigation services relating to an irrigation system. 
Pressure Vacuum Breaker . An assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known as a Pressure Vacuum Breaker Back-siphonage Prevention Assembly. 
Reclaimed Water . Domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for beneficial use, such as landscape irrigation. 
Records of Landscape Irrigation Activities . The irrigation plans, contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies of permits, and other documents that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a landscape irrigation system. 
Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly . An assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the two check valves and below the first check valve. 
Static Water Pressure . The pressure of water when it is not moving. 
Supervision, Landscape Irrigation . The on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling his or her professional responsibility to the client and/or employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also a licensed installer working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or an irrigation technician who is working under the direction of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or service an irrigation system. 
Water Conservation, Irrigation System . The design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system in a manner that prevents the waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce dust, and control erosion. 
Zone Flow . A measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the actual flow of water through a zone valve, calculated by individually opening each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has stabilized. For design purposes, the zone flow is the total flow of all nozzles in the zone at a specific pressure. 
Zone Valve, Irrigation System . An automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape irrigation system. 
(11)  Section R302.1 (Exterior walls) is amended by deleting the existing text and replacing it with the following: 
R302.1 Exterior walls. Exterior walls with a fire separation distance less than 3 feet shall have not less than a one hour fire-resistive rating with exposure from both sides. The above provisions shall not apply to walls which are perpendicular to the line used to determine the fire separation distance. 
Exception : Tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar structures exempted from permits by Section R105.2 are not required to provide wall protection based on location on the lot. 
Projections . Projections may extend beyond the exterior wall on zero lot line construction. Projections shall be constructed from non-combustible material on the underside and may allow manufactured perforated soffit material installed for attic ventilation. The soffit may project a maximum of 18 inches, excluding non-combustible gutters, over the adjacent property line. 
Exception : Tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar structures exempted from permits by Section R 105.2 shall not extend over the lot line in zero lot line construction. 
Combustibles in maintenance easement . The construction of any structure utilizing combustible material or the storage of combustible material is prohibited within the maintenance easement. The term "maintenance easement" is defined in Article 11 of the UDO. 
Exception : A wood fence may be installed in the maintenance easement. 
(12)  Section R302.6 (Dwelling-garage fire separation) is amended by adding the following exception: 
Exception : One unprotected attic access opening, not exceeding 30 inches by 54 inches in size, is allowed per garage. 
(13)  Section R310.2.1 (Minimum opening area) is amended by deleting everything except the last sentence. 
(14)  Section R311.7.8.4 (Continuity) is amended by deleting the following text in said section: 
Handrail ends shall be returned or shall terminate in newel posts or safety terminals. 
(15)  Section R313 (Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(16)  Section R318.2 (Chemical termiticide treatment) is amended by adding the following to the end of said section: 
The method of application and contractor hired to apply the chemicals shall submit to the Building Department when applying for the Building Permit, and verification of the application turned in prior to issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. 
(17)  Section R319.1 (Address Identification) is amended by deleting the existing text in its entirety and replacing it with the following: 
Premises identification shall comply with Section 502.1, International Building Code, as amended. 
(18)  Section 322.2.1 (Elevation requirements) is amended by deleting the existing text, save the exception, and replacing it with the following: 
1.  Buildings and structures shall have the lowest floors elevated in accordance with the City of College Station Code of Ordinances, Chapter 13 (Flood Hazard Protection) and the City of College Station Drainage Policy and Design Standards (refer to Section II.D). 
2.  In areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones), buildings and structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade as the depth number specified in feet on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps, or at least 2 feet if a depth number is not specified, plus the additional footage requirements in the City of College Station Code of Ordinances, Chapter 13 (Flood Hazard Protection) and the City of College Station Drainage Policy and Design Standards (refer to Section II.D). 
3.  Basement floors that are below grade on all sides shall be elevated in accordance with the City of College Station Code of Ordinances, Chapter 13 (Flood Hazard Protection) and the City of College Station Drainage Policy and Design Standards (refer to Section II.D). 
(19)  Section R403.1.3.3 (Slabs-on-ground with turned-down footings) is amended by deleting the existing text and replacing it with the following to read as follows: 
All slabs-on-ground with turned-down footings shall comply with the minimum foundation standard in Section 1907.2, International Building Code. 
(20)  Chapter 11 (Energy Efficiency) is amended by deleting this chapter in its entirety and replacing it with the following. 
One-and-two family dwellings shall comply with the 2018 International Energy Conservation Code as amended. 
(21)  Section M1411.3 (Condensate disposal) is amended by deleting the existing text and replacing with the following: 
Condensate from all cooling coils or evaporators shall be conveyed from the drain pan outlet to the sanitary sewer system, if available. The condensate drain shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system in a manner approved by the code official. 
Exception : When a sanitary sewer system is not available on the premises, or connection thereto is not practical, the condensate shall discharge into an approved french drain. 
(22)  Section M1501.1 (Outdoor discharge) is amended by deleting the last sentence in said section. 
(23)  Section M1505.2 (Recirculation of air) is amended by deleting the second sentence in said section, and replacing it with the following: 
Exhaust air from bathrooms and toilet rooms shall discharge directly to the outdoors or the vent termination shall be unobstructed and within 6 inches of the soffit vent or ridge vent. 
(24)  Section G2408.3 (Private garages) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(25)  Section G2414.5.3 (Copper or copper-alloy tubing) is amended by deleting said section in its entirety. 
(26)  Section G2417.1.2 (Repairs and additions) is amended by deleting the existing text in its entirety and replacing it with the following: 
In the event repairs or additions are made after the pressure test, the affected piping shall be tested. If approved by the code official, minor repairs and additions are not required to be pressure tested provided the work is inspected and connections are tested with a noncorrosive leak-detecting fluid or other leak detecting methods. 
(27)  Section G2417.4 (Test pressure measurement) is amended by deleting the existing text in its entirety and replacing it with the following: 
Test pressure measurement shall comply with Section 406.4, 2018 International Fuel Gas Code, as amended. 
(28)  Section G2417.4.1 (Test pressure) is amended by deleting the existing text in its entirety and replacing it with the following: 
Test pressure shall comply with Section 406.4.1, 2018 International Fuel Gas Code, as amended. 
(29)  Section P2503.8 (Inspection and testing of backflow prevention devices) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Inspection and testing of backflow prevention devices shall comply with Section 312.10, 2018 International Plumbing Code, as amended. 
(30)  Section P2804.6.1 (Requirements for discharge pipe) is amended by deleting the text in number five and replacing it with the following: 
Discharge to an indirect waste receptor or to the outdoors. 
(31)  Section P2902.5.3 (Lawn irrigation systems) is amended by deleting the existing text in its entirety and replacing it with the following: 
P2902.5.3 Lawn Irrigation Systems 
P2902.5.3.1 Valid License Required. Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the city or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, commonly referred to as the ETJ, must hold a valid license, as defined by Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 and required by Chapter 1903 of the Texas Occupations Code, or as defined by Chapter 365, Title 22 of the Texas Administrative Code and required by Chapter 1301 of the Texas Occupations Code. 
Exception: A property owner is not required to be licensed in accordance with Texas Occupations Code, Title 12, 1903.002(c)(1) if he or she is performing irrigation work in a building or on a premises owned or occupied by the person as the person's home. A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system must meet the standards contained in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 344 regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water over impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology, backflow prevention and isolation valves. See Texas Occupations Code 1903.002 for other exemptions to the licensing requirement. 
P2902.5.3.2 Permit Required. Any person installing an irrigation system within the territorial limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city is required to obtain a permit from the city prior to beginning work on the irrigation system. A completed irrigation permit application and irrigation plan must be a submitted to the city and approved before a permit will be issued by the city. The irrigation plan must be in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
Exceptions : 
(1)  An irrigation system that is an on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by Section 366.002, Health and Safety Code; or 
(2)  An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by Section 251.002, Agriculture Code; or 
(3)  An irrigation system connected to a groundwater well used by a property owner strictly for domestic use. 
P2902.5.3.3 Backflow Prevention Methods and Devices. Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply must be connected through a backflow prevention method approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). The backflow prevention device must be approved by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, the University of Southern California, the International Plumbing Code, or any other laboratory that has equivalent capabilities for both the laboratory and field evaluation of backflow prevention assemblies. The backflow prevention device must be installed in accordance with the laboratory approval standards or if the approval does not include specific installation information, the manufacturer's current published recommendations. If conditions that present a health hazard exist, one of the following methods must be used to prevent backflow; 
(1)  An air gap may be used if: 
(a)  there is an unobstructed physical separation; and 
(b)  the distance from the lowest point of the water supply outlet to the flood rim of the fixture or assembly into which the outlet discharges is at least one inch or twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be used if: 
(a)  the device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above ground in a location that will ensure that the assembly will not be submerged; and 
(b)  drainage is provided for any water that may be discharged through the assembly relief valve. 
(3)  Atmospheric vacuum breakers may only be used as replacements on existing systems utilizing atmospheric vacuum breakers if: 
(a)  no back-pressure will be present; 
(b)  there are no shutoff valves downstream from the atmospheric vacuum breaker; 
(c)  the device is installed at a minimum of six inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler; 
(d)  there is no continuous pressure on the supply side of the atmospheric vacuum breaker for more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period; and 
(e)  a separate atmospheric vacuum breaker is installed on the discharge side of each irrigation control valve, between the valve and all the emission devices that the valve controls. 
(4)  Pressure vacuum breakers may be used if: 
(a)  no back-pressure condition will occur; and 
(b)  the device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of the sprinkler. 
All backflow prevention devices used in applications designated as health hazards must be tested upon installation and annually thereafter. 
If there are no conditions that present a health hazard, double check valve backflow prevention assemblies may be used to prevent backflow if the device is tested upon installation and test cocks are used for testing only. A double check valve may be installed below ground if: 
(a)  the double check valve assembly is installed in a vault or other approved enclosure that which is constructed of a durable material. The vault or enclosure shall either be of solid (waterproof) construction with an integral bottom or bottomless to facilitate drainage. If the vault or enclosure is bottomless, a minimum of four (4) inches of washed gravel shall be installed below the assembly. The washed gravel shall have a diameter of between 3/8 inch and 3/4 inch (inclusive); 
(b)  the test cocks are plugged with a non-ferrous material (brass, plastic, etc.) except when the double check valve is being tested; 
(c)  the test cock plugs are threaded, water-tight, and made of non-ferrous material; 
(d)  a y-type strainer is installed on the inlet side of the double check valve; 
(e)  a minimum clearance of three (3) inches is provided between any fill material and the bottom of the double check valve to allow space for testing and repair; and 
(f)  a minimum clearance of four (4) inches is provided on the sides of the double check valve to test and repair the double check valve. 
If an existing irrigation system without a backflow-prevention assembly requires major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service, the system must be connected to the potable water supply through an approved, properly installed backflow prevention method before any major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service is performed. 
If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply through a double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, or reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic master valve on the system, the automatic master valve must be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention assembly. 
The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested by a licensed Backflow Prevention Assembly Tester prior to being placed in service. The tester must be registered with the City of College Station and the test results must be provided to the local water purveyor and the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative within ten business days of testing of the backflow prevention device. 
P2902.5.3.4 Specific Conditions and Cross-Connection Control. Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to the potable water supply, the irrigation system must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or air gap. 
Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply can only be done if the irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or an air gap. 
Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by aspiration, injection, or emission system connected to any potable water supply must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow device. 
If an irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that is served by an on-site sewage facility, as defined in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 285, then: 
(1)  all irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation distances from the On-Site Sewage Facilities system as required for a private water line in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Section 285.91(10); 
(2)  any connections using a private or public potable water source that is not the city's potable water system must be connected to the water source through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly as defined in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Section 344.50; and 
(3)  any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the surface of the area utilized by the On-Site Sewage Facility system must be controlled on a separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow complete control of any irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess water that would prevent the On-Site Sewage Facilities system from operating effectively. 
P2902.5.3.5 Water Conservation. All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a manner that will promote water conservation as defined in the Definitions section of this ordinance. 
P2902.5.3.6 Irrigation Plan Design. An irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system will be installed. A paper or electronic copy of the irrigation plan must be on the job site at all times during the installation of the irrigation system. A drawing showing the actual installation of the system is due to each irrigation system owner after all new irrigation system installations. During the installation of the irrigation system, variances from the original plan may be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the plan does not: 
(1)  diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system; 
(2)  violate any requirements of this ordinance; and 
(3)  go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan. 
The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system does not provide complete coverage of the area to be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan. 
All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale. The plan must include, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  the irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing; 
(2)  all major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered; 
(3)  a North arrow; 
(4)  a legend; 
(5)  the zone flow measurement for each zone; 
(6)  location and type of each: 
(a)  controller; and 
(b)  sensor (for example, but not limited to, rain, moisture, wind, flow, or freeze); 
(7)  location, type, and size of each: 
(a)  water source, such as, but not limited to a water meter and point(s) of connection; 
(b)  backflow prevention device; 
(c)  water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray heads, rotary sprinkler heads, quick-couplers, bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays; 
(d)  valve, including but not limited to, zone valves, master valves, and isolation valves; 
(e)  pressure regulation component; and 
(f)  main line and lateral piping. 
(8)  the scale used; and 
(9)  the design pressure. 
P2902.5.3.7 Design and Installation. No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any component, including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the manufacturer's published performance limitations for the component. 
P2902.5.3.7.1 Spacing. The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the manufacturer's published radius or spacing of the device(s). The radius or spacing is determined by referring to the manufacturer's published specifications for a specific emission device at a specific operating pressure. New irrigation systems shall not utilize above-ground spray emission devices in landscapes that are less than 48 inches not including the impervious surfaces in either length or width and which contain impervious pedestrian or vehicular traffic surfaces along two or more perimeters. If pop-up sprays or rotary sprinkler heads are used in a new irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any adjacent surface and shall not be installed closer than four inches from a hardscape, such as, but not limited to, a building foundation, fence, concrete, asphalt, pavers, or stones set with mortar. 
Exception: 
Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other small areas located in cemeteries, parks, golf courses or other public areas if the runoff drains into a landscaped area. 
P2902.5.3.7.2 Water Pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not above the maximum sprinkler head pressure as published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods to achieve the water pressure requirements include, but are not limited to, flow control valves, a pressure regulator, or pressure compensating spray heads. 
P2902.5.3.7.3 Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so that the flow of water in the pipe will not exceed a velocity of five feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe. 
P2902.5.3.7.4 Irrigation Zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based on plant material type, microclimate factors, topographic features, soil conditions, and hydrological requirements. 
P2902.5.3.7.5 Matched Precipitation Rate. Zones must be designed and installed so that all of the emission devices in that zone irrigate at the same precipitation rate. 
P2902.5.3.7.6 Impervious Surfaces. Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of concrete, asphalt, brick, wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious material, such as, but not limited to, walls, fences, sidewalks, streets, etc. 
P2902.5.3.7.7 Master Valve. When provided, a master valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention device on all new installations. 
P2902.5.3.7.8 PVC Pipe Primer Solvent. All new irrigation systems that are installed using PVC pipe and fittings shall be primed with a colored primer prior to applying the PVC cement in accordance with the International Plumbing Code (Section 605). 
P2902.5.3.7.9 Rain or Moisture Sensor. All new automatically controlled irrigation systems must include sensors or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of moisture or rainfall. Rain or moisture shut-off technology must be installed according to the manufacturer's published recommendations. Repairs to existing automatic irrigation systems that require replacement of an existing controller must include a sensor or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of moisture or rainfall. 
P2902.5.3.7.10 Isolation Valve. All new irrigation systems must include an isolation valve between the water meter and the backflow prevention device. 
P2902.5.3.7.11 Depth Coverage of Piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be installed according to the manufacturer's published specifications for depth coverage of piping. If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth coverage of piping, the piping must be installed to provide minimum depth coverage of six inches of select backfill, between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of the irrigation system that fail to meet this standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being irrigated has rock at a depth of six inches or less, select backfill may be mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the irrigation plan and discussed with the irrigation system owner or owner's representative to address any safety issues. If a utility, man-made structure or roots create an unavoidable obstacle, which makes the six-inch depth coverage requirement impractical, the piping shall be installed to provide a minimum of two inches of select backfill between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation system must be backfilled and compacted to the original grade. 
P2902.5.3.7.12 Irrigation System Wiring. Underground electrical wiring used to connect an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be listed by Underwriters Laboratories as acceptable for burial underground. Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an irrigation system must be sized according to the manufacturer's recommendation. Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be waterproof as certified by the wire splice manufacturer. Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic controller to any electrical component of the irrigation system must be buried with a minimum of six inches of select backfill. 
P2902.5.3.13 Irrigation System Water. Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is deemed to be non-potable. No drinking or domestic water usage, such as, but not limited to, filling swimming pools or decorative fountains, shall be connected to an irrigation system. If a hose bib (an outdoor water faucet that has hose threads on the spout) is connected to an irrigation system for the purpose of providing supplemental water to an area, the hose bib must be installed using a quick coupler key on a quick coupler installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose bib and any hoses connected to the bib must be labeled "non potable, not safe for drinking." An isolation valve must be installed upstream of a quick coupler connecting a hose bib to an irrigation system. 
P2902.5.3.7.14 Licensed Person On Site During Installation. Beginning January 1, 2010, either a licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation technician shall be on-site at all times while the landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an irrigator is not onsite, the irrigator shall be responsible for ensuring that a licensed irrigation technician is on-site to supervise the installation of the irrigation system. 
P2902.5.3.8 Completion of Irrigation System Installation. Upon completion of the irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided supervision for the on-site installation shall be required to complete the following four items: 
(1)  a final walk through with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to explain the operation of the system; 
(2)  The maintenance checklist on which the irrigator or irrigation technician shall obtain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative and shall sign, date, and seal the checklist. If the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to sign the maintenance checklist, the irrigator shall note the time and date of the refusal on the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative's signature line. The irrigation system owner or owner's representative will be given the original maintenance checklist and a duplicate copy of the maintenance checklist shall be maintained by the irrigator. 
The items on the maintenance checklist shall include but are not limited to: 
(a)  the manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the system is automatic; 
(b)  a seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either current/real time evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data, monthly effective rainfall estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors; 
(c)  a list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and other such components; that require maintenance and the recommended frequency for the service; and 
(d)  the statement, "This irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all applicable state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. I have tested the system and determined that it has been installed according to the Irrigation Plan and is properly adjusted for the most efficient application of water at this time." 
(3)  A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name, telephone number and the dates of the warranty period shall be affixed to each automatic controller installed by the irrigator or irrigation technician. If the irrigation system is manual, the sticker shall be affixed to the original maintenance checklist. The information contained on the sticker must be printed with waterproof ink and include: 
(4)  The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system must be provided to the irrigation system's owner or owner representative. 
P2902.5.3.9 Maintenance, Alteration, Repair, or Service of Irrigation Systems. The licensed irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performed during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system during the warranty period. The irrigator or business owner is not responsible for the professional negligence of any other irrigator who subsequently conducts any irrigation service on the same irrigation system. All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system must be returned to the original grade with compacted select backfill. Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings used in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system in accordance with the adopted International Plumbing Code (Section 605). When maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system involves excavation work at the water meter or backflow prevention device, an isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not present. 
P2902.5.3.10 Reclaimed Water. Reclaimed water may be utilized in landscape irrigation systems if: 
(1)  there is no direct contact with edible crops, unless the crop is pasteurized before consumption; 
(2)  the irrigation system does not spray water across property lines that do not belong to the irrigation system's owner; 
(3)  the irrigation system is installed using purple components; 
(4)  the domestic potable water line is connected using an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device, in accordance with 290.47(i) of this title (relating to Appendices); 
(5)  a minimum of an eight inch by eight inch sign is prominently posted on/in the area that is being irrigated, that reads, "RECLAIMED WATER - DO NOT DRINK"; and 
(6)  backflow prevention on the reclaimed water supply line shall be provided in accordance with the regulations of the city's water provider. 
P2902.5.3.11 Advertisement Requirements. All vehicles used in the performance of irrigation installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service must display the irrigator's license number in the form of "LI ___________" in a contrasting color of block letters at least two inches high, on both sides of the vehicle. All forms of written and electronic advertisements for irrigation services must display the irrigator's license number in the form of "LI ___________." Any form of advertisement, including business cards, and estimates which displays an entity's or individual's name other than that of the licensed irrigator must also display the name of the licensed irrigator and the licensed irrigator's license number. Trailers that advertise irrigation services must display the irrigator's license number. The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the commission must be prominently displayed on a legible sign and displayed in plain view for the purpose of addressing complaints at the permanent structure where irrigation business is primarily conducted and irrigation records are kept. 
P2902.5.3.12 Contracts. All contracts to install an irrigation system must be in writing and signed by each party and must specify the irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business telephone numbers, the date that each party signed the agreement, the total agreed price, and must contain the statement, "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www. tceq.state.tx.us." All contracts must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date. All written estimates, proposals, bids, and invoices relating to the installation or repair of an irrigation system(s) must include the irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business telephone number(s), and the statement: "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission On Environmental Quality (TCEQ) (MC-178), P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's web site is: www.tceq.state.tx.us." An individual who agrees by contract to provide irrigation services as defined in 344.30 of this title (relating to License Required) shall hold an irrigator license issued under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations) unless the contract is a pass-through contract as defined in 344.1(36) of this title (relating to Definitions). If a pass-through contract includes irrigation services, then the irrigation portion of the contract can only be performed by a licensed irrigator. If an irrigator installs a system pursuant to a pass-through contract, the irrigator shall still be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or through contract, the irrigator shall still be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative a copy of the warranty and all other documents required under this chapter. A pass-through contract must identify by name and license number the irrigator that will perform the work and must provide a mechanism for contacting the irrigator for irrigation system warranty work. The contract must include the dates that the warranty is valid. 
P2902.5.3.13 Warranties for Irrigation Systems. On all installations of new irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative with a written warranty covering materials and labor furnished in the new installation of the irrigation system. The irrigator shall be responsible for adhering to terms of the warranty. If the irrigator's warranty is less than the manufacturer's warranty for the system components, then the irrigator shall provide the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative with applicable information regarding the manufacturer's warranty period. The warranty must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date. If the warranty is part of an irrigator's contract, a separate warranty document is not required. An irrigator's written warranty on new irrigation systems must specify the irrigator's name, business address, and business telephone number(s), must contain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative confirming receipt of the warranty and must include the statement: "Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 130897, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us. " On all maintenance, alterations, repairs, or service to existing irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative a written document that identifies the materials furnished in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service. If a warranty is provided, the irrigator shall abide by the terms. The warranty document must include the irrigator's name and business contact information. 
P2902.5.3.14 Duties and Responsibilities of City Irrigation Inspectors. A licensed irrigation inspector or plumbing inspector shall enforce the ordinance of the city, and shall be responsible for: 
(1)  verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an irrigation system and that the irrigator and installer or irrigation technician, if applicable, are licensed; 
(2)  inspecting the irrigation system; 
(3)  determining that the irrigation system complies with the requirements of this section; 
(4)  determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was installed and tested; 
(5)  investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation, maintenance, alteration, repairs, or service of an irrigation system and advertisement of irrigation services; and 
(6)  maintaining inspection records according to this section." 
(32)  Table P2906.4 (Water service pipe) is amended by deleting the following materials: 
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe 
Asbestos-cement pipe 
Polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) pipe 
Polyethylene (PE) plastic pipe 
Polyethylene (PE) plastic tubing 
(33)  Table P2906.5 (Water distribution pipe) is amended by deleting the following materials: 
Polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) composite pipe 
(34)  Section P2906.5 (Water-distribution pipe.) is amended by adding the following text to the end of the section: 
Inaccessible water distribution piping under slabs shall be copper (minimum type K) or cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) tubing all installed without joints or connections. Materials subject to corrosion shall be protected when exposed to concrete or corrosive soils. 
(35)  Section 2906.10 (Cross-linked polyethylene plastic (PEX)) is amended by adding P2906.10.3 to read as follows: 
P2906.10.3. Sleeving. When a sleeve is provided for cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) plastic piping or tubing installed under concrete slabs the annular space between the piping or tubing and the sleeve must be caulked, foamed, or otherwise sealed to prevent the entrance of termiticide. 
(36)  Section P3002.2. (Building sewer) is amended by adding P3002.2.1 to read as follows: 
P3002.2.1 Depth of building sewer. Building sewer pipe shall be installed with a minimum of twelve (12) inches of cover. Where conditions prohibit the required amount of cover, cast iron pipe with approved joints may be used unless other means of protecting the pipe is provided as approved by the Building Official. 
(37)  Section E3401.1 (applicability) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Electrical installations shall comply with the National Electrical Code , as adopted and amended by the City of College Station. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-6(B); Ord. No. 2019-4075 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
State Law reference- International Residential Code and International Building Code adopted as municipal residential and commercial electrical code, Texas Local Government Code  214.212, 214.216. 
Sec. 103-135. - Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code. 
    The International Fuel Gas Code adopted by reference in Section 101.4.1, 2018 International Building Code is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 102.8 (Referenced codes and standards) is amended by adding the following exception: 
Exception: Any reference to the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the City of College Station. 
(2)  Section 106.3 (Application for permit) is amended by deleting the text in said section and replacing it with the following: 
The code official may require a permit application for work regulated by this code. 
(3)  Section 106.6.2 (Fee schedule) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(4)  Section 106.6.3 (Fee refunds) is amended by deleting the text in said section and replacing it with the following: 
The City Manager or his designee is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
(5)  Section 109 (Means of Appeal) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(6)  Section 305.5 (Private garages) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(7)  Section 403.4.3 (Copper and copper alloy) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(8)  Section 403.5.3 (Copper and copper alloy tubing) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(9)  Section 406.1.2 (Repairs and additions) is amended by deleting the existing text in its entirety and replacing it with the following: 
In the event repairs or additions are made after the pressure test, the affected piping shall be tested. If approved by the code official, minor repairs and additions are not required to be pressure tested provided the work is inspected and connections are tested with a noncorrosive leak-detecting fluid or other leak detecting methods. 
(10)  Section 406.4 (Test pressure measurement) is amended by adding the following to the end of said section: 
For gas systems with a working pressure up to and including five (5) psi., a diaphragm gauge utilizing a dial with a minimum diameter of three and one-half inches (3 1/2"), a set hand, 2/10 pound incrementation and a pressure range not more than twenty (20) psi shall be acceptable. A mechanical spring gauge is only acceptable for use on gas systems requiring a pressure test of more than 20 psig. 
(11)  Section 406.4.1 (Test pressure) is amended by deleting the existing text in its entirety and replacing it with the following: 
The test pressure to be used shall be no less than twice the proposed maximum working pressure, but no less than five (5) psig, irrespective of design pressure. 
(12)  Section 406.4.2 (Test duration) is amended by deleting the existing text in its entirety and replacing it with the following: 
Gas piping systems shall withstand the required pressure test for a period of not less than ten (10) minutes without showing any drop in pressure. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-6(C); Ord. No. 2019-4075 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 103-136. - Amendments to the International Mechanical Code. 
    The International Mechanical Code adopted by reference in Section 101.4.2, 2018 International Building Code is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 102.8 (Referenced codes and standards) is amended by adding the following exception: 
Exception: Any reference to the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the City of College Station. 
(2)  Section 106.3 (Application for permit) is amended by deleting the text in said section and replacing it with the following: 
The code official may require a permit application for work regulated by this code. 
(3)  Section 106.5.2 (Fee schedule) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(4)  Section 106.5.3 (Fee refunds) is amended by deleting the text in said section and replacing it with the following: 
The City Manager or his designee is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
(5)  Section 108.5 (Stop work orders) is amended by inserting the following amounts in the blanks provided at the end of said section: 
'twenty-five ($25.00) in the first blank and two-thousand ($2,000.00) in the second blank' 
(6)  Section 109 (Means of Appeal) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
7. Section 304.7 (Private garages) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(8)  Section 507.6.1 (Capture and containment test) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-6(D); Ord. No. 2019-4075 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 103-137. - Amendments to the International Plumbing Code. 
    The International Plumbing Code adopted by reference in Section 101.4.3, 2012 International Building Code is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 102.8 (Referenced codes and standards) is amended by adding the following exception: 
Exception: Any reference to the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the City of College Station. 
(2)  Section 106.3 (Application for permit) is amended by deleting the text in said section and replacing it with the following: 
The code official may require a permit application for work regulated by this code. 
(3)  Section 106.6.2 (Fee Schedule) is amended by deleting this section in its entirety. 
(4)  Section 106.6.3 (Fee refunds) is amended by deleting the text in said section and replacing it with the following: 
The City Manager or designee is authorized to establish a refund policy. 
(5)  Section 108.5 (Stop work orders) is amended by inserting the following amounts in the blanks provided at the end of said section: 
twenty-five ($25.00) in the first blank and two-thousand ($2,000.00) in the second blank 
(6)  Section 109 (Means of Appeal) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(7)  Section 305.4.1 (Sewer depth) is amended by inserting "twelve (12)" in both blanks and adding the following sentence to the end of said section. 
Where conditions prohibit the required amount of cover, cast iron pipe with approved joints may be used unless other means of protecting the pipe is provided as approved by the Building Official. 
(8)  Section 312.1 (Required tests) is amended by deleting the following text from said section: 
, for piping systems other than plastic, by 
(9)  Section 312.2 (Drainage and vent water test) is amended by deleting said section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
312.2 Drainage water test. A water test shall be applied to the drainage system either in its entirety or in sections. If applied to the entire system, all openings in the piping shall be tightly closed, except the highest opening, and the system shall be filled with water to the point of overflow. If the system is tested in sections, each opening shall be tightly plugged except the highest opening of the section under test, and each section shall be tested with not less than a 5-foot head of water. This pressure shall be held for at least 15 minutes. The drainage system shall then be tight at all points. 
(10)  Section 312.3 (Drainage and vent air test) is amended by deleting said section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
312.3 Drainage air test. An air test shall be applied to the drainage piping by forcing air into the system until there is uniform gauge pressure of 5 pounds per square inch (psi) or sufficient to balance a 10-inch column of mercury. This pressure shall be held for a test period of at least 15 minutes. Any adjustment to the test pressure required because of changes in ambient temperature or the seating of gaskets shall be made prior to the beginning of the test period. 
(11)  Section 312.6 (Gravity sewer test) is amended by replacing "10-foot" with "5-foot". 
(12)  Section 312.10 (Inspection and testing of backflow prevention assemblies.) is amended by deleting said section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
312.10 Inspection and testing of backflow prevention assemblies. Upon initial installation, an inspection shall be made of all backflow prevention devices and assemblies to determine whether they are operable. Testing of all backflow prevention devices and assemblies shall be in accordance with Chapter 11, Section 10, Subsection F, of the Code of Ordinances, City of College Station, Texas. 
(13)  Section 410.4 (Substitution) is amended by deleting the last sentence in said section and replacing it with the following: 
Where bottle water dispensers are provided in other occupancies, drinking fountains shall not be required. 
(14)  Table 605.3 (Water Service Pipe) is amended by deleting the following materials: 
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic pipe 
Polyethylene (PE) plastic pipe 
Polyethylene (PE) plastic tubing 
Polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) pipe 
(15)  Section 606 (Installation of the Building Water Distribution System) is amended by adding section 606.8 to read as follows: 
606.8 Materials below slab. Water distribution piping installed under concrete slabs shall be copper (minimum type K), cross-link polyethylene (PEX) tubing, or cross-linked polyethylene/aluminum/polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) pipe, all installed without joints or connections. Materials subject to corrosion shall be protected when exposed to concrete or corrosive soils. 
(16)  Section 606 (Installation of the Building Water Distribution System) is amended by adding section 606.9 to read as follows: 
606.9 Sleeved cross-polyethylene piping or tubing. When a sleeve is provided for cross-linked polyethylene (PEX) plastic piping or tubing installed under concrete slabs the annular space between the piping or tubing and the sleeve must be caulked, foamed, or otherwise sealed to prevent the entrance of termiticide. 
(17)  Section 608.17.5 (Connections to lawn irrigation systems) is amended by deleting the first sentence in said section and replacing it with the following: 
The potable water supply to lawn irrigation systems shall be protected against backflow by an atmospheric vacuum breaker, a pressure vacuum breaker assembly, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check. 
(18)  Section 701.2 (Sewer required) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
701.2 Sewer required. Every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed and all premises having sanitary drainage piping shall be connected to an approved sewer. Private sewage systems must comply with City of College Station's Code of Ordinances. All private sewage disposal systems must comply with the latest adopted standards of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and be installed under the direction of the Brazos County Health Department. The installer shall be licensed by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
(19)  Section 1003.3.5 (Hydromechanical grease interceptors, fats, oils and greases disposal systems and automatic grease removal devices) is amended by deleting the first sentence in said section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-6(E); Ord. No. 2019-4075 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 103-138. - Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code adopted by reference in Section 101.4.4, 2018 International Building Code is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 102.7 (Referenced codes and standards) is amended by adding the following exception: 
Exception: Any reference to the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the City of College Station. 
(2)  Section 107 (Notices and orders) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(3)  Section 108 (Unsafe Structures and Equipment) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(4)  Section 109 (Emergency Measures) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(5)  Section 110 (Demolition) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(6)  Section 111 (Means of Appeal) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(7)  Section 302.4 (Weeds) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(8)  Section 304.3 (Premises identification) is amended by deleting the text in said section and replacing it with the following: Premises identification shall be in compliance with Section 502.1, 2018 International Building Code as amended. 
(9)  Section 304.14 (Insect screens) is amended by deleting the existing text and replacing it with the following: 
Every door, window, and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any other areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25mm) and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exceptions : 
1.  Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or Insect repellant fans, are employed. 
2.  Screens shall not be required for windows and doors enclosing habitable spaces that contain central heating and air conditioning equipment that provide mechanical ventilation. 
(10)  Section 602.3 (Heat supply) is amended by adding the following dates in the blanks provided: 
1 October in first blank and 30 April in second blank 
(11)  Section 602.4 (Occupiable work space) is amended by adding the following dates in the blanks provided: 
1 October in first blank and 30 April in second blank 
(12)  Section 602.4 (Occupiable work spaces) is amended by adding the following exception: 
3.  Warehouse, storage rooms and similar areas that are not occupied on a constant basis. 
(13)  Appendix A (Boarding Standard) is hereby adopted. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-6(F); Ord. No. 2019-4075 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 103-139. - Amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code. 
    The International Energy Conservation Code adopted by reference in Section 101.4.6, 2018 International Building Code, is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section C&R106.1 (Referenced codes and standards) is amended by adding the following to said section: 
Any reference to the ICC Electrical Code shall mean the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the City of College Station. 
(2)  Section C&R109 (Board of Appeals) is amended by deleting the section in its entirety. 
(3)  Section C402.5 (Air leakage-thermal envelope (Mandatory)) is amended by adding an exception: 
Exception : The air leakage - thermal envelope shall be considered acceptable when the items listed in Table R402.4.1.1, applicable to the method of construction, are field verified. Where required by the code official, an approved third party, independent from the installer, shall inspect and approve the thermal envelope and insulation installation. 
(4)  Section R401.3 (Certificate) is amended by deleting the existing text from said section: 
The certificate shall list the types and efficiencies of heating, cooling and service water heating equipment. Where a gas-fired unvented room heater, electric furnace, or baseboard electric heater is installed in the residence, the certificate shall list "gas-fired unvented room heater," "electric furnace" or "baseboard electric heater." as appropriate. An efficiency shall not be listed for gas-fired unvented room heaters, electric furnaces or electric baseboard heaters. 
(5)  Section R402.4.1.2 (Testing) is amended by adding an exception: 
Exception : Building envelope tightness and insulation installation shall be considered acceptable when the items listed in Table R402.4.1.1, applicable to the method of construction, are field verified. Where required by the code official, an approved third party independent from the installer, shall inspect and approve the air barrier and insulation installation. 
(6)  Section R403.3.1 (Insulation (Prescriptive)) is amended by adding the following to the end of the section: 
Supply and return air ducts in unconditioned spaces may have an insulation R-Value of 6 when installed in conjunction with an air conditioner having a minimum SEER rating of 15. 
(7)  Section R403.3.3 (Duct Testing (Mandatory)) is amended by adding an additional exception below said section: 
Exception : 2. Duct tightness shall be considered acceptable when the items listed below, applicable to the method of construction, are field verified: 
Connections: 
a.  Seal core to collar with UL listed mastic or at least 2 wraps of UL 181 listed tape. 
b.  Secure connection with mechanical clamp placed over the core and tape. 
c.  Pull jacket and insulation back over core. Use a mechanical clamp, two wraps of UL 181 listed tape or UL listed mastic to secure insulation. 
Splices: 
a.  Butt two cores together on a 4" length metal sleeve. 
b.  Secure core and sleeve with UL listed mastic or two wraps of UL 181 listed tape 
c.  Secure connection with 2 clamps placed over the taped core ends. 
d.  Pull jacket and insulation back over core. Use two wraps of UL 181 listed tape or UL listed mastic to secure insulation. 
(8)  Section R403 (Systems) is amended by adding R403.13 to read as follows: 
403.13 Heating equipment. Electrical resistance heat may be used as the primary source of heating for residential use not exceeding five hundred (500) square feet in area. 
(9)  Section R406.5 (Verification by approved agency) is amended by replacing the existing text with: 
The Code Official may require verification of compliance with Section R406 be completed by an approved third party. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-6(G); Ord. No. 2019-4075 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
Secs. 103-140-103-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICAL CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- National Electrical Code adopted as municipal residential and commercial electrical code, Texas Local Government Code  214.214; Texas Electrical Safety and Licensing Act, Texas Occupations Code ch. 1305. 

Sec. 103-162. - National Electrical Code adopted. 
    A booklet entitled National Electrical Code 2017 Edition as amended and as hereafter may be amended, at least one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the Building Official of the City of College Station, Texas, is hereby adopted and designated as the Electrical Code of College Station, Texas. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-7; Ord. No. 2019-4075 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
Sec. 103-163. - Amendments to the National Electrical Code. 
(1)  Section 210.23 (A) 15- and 20- Ampere Branch Circuits. Shall be amended to delete the reference to 15 ampere branch circuits. It shall also be amended to include the following sentence after said section: 
However, a circuit of twenty (20) amperes shall not serve more than ten openings. 
(2)  Table 210.24 Summary of Branch-Circuit Requirements shall be amended by placing an asterisk next to all 14 AWG conductors indicated in the table and by adding this footnote at the bottom of the table: 
* special note: Except for fixture wires in UL or other listed fixtures, no conductor of a size smaller than 12 AWG solid copper is allowed in branch circuit wiring. 
(3)  Section 210.52 (B) Small Appliances shall be amended by adding the following subsection: 
(4)  Separate Circuit Required. A separate circuit is required for each refrigerator, deep freeze, dishwasher, disposal, trash compactor or any other load exceeding six (6) amperes. 
(4)  Section 210.52 (C) Countertops shall be amended to include after the words '...with 210.52 (C) (1) through (C) (5). the following sentence: 
However, a separate circuit is required for microwave ovens or any other counter top appliance with a load exceeding six (6) amperes. 
(5)  Section 210.52 (F) Laundry Areas. Shall be amended to include after the words '...for the installation of laundry equipment.' the following sentence: 
However, a separate circuit is required for a washing machine or any other laundry appliance with a load exceeding six (6) amperes. 
(6)  Section 210.52 Dwelling Unit Receptacle Outlets. Shall be amended by adding the following subsection: 
(J) Other Locations. A separate circuit is required for each well pump or other outdoor loads exceeding six (6) amperes. 
(7)  Article 230 Services. Shall be amended by adding the following section: 
230.11 Meter Mounting Heights. Individual meters shall be mounted at a height not greater than 5'-6" or less than 4'-6" above finished grade, measured to the center line of the meter base. Meter packs shall be mounted with its horizontal centerline not greater than 4'-6" or less than 4'-0" above finished grade. 
Exception : Meters and meter packs may be mounted at a different height by special permission of the Building Official or his designee when special conditions make the installation at the above heights impractical. 
(8)  Section 230.70 General shall be amended by adding the following subsection: 
(D) Service Disconnecting Means for Commercial Buildings and Structures. For commercial buildings and structures, the service disconnecting means shall be installed on the outside of the building or structure. A power operated disconnect switch (shunt trip) is permitted for service disconnects rated 1000 amps or more. All shunt trip disconnecting means shall be of the maintained contact type in an approved, lockable enclosure. All service disconnects shall be clearly marked in a permanent manner. 
Exception : A power operated disconnect switch (shunt trip) may be allowed on service disconnects rated less than 1000 amps, if the applicant requests an exception from the Electrical Division and Building Official and satisfies the official that one of the following criteria has been met. 
(a)  A power operated disconnect switch (shunt trip) may be used for a service disconnect rated less than 1000 amps when the building or structure is served by a single transformer and the transformer is not anticipated to be used for multiple services; or 
(b)  A power operated disconnect switch (shunt trip) may be used for a service disconnect rated less than 1000 amps on an existing building or structure when space is not available to mount an external disconnect. 
(9)  Article 230 Services. Shall be amended by adding the following section: 
230.70 (E) Outside Disconnect Locking Device. Factory installed key operated lock shall have an alternate locking mechanism approved by the local jurisdiction. 
(10)  Section 230.71 (A) General shall be amended to include the following sentence after said section: 
Any multi-tenant building larger than 5,000 square feet shall have a service disconnect. 
(11)  Section 250.52 (A) (5) Rod and Pipe Electrodes shall be amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Rod and Pipe Electrodes. Rod and pipe electrodes shall not be less than eight (8) feet in length, not less than 5/8" in diameter and shall be copper coated. 
(12)  Section 310.106 (B) Conductor Material shall be amended by adding the following Exception: 
Exception : Aluminum and copper-clad aluminum is not allowed in branch circuits. 
(13)  Section 320.12 Uses Not Permitted shall be amended by deleting the section in its entirety and replacing with the following: 
Uses Not Permitted. Type AC cable shall not be permitted in commercial buildings as a wiring method. 
(14)  Section 334.12 (A) Types NM, NMC, and NMS. Shall be amended to include the following subsection: 
(11) In educational occupancies as defined by the City's "adopted building code. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-7; Ord. No. 2019-4075 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-25-2019) 
Secs. 103-164-103-194. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dangerous structures, Texas Local Government Code  214.001 et seq. 

Sec. 103-195. - Abatement authorized. 
    The City may require the vacation, relocation of occupants, securing, repair, removal, or demolition of a structure that is: 
(1)  Dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare; 
(2)  Regardless of its structural condition, unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children; or 
(3)  Boarded up, fenced, or otherwise secured in any manner if the building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or the means used to secure the structure are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the structure in the manner described in Subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(C)(1)) 
Sec. 103-196. - Public nuisance. 
    All structures determined unsafe within the terms of this article are hereby declared public nuisances and illegal and shall be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, demolished, or the occupants relocated as herein provided. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(C)(3)) 
Sec. 103-197. - Minimum standards. 
    The minimum standards that shall determine the suitability of a structure for continued use or occupancy, regardless of the date of construction, are those found in the City's adopted Property Maintenance Code. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(C)(2)) 
Sec. 103-198. - Investigation. 
    When the Building Official or designee or the Fire Marshal determines that a structure may be unsafe within the meaning of this article, such official shall do the following: 
(1)  Conduct a drive-by inspection; 
(2)  If the structure is occupied, present proper identification to the occupant and request entry to conduct an inspection; 
(3)  If entry is refused or the structure unoccupied, an administrative search warrant must be obtained; 
(4)  If the drive-by inspection and/or other facts suggest an emergency exists, an administrative search warrant is not required; 
(5)  Upon completion of the inspection, the Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal shall document any violations of this article; 
(6)  If, upon the conclusion of an investigation, the Building Official or designee or the Fire Marshal concludes that there is probable cause to believe that the building is unsafe within the terms of this article, such official shall make a report to the Commission and give notice of a public hearing to the property owner, lienholder and mortgagee as herein provided. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(C)(4)) 
Sec. 103-199. - Notice of hearings. 
(a)  Notices sent. The Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal or designee shall, at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing date, send to each property owner notice of the hearing in the following manner: 
(1)  By delivery to each party personally or by leaving the notice at the usual place of abode of that party with a person of 16 years of age or older or by depositing the notice in United States mail addressed to the party at the party's last known address, certified mail, return receipt requested; 
(2)  By posting the notice on or near the front door of the structure; 
(3)  By publishing notice in the Bryan/College Station Eagle on two consecutive days; 
(4)  Notice shall also be filed in the Official Public Records of Real Property in the County Clerk's Office. 
(b)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or cover such notice posted pursuant to Subsection (a)(2) of this section until after the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Notice contents. The notice of the hearing shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  State the time and place of the hearing; 
(3)  Provide a legal description of the affected property; 
(4)  List the name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined from a reasonable search of the instruments on file in the County Clerk's Office; 
(5)  List each owner, lienholder and mortgagee shown to have a legal interest in the property; 
(6)  Describe each violation of the municipal standards which allegedly exists; 
(7)  State the action that will be recommended to the Commission by the Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal which may include vacating, securing, repairing, removing or demolition of the structure or relocating occupants of the building; 
(8)  Provide a description of the hearing; 
(9)  State that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the article and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work; and 
(10)  State that the City may perform any required work to abate the violation if the owner fails to do so. 
(d)  Recipients. Notice shall be provided to each mortgagee and lienholder in the same manner provided for in Subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(C)(5)) 
Sec. 103-200. - Hearing before the Commission. 
(a)  The Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal shall request a public hearing before the Commission for the purpose of determining whether a structure is unsafe within the terms of this article. The Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal shall present all cases before the Commission. 
(b)  In a public hearing to determine whether a structure complies with the standards set out in this Code, the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this Code and the time it will take to reasonably perform such work. 
(c)  The Commission shall provide each party an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine witnesses at the hearing. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(C)(6)) 
Sec. 103-201. - Action of the Commission. 
(a)  Decision. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Commission may declare a structure unsafe within the terms of this article. 
(b)  Commission order. If the Commission determines the structure is unsafe within the terms of this article, it shall proceed to determine whether the structure should be vacated, repaired, secured, demolished and/or the occupants relocated under the standards contained herein and in accordance with the following: 
(1)  If the structure can be feasibly repaired or the dangerous condition remedied so that violations no longer exist, it shall be ordered repaired or remedied. Repairs shall be deemed feasible if the cost of repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure equals less than 50 percent of the market value of the structure. 
(2)  In any case where 50 percent or more of the value of a structure is damaged or deteriorated, it shall be ordered demolished or removed, and in all cases where a structure cannot be repaired so that it will no longer be considered dangerous under the provision of this article, it shall be demolished or removed. 
(c)  Order. Upon determining that the structure should be either vacated, repaired, secured, demolished and/or the occupants relocated, the Commission shall issue an order stating that the required action be taken by the owner within a specified reasonable time as provided in Section 103-202. 
(d)  Notification to owner. The Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal shall, no later than the next working day after the Commission issues an order, mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the order to the owner of the structure and to any mortgagee or lienholder. 
(e)  Public notice. Within ten calendar days after the date the order is issued, the Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal shall: 
(1)  File a copy of the order in the Office of the City Secretary; and 
(2)  Publish in the Bryan/College Station Eagle a notice containing the street address or legal description of the property, the date of the hearing, a brief statement indicating the results of the order, and instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(C)(7)) 
Sec. 103-202. - Compliance with order. 
(a)  Each order issued by the Commission shall require the owner to, within 30 calendar days: 
(1)  Secure the structure from unauthorized entry; or 
(2)  Repair, remove, or demolish the structure, unless the owner, mortgagee or lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 days. 
(b)  In the event that the owner fails to comply with the order, the Commission's order may allow an additional 30 calendar days to any lienholder or mortgagee to comply with Subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  If the Commission allows the owner, mortgagee, or lienholder more than 30 calendar days to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the municipality shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal. 
(d)  The Commission may not allow the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 calendar days to repair, remove, or demolish the structure or fully perform all work to comply with the order unless the owner, lienholder or mortgagee: 
(1)  Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and 
(2)  Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 calendar days because of the scope and complexity of the work. 
(e)  If the Commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than 90 calendar days to complete any part of the work required to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the Commission shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to the Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules established for commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee appear before the Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal to demonstrate compliance with the time schedules. If the owner, lienholder or mortgagee owns property, including structures or improvements on property within City boundaries that exceeds $100,000.00 in total value, the City may require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate to cover the cost of repairing, removing or demolishing a building under this article. In lieu of a bond, the City may require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to provide a letter of credit from a financial institution or a guaranty from a third party approved by the City. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or third party guaranty provided, not later than the 30th day after the date the Commission issues the order. 
(f)  If the Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal finds that the owner has failed to comply with the Commission's order such official shall notify the lienholder and mortgagee in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, with a copy of the order. 
(g)  If the Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal finds that neither the owner nor the lienholder and mortgagee have complied, such official shall notify the Commission. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(C)(8)) 
Sec. 103-203. - Abatement by City. 
(a)  If the unsafe structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the occupants are not relocated within the time allowed by order, the Commission may, upon the recommendation of the Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal, order the City to vacate, secure, repair, remove, or demolish the structure or relocate the occupants at the City's expense. This provision does not limit the City's ability to collect on a bond or other financial guaranty that is required under Section 103-202(e). 
(b)  The Commission may order a structure repaired under Subsection (a) of this section only to the extent necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the minimum standards and only if the structure is a residential building with ten or fewer dwelling units. 
(c)  The owner of the unsafe structure shall be charged the City's expense to vacate, secure, repair, remove, or demolish the structure or to relocate the occupants. Such charges shall include, but are not limited to, the expense of inspection or testing by third parties; photography; publication; title search; attorney's fees; labor and equipment costs for preparation of the premises, work to secure, repair or demolish; clean up and remove debris; and landfill fees. 
(d)  The Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal shall certify the expenses incurred to enforce the Commission's order. The certified expenses shall be forwarded to the City's Fiscal Services Department. 
(e)  The City may assess expenses on, and the City shall have a lien against, the property on which the structure was located, unless the property is a homestead as protected by the State Constitution. 
(f)  Notice of the lien shall be provided to the property owner. Notice of the lien shall be recorded and indexed in the County Clerk's Office. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort; a legal description of the real property on which the structure was located; the amount of the expenses incurred by the City; the interest rate to be charged; and the balance due. 
(g)  The City's lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens. Such lien shall bear an interest rate of ten percent per annum until paid. 
(h)  The lien for repair expenses may not be foreclosed if the property on which the repairs were made is occupied as a residential homestead by a person 65 years of age or older. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(C)(9); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 103-204. - Emergency actions. 
    In cases where a structure is determined unsafe under the terms of this article by the Building Official or designee or Fire Marshal, and such structure or the manner of its use constitutes an imminent danger to health, life or property, the condition shall justify the use of emergency measures. Imminent danger exists where there is considerable risk of danger or peril and where accidents or injuries are likely to occur. Under those conditions, the City Manager may order the owner of the structure, the owner's agent, or the owner or occupant of the property to vacate, repair, remove or demolish the structure to the extent necessary to alleviate the imminent danger. If the owner, agent or occupant fails to comply with the order within 72 hours, the City may vacate, repair, remove or demolish the structure and assess the expenses of such action against the property. Notice of the assessment and recovery of the expenses shall be in the manner provided for in Section 103-203. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(C)(10)) 
Sec. 103-205. - Appellate review. 
    Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record shall have the right to appeal the decision of the Commission to the District Court. The petition must be filed with the District Court Clerk within 30 calendar days from the date the Commission's order is mailed to the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee. Appeal in the District Court shall be limited to a hearing under the substantial evidence rule. The Commission's decision shall become final if no appeal is taken within the 30-calendar-day time period. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(C)(11)) 
Sec. 103-206. - Liability of City for action under this article. 
    Neither the City nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this article shall be liable or have any liability by reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  3-1(C)(12)) 
Secs. 103-207-103-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SINGLE-FAMILY AND DUPLEX UNIT RENTAL REGISTRATION 

Sec. 103-236. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrator means the City Manager or designee. 
    Duplex dwelling is as defined in Article 11, "Definitions," of the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
    Multi-family dwelling is as defined in Article 11. "Definitions," of the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
    Owner occupied is defined as the property's owner of record that utilizes the dwelling as the owner's primary residence. 
    Rental property means any single-family, townhome, duplex, tri-plex, four-plex, five-plex, or six-plex dwelling unit that is not owner occupied, whether or not rent is charged. The term "rental property" includes, but is not limited to, properties rented to students, families, or any other persons; properties in which a family member of the owner resides in the home but the owner does not (regardless of whether additional persons also reside in the home); properties used as vacation rentals or game-day rentals; and properties where a property caretaker lives in the home but the owner does not. 
    Single-family dwelling is as defined in Article 11, "Definitions," of the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-19(B); Ord. No. 2017-3927 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 103-237. - Penalties. 
(a)  Administrative penalties for code violations may be imposed, in addition to the criminal prosecution authorized by Section 1-7. The following criteria shall be considered: 
(1)  The extent to which the person has benefited from the violation; 
(2)  The degree of harm to the public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics as a result of the violation; 
(3)  The recidivism of the person, including previous compliance and enforcement action; 
(4)  Good faith efforts to remedy the violation; 
(5)  The duration of the violation after a notice and order of compliance was served. 
(b)  The amount of the citation shall be as follows: 
Offense Payment Within Ten Days/Payment After Ten Days First $180.00/$200.00 Second $330.00/$350.00 Third and subsequent $480.00/$500.00  
(c)  Each day such violation shall continue or be permitted to continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-19(E); Ord. No. 2017-3927 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 103-238. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish a registration requirement for owners of rental properties so that the City may expeditiously identify and contact the owner, if local, or owner's local contact person to obtain tenant information in the event of an emergency or when a disproportionate number of City, State or Federal law violations have occurred on or in the property. It is not the intent of this article to determine the rights and liabilities of persons under agreements to which the City is not a party. This article shall not be construed to alter the terms of any lease or other agreement between a landlord and a tenant or others relating to property that is the subject of this article, provided that no provision of any lease or other agreement shall be construed to excuse non-compliance with this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-19(A); Ord. No. 2017-3927 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 103-239. - Violations. 
(a)  It is a violation of this article to: 
(1)  Fail to register a rental property when required by Section 103-242; 
(2)  Fail to present and/or provide documents requested pursuant to Section 103-242(b) or (c); 
(3)  Provide false information to the Administrator under this article; or 
(4)  Continue noncompliance with this article, following either an administrative or judicial finding of noncompliance or plea of guilty. 
(b)  A plea of no contest shall be treated as a plea of guilty for purposes of this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-19(F); Ord. No. 2017-3927 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 103-240. - Citations. 
    The Administrator shall have the authority to issue citations for the violation of the provisions of this article. An individual's signature on a copy of the citation is acknowledgement of receipt of the same and a promise to contact the Administrator to either pay or arrange for the entry of a plea and a hearing, within ten days of the date of the citation. Failure or refusal to sign shall be noted and a copy filed with the Administrator, as due and payable within ten days, absent a timely appeal, the lack of signature notwithstanding. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-19(D); Ord. No. 2017-3927 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 103-241. - Administrative adjudication of violations. 
(a)  A person who receives an administrative citation or summons under Section 103-237 is entitled to an administrative hearing. 
(b)  The Administrator shall implement and enforce the provisions of this article, establishing necessary procedures consistent with this article. 
(c)  One or more Hearing Officers shall be appointed by the Administrator to administratively adjudicate all violations for which an administrative citation or summons is issued. 
(d)  A Hearing Officer shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Administer oaths; 
(2)  Accept admissions and hear and determine contests of violations under this article; and 
(3)  Issue orders enforceable by the Municipal Court compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents. 
(e)  The administrative adjudication process is initiated by the issuance of an administrative citation or summons by a City Code Enforcement Officer or licensed Peace Officer. An administrative citation or summons serves as notice of administrative adjudication hearing under this article. 
(f)  An administrative citation or summons shall include the following information: 
(1)  The nature, date, time and location of the alleged violation; 
(2)  A statement that a person charged with a civil offense under this Code is entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing to determine liability for the charged offense and that such right to a hearing shall be exercised by personally appearing at College Station Municipal Court within ten days from the date of the citation. 
(3)  A notification that failure to answer the citation or to appear at the administrative adjudication hearing is considered an admission of liability for the violation and will result in the assessment of civil fines, costs and fees. 
(g)  An administrative citation or summons may be served personally on the owner of the rental property or the owner's legal registered agent. The citation or summons may be served by personal service, regular and/or certified mail. 
(h)  The original or a copy of the citation, including an electronic copy, is a governmental record kept in the ordinary course of City business and is rebuttable proof of the facts it contains. 
(i)  The original and all copies of any administrative citation or summons are prima facie evidence that it was issued and that service was made in accordance with this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-19(G); Ord. No. 2017-3927 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-11-2017) 
Sec. 103-242. - Rental registration required. 
(a)  Each owner or real estate manager of rental property is required to register the property with the City on a form provided by the Administrator. A new registration is also required upon any change in ownership. The information required to register the rental property is as follows: 
(1)  Address of the rental property; 
(2)  Owner and contact information for the owner; 
(3)  Type of rental property, such as single-family or duplex; 
(4)  Local contact person with contact information, in the case of an absentee owner. The local contact person cannot be someone who is listed on the lease. The local contact must reside within 30 miles of City Hall. Any change in local contact information must be reported to the Administrator in writing within 30 days of any changes. 
(b)  Tenant names, the contact information for all persons listed on the current lease and all current lease shall be presented to the Administrator for review upon request. 
(c)  Other information shall likewise be provided, as deemed necessary by the Administrator. 
(d)  A fee established in Section 2-117 shall be assessed per building at the time of any required registration. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  4-19(C); altered in 2017 recodification; Ord. No. 2017-3927 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-11-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-3927 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 11, 2017, amended  103-242 and in so doing changed the title of said section from "Annual registration required" to "Rental registration required," as set out herein. 
Chapter 105 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Flood Control and Insurance Act, Texas Water Code  16.311 et seq.; governing body required to adopt ordinances or orders necessary to participate in National Flood Insurance Program, Texas Water Code  16.3145; responsibility to establish flood hazard regulations, Texas Water Code  16.315. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 105-1-105-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD HAZARD PROTECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 105-19. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accelerated soil erosion means the erosion that results from increased slope and/or exposure of the land surface that occurs as a result of man's activities. 
    Anticipated development means full potential urbanization of the contributing watershed in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and the reasonable assumption that in considering the effects of a proposed development in a floodplain area that there will be an equal degree of encroachment extending for a significant reach on both sides of the stream or watercourse. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the Administrator's interpretation of any provisions of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land adjacent to a clearly defined channel within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE, or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year ("the 100-year flood"). 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year, also called the base flood. 
    Certificate of compliance means a letter signed by the Administrator indicating compliance with all plans and specifications applicable to the subject project and completion of all stormwater management and soil erosion protection measures. 
    Construction plans means the construction documents required to accompany the final plat according to the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A), or the building and site plans required for the issuance of a building permit by the City. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Detention means the temporary storage and controlled release of stormwater flows. 
    Detention facility means a permanent facility for the temporary storage of stormwater flows which is designed so as not to create a permanent pool of water. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, clearing, or drilling operations. 
    Drainage area means that area, measured in a horizontal plane, which contributes stormwater flows by gravity flow along natural or manmade pathways to a single designated point along a pathway. 
    Drainage easement means an interest in land granted to the City for maintenance of a drainage facility, on which certain uses are prohibited; and providing for the entry and operation of machinery and vehicles for maintenance. 
    Drainage facility means any element necessary to convey stormwater flows from its initial contact with earth to its disposition in an existing watercourse; said drainage facilities shall consist of both public and private storm sewers (closed conduits), streets, improved channels constructed in conformity with the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications, unimproved drainageways left in their natural condition, areas covered by drainage easements for the purpose of providing concentrated or overland sheet flow, and all appurtenances to the foregoing, including inlets, manholes, junction boxes, headwalls, energy dissipaters, culverts, etc. 
    Drainage right-of-way means an area of land dedicated to the City for the purposes of carrying and containing stormwater flows, constructing drainage facilities, and/or allowing entry or operation of maintenance equipment. 
    Earth change means a manmade change in the natural cover or topography of land, including cutting or filling activities, which may result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation. 
    Easement means a grant of reservation by the owner of land for the use of such land by others for a specific purpose, and which must be included in the conveyance of land affected by such easement. 
    Elevated building. 
(1)  The term "elevated building" means a non-basement building: 
a.  Built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the cases of a building in Zones V1-30, VE or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear wall parallel to the flow of the water; and 
b.  Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. 
(2)  In the case of Zones A1-A30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X and D, the term "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. 
(3)  In the case of Zones V1-30, VE, or V, the term "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of the term "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the applicable standards of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Elevation means the vertical distance from a datum, usually the NGVD, to a point or object. If the elevation of point A is 802.46 feet, the point is 802.46 feet, above some datum. 
    Encroachment means an intrusion, obstruction, or other infringement on an area reserved for a specific purpose such as an easement or floodway. 
    Erosion means the process whereby the surface of the earth is broken up and carried away by the action of wind, water, gravity, ice, or a combination thereof. 
    Excavation means any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, or relocated purposely by man and shall be taken to include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
    Existing construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing development means any development as defined above which existed or was permitted prior to the date on which the ordinance from which this article is derived became effective. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Extraterritorial jurisdiction within the terms of the Texas Municipal Annexation Act means the unincorporated area, not a part of any other city, which is contiguous to the corporate limits of the City, the outer boundaries of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of the City, outward for such distances as may be stipulated in the Texas Municipal Annexation Act, in which area, within the terms of the Act, the City may enjoin the violation of its Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
    Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is an agency of the Federal Insurance Administration which administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
    Flood or flooding means a temporary rise in the level of water which results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood frequency means the statistically determined average for how often a specific flood level or discharge may be equaled or exceeded. 
    Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the areas within the boundaries of special flood hazards have been designated. 
    Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood Insurance Study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, the water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood Hazard Boundary Floodway Map. 
    Floodplain or floodprone area means any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see Flood or Flooding ). 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such systems typically include hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Floodway fringe means that part of the base floodplain outside the floodway. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading or unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Grading means any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled, excavated, scarified, filled or any combination thereof. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a State Inventory of Historic Places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Land use means a use of land which may result in an earth change, including, but not limited to, subdivision, residential, commercial, industrial, recreational, or other development, private and public highway, road and street construction, drainage construction, logging operations, agricultural practices, oil and gas exploration, exploitation, extraction and mining. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practice. 
    Lot means a tract or parcel of land which is physically and legally undivided and is shown on a duly recorded plat. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this article. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or for sale. 
    Mean sea level means the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which the base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) means the nationwide reference surface for elevations throughout the United States made available to local surveyors by the National Geodetic Survey with the establishment of thousands of benchmarks throughout the continent. It was obtained through a least-squares adjustment in 1929 of all first-order leveling in the United States and Canada. The adjustment included the 26 tide stations, and thus referenced the NGVD to MSL. 
    Natural means the cover and topography of land before any manmade changes, or in areas where there have already been manmade modifications, the state of the area and topography of land at the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    New construction means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community. 
    Plat means the final plat as described in the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
    Primary drainage system means the system of natural watercourses, improved or channelized watercourses; and all closed conduits, culverts, bridges, detention facilities, and retention facilities associated with the watercourses, all of which are shown or indicated in the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Registered professional engineer means a person duly authorized and licensed under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act, to practice the profession of engineering. 
    Retention means the storage of stormwater flows in a facility which has a permanent pool of water. 
    Retention facility means a facility that provides for the storage of stormwater flows by means of a permanent pool of water or permanent pool in conjunction with a temporary storage component. 
    Secondary drainage system means the system of conveyance of rainfall from the point that it becomes concentrated flow to the point where it reaches the primary drainage system. This system includes all swales, ditches, minor channels, streets, gutters, inlets, culverts, detention or retention facilities, or other means of conveyance of stormwater flows. 
    Sediment means soils or other surficial materials transported or deposited by the action of wind, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Site plan means a site development plan submitted for approval as described in the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as a dwelling unit and not part of the main structure. 
    Stormwater management includes all ordinances, standards, plans, and studies to ensure the timely and effective construction of: 
(1)  A system of vegetative and structural measures that control the increased volume and rate of surface runoff caused by manmade changes to the land; and 
(2)  A system of vegetative, structural, and other measures that reduce or eliminate pollutants that might otherwise be carried by surface runoff. 
    Stripping means any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the vegetative surface cover, including clearing and grubbing operations. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Subdivision Control Ordinance means that portion of the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A) pertaining to "Subdivisions." 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
a.  Before the improvement or repair is started, or 
b.  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
(2)  For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
(3)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any projects for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, or 
b.  Any alterations of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
    Variance means the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements for specific circumstances such that strict adherence to the requirements would: 
(1)  Result in unnecessary hardship; and 
(2)  Not fulfill the intent of this article. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum if specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
    Watercourse means any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash, in and including any area adjacent thereto which is subject to inundation by reason of overflow of floodwater. 
    Zoning means a method of land use control requiring the categorization of land use of every tract of land within a particular jurisdiction according to a zoning ordinance or code and usually in accordance with a land use plan which is intended to preserve the quality of life and orderly development of that jurisdiction. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-2; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 105-20. - Penalty imposed. 
(a)  Upon the finding of a violation of this article, the Administrator may file a complaint in the Municipal Court of the City against any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity. In the event that the Judge finds any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity to be in violation of the terms, conditions, or requirements of this article, or provisions or conditions pursuant thereto, the Judge shall find said person firm, corporation, or other legal entity guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon conviction shall impose a fine as provided in Section 1-7. Prosecution under this provision shall not be a bar to any other relief for violation of this article. 
(b)  In addition to a fine, the City may institute appropriate actions or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of the provisions of this article or Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications, or to correct violations thereof, and, if applicable, appropriate actions or proceedings at law or equity against any surety company, escrow holder, or any third party who has affirmatively acted as surety or guarantor for the faithful performance of the permit holder's work. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-7(C), (D)) 
Sec. 105-21. - Authority. 
    This article is adopted under the authority of the Constitution and laws of the State and pursuant to the provisions of the Charter of the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-1(A)) 
State Law reference- Flood Control and Insurance Act, Texas Water Code  16.311 et seq.; governing body required to adopt ordinances or orders necessary to participate in National Flood Insurance Program, Texas Water Code  16.3145; responsibility to establish flood hazard regulations, Texas Water Code  16.315. 
Sec. 105-22. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse impacts associated with the increased stormwater flows generated by development. It is also the purpose of this article to enhance the public health, safety and welfare by furthering the goals and objectives of the City Comprehensive Plan and all of its elements. The following objectives will minimize public and private losses due to flooding, erosion, and sedimentation: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize the expenditure of public money for costly flood and erosion control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need for relief and rescue efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize the damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and sewer lines, streets, and drainage structures; 
(5)  To help maintain a stable tax base for the City by providing for the sound use and development of all areas in such a manner as to minimize future areas of flooding; 
(6)  To establish review, approval, and permit procedures for the methods of handling, conveying, and disposing of stormwater flows within the corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City, and ensure the review by the appropriate authority of the design, analysis, construction and maintenance of all drainage facilities according to the provisions of this article and the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications; 
(7)  To restrict or prohibit development which is dangerous to health, safety, or property during flooding conditions, or causes unacceptable increases in water surface elevations or velocities; 
(8)  To require that uses vulnerable to floods, or flooding, including public and private facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(9)  To provide authoritative guidance in the alteration of any natural stream course, floodplain, or their associated protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(10)  To prevent the construction of barriers which will divert stormwater flows and subject other lands to increased flood hazard; 
(11)  To provide authoritative guidance in the modification of ground cover to minimize erosion and sedimentation; 
(12)  To ensure that potential property owners are notified if the property is included in an area of special flood hazard; 
(13)  To control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-1(B)) 
Sec. 105-23. - Interpretation. 
(a)  In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally constructed in favor of the City Council, health, and safety; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes. 
(b)  The Administrator shall interpret and apply this article. If the Administrator determines that the meaning of a word, provision, or requirement is unclear, or that its application to a particular circumstance is uncertain, or upon written request for an interpretation by any interested party, the Administrator shall prepare a written interpretation or determination, setting forth the reasons, explanations, and conclusions regarding the interpretation. Appeals of interpretations made under this section shall be made in accordance with Section 105-55. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-3(E)(1)) 
Sec. 105-24. - National Flood Insurance Program. 
    The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) is a Federal program enabling property owners to purchase flood insurance. This program is based on an agreement between local communities and the Federal government that if a community will implement programs to reduce future flood damages, the Federal government will make flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection against flood losses. The United States Congress established the NFIP with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 and later modified and broadened the Program. The NFIP is administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The provisions of this article are in accordance with the requirements for participation in the NFIP. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-5(A)) 
Sec. 105-25. - Abrogation and greater restriction. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions; however, where this article and another conflict, or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions, under the interpretation of the Administrator, and subject to the provisions of interpretation defined above, shall apply. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-3(E)(2)) 
Sec. 105-26. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection accorded by the requirements of this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations which are consistent with accepted engineering principles and practice. Floods from stormwater flows can and will occur which are greater than those indicated or referenced under this article, and water surface elevations may be increased by manmade or natural causes beyond the scope of this article. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard, or uses permitted within such areas will be free or protected from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not be construed as warranting any such protection or freedom. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City, the Administrator of this article, or any officer or employee of the City, or for any flood damages resulting from reliance on or compliance with the provisions and requirements of this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-3(E)(3)) 
Sec. 105-27. - Compliance. 
    No structure, permanent or otherwise, or land, shall hereafter be located, substantially improved, platted, replatted, subdivided, have its use changed, or have its drainage pattern changed, without full compliance with the terms and provisions of this article, the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications, and other applicable regulations. The provisions of this article shall apply to and be binding on any and all persons, firms, or corporations who singly or jointly seek to develop, redevelop, grade, regrade, excavate, landfill, berm, dike, or otherwise change existing land within the corporate limit of the City, or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-3(E)) 
Sec. 105-28. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all lands within the corporate limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City as adjusted from time to time by the action of the City Council. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-3(A)) 
Sec. 105-29. - Notification of noncompliance. 
(a)  If at any time, development, as defined by this article, takes place for which an approved development permit has not been issued, or development occurs which does not conform to the plans and specifications upon which the issued development permit was based, the Administrator shall issue a written notice of noncompliance to the owner. The notice shall include a description of the nature and location of each alleged violation of this article, and, if readily apparent, the measures required to bring the development into compliance with the provisions and requirements of this article. The notice shall give a specific time allowance to the owner during which the owner must take one of the following steps to bring the development into compliance with this article: 
(1)  An acceptable application for a development permit must be filed with the Office of the Administrator for the entire scope of development taking place or proposed for the site; 
(2)  The items which are not in compliance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of this article shall be corrected, added, or improved until they are in compliance with this article, at which time the owner shall request, in writing, a re-inspection by the Administrator; 
(3)  Modified construction plans shall be submitted to the Administrator which detail, in an acceptable manner, the remedial, additional, or corrective measures which must be taken to bring the development within the provisions and requirements of this article; or 
(4)  An acceptable variance request, subject to the provisions of this article, shall be submitted to the Office of the Administrator which shall have the effect, if granted, of removing the requirements for which the development was determined to be in noncompliance. 
(b)  The time allotment for these actions shall be reasonable, and shall be determined according to the number, nature, and severity of the noncomplying items. In no case shall that time period exceed 30 calendar days from the date of notification. If, in the opinion of the Administrator, a condition exists which is hazardous to the immediate safety of the public, the Administrator may seek remedies outside the scope of this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-7(A)) 
Sec. 105-30. - Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications. 
    All design, construction plans, as-built construction plans, plats, zoning change requests, site plans, building permit applications, and all items relating to stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications. This document shall be available at the Office of the Administrator and shall be maintained by the Administrator as a single document. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-3(B)) 
Sec. 105-31. - Establishment of areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current effective scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Brazos County, Texas and Incorporated Areas, dated February 9, 2000, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary Floodway Maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated February 9, 2000, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-5(B)) 
Sec. 105-32. - Revision or amendment of Flood Insurance Study. 
    Any revision or amendment to the Flood Insurance Study which is requested by a land owner in the City shall be submitted to the designated Administrator of the Stormwater Management Program in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications. All requests for map amendment or map revision must be approved by the Administrator in writing prior to their submission to FEMA. If a modification of any watercourse is involved where a total of 300 feet reach or more is channelized or closed within a culvert, an effective conditional letter of map amendment shall be on file with the Administrator prior to any development or issuance of a development permit. All submittals to FEMA shall be made at no cost to the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-5(C)) 
Sec. 105-33. - Methods of reducing flood damage. 
    In order that the purposes of this article shall be accomplished in accordance with Section 105-22, the following methods, measures, requirements, and practices may be utilized by the Administrator in accordance with the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications: 
(1)  Limit peak stormwater flows after development to that which existed before development; 
(2)  Limit, control, or prevent changes in the path of stormwater flows across or away from a site or development; 
(3)  Limit, control, or prevent alterations to existing watercourses and drainage facilities either inside or outside existing areas of special flood hazard; 
(4)  Limit, control, or prevent the alteration of natural or developed areas of special flood hazard, channels, or protective barriers which are necessary to accommodate floodwaters; 
(5)  Limit, control, or prevent the use of existing or proposed drainage easements such that the easement remains useful for its intended purpose; 
(6)  Limit, control, or prevent the construction of barriers which may increase flood hazards to other lands or facilities; 
(7)  Establish or cause to be established adequate drainage easements and/or rights-of-way to control development and limit potential flood damage and protect existing or proposed drainage facilities; 
(8)  Limit, control, or prevent dumping of refuse, fill, garbage, grass clippings, brush, waste concrete, or other materials in existing drainage facilities, including swales, streets, inlets, ditches, storm sewers, culverts, etc.; 
(9)  Limit, control, or prevent filling, grading, clearing, dredging, paving, berming, or other earthwork which may increase stormwater flows, change drainage pathways, increase erosion and sedimentation, or increase flood hazard or damage from flooding; 
(10)  Limit, control, or prevent development which is dangerous to health, safety, or property by causing increases in water surface elevations, velocities, or flow rates which exist prior to such development; 
(11)  Limit, control, or prevent development which is vulnerable to flood damage or require that said development shall be adequately protected against said flood damage at the time of construction; 
(12)  Require adequate maintenance of drainage facilities such that they retain their capacity for conveyance of stormwater flows. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-5(D)) 
Secs. 105-34-105-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 105-55. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  All rulings, requirements, and interpretations of the Administrator shall be final and binding on the parties thereto unless said rulings, requirements, and interpretations are appealed to the Municipal Court. Any person aggrieved thereby shall submit a formal appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the Administrator within ten working days of the action prompting the appeal. The notice of appeal shall specify all rulings being appealed, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Specific sections of this article related to the appealed ruling or pertinent thereto; 
(2)  A brief summary of all facts material to the appeal; 
(3)  Grounds for the appeal. 
(b)  A hearing by the Municipal Court on the appeal shall take place at a regularly scheduled Court meeting. 
(c)  The ruling of the Municipal Court shall be finally binding upon all parties involved. Any party aggrieved by said final ruling may seek relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. The appeal of a ruling or requirement shall stay the enforcement of said ruling or requirement unless the Administrator certifies to the Court that by reason of fact a stay would cause an immediate public hazard or impair life or property. In such case, enforcement shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-4(C)) 
Sec. 105-56. - Variances. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  The Zoning Board of Adjustment may authorize a variance to the provisions and requirements of this article when, in their opinion, undue hardship on the owner will result from strict compliance with those requirements, and when either of the following criteria are met: 
a.  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that strict compliance with the provisions and requirements of this article will deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of land; or 
b.  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant. 
(2)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
(b)  Prerequisites for granting of variances. Upon consideration of the factors noted above, the specific provisions and requirements of this article, and the intent of this article, the Board may grant variances subject to the following prerequisites: 
(1)  A variance shall only be granted upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, or potential flood damage, to afford relief to the applicant; 
(2)  The effect of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to other property in the City; 
(3)  The effect of the variance will not increase water surface elevations, flow velocities, or alter drainage pathways to the extent that there will be any threat to public safety, extraordinary public expense, increase in nuisance flooding, or be detrimental to other portions of the major or minor drainage systems; 
(4)  The effect of the variance will not prevent the orderly subdivision of other land, upstream or downstream of the subject property, in the City; 
(5)  No variance shall be allowed within any designated floodway if any increase in water surface elevation would occur during the base flood discharge; 
(6)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
a.  The criteria and procedures outlined in this section for obtaining a variance are met; and 
b.  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(c)  Variance procedures. The granting of variances shall be subject to and in conformance with the following procedures and requirements: 
(1)  The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and render judgment on any requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving appeals, and variance requests, and shall report all variances to the requirements of this article to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request. 
(3)  Upon consideration of the above criteria, and prerequisites, and the intent of this article, the Board may attach such conditions to the granting of any variance as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article. 
(4)  All requests for variance shall be judged solely on the merits and special conditions of the case. The granting of a variance based upon the facts and evidence of one request for variance shall have no bearing on the consideration of any other request for variance. 
(5)  Before consideration by the Board, a formal request for variance shall be submitted to the Office of the Administrator. The request shall contain sufficient information to: 
a.  Define specifically which provision or requirement according to this article that allegedly causes the undue hardship; 
b.  Detail specifically what measures shall be taken to obtain the minimum relief from said hardship; 
c.  Define specifically the effects of the variance in terms of water surface elevations, flood velocities, etc., which pertain to the prerequisites required by this section; and 
d.  Identify any special conditions which should be considered as criteria for granting said variance. 
After review of the request, the Administrator may require additional information which is deemed necessary to fully document the prerequisites required by this section for the granting of a variance. This information shall be provided by the applicant prior to placement of the variance request on the agenda for consideration by the Board. 
(6)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation no more than three feet below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(7)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may appeal such decision to the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-6) 
Sec. 105-57. - Designation of Administrator. 
    The City Engineer shall be the Administrator to implement, administer, and oversee the provisions, terms, and conditions and requirements of this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-4(A); altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 105-58. - Duties and responsibilities of the Administrator. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Review, and approve or deny all applications for development permits, as required by this division, for compliance with the terms and provisions of this article; 
(3)  Ensure that adequate inspection of construction permitted under the terms and provisions of this division are carried out in accordance with the permitted plan; 
(4)  Maintain, update, and provide to interested parties at a reasonable cost the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications; 
(5)  Ensure that adequate maintenance of drainage pathways, including altered or relocated waterways, is provided such that capacity for carrying stormwater flows is maintained; 
(6)  Provide interpretation, where required, of boundaries of areas of special flood hazard, location of floodway, and water surface elevations, when disputes arise during review. (The initial determination of the above is the responsibility of the engineer working on the particular project;) 
(7)  Provide information to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, Municipal Court, or City Council, as applicable, on all variance requests, administrative appeals, enforcement actions, and proposed amendments to the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications as required; 
(8)  Review and utilize any acceptable new flood study data in accordance with the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications; 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Texas Water Commission prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; 
(10)  Interpret the terms and provisions of this article, as required, as they apply to each project, in accordance with the stated purpose of this article; and 
(11)  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State, or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-4(B)) 
Sec. 105-59. - Establishment of development permit. 
(a)  Issuance of a duly approved development permit shall be required prior to any development, as defined herein, to ensure conformance to the provisions and requirements of this article. 
(b)  Exception. The following uses shall be exempt from the permitting requirements of the section but must otherwise meet all of the requirements of the section and the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications: 
(1)  Customary and incidental grounds maintenance, landscaping, and gardening; 
(2)  Improvements by a homeowner on property used as their principal residence where that property lies outside of the designated area of special flood hazard; 
(3)  Uses by a landowner of their property for bona fide agricultural purposes where that property lies outside of the designated area of special flood hazard. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-3(C)) 
Sec. 105-60. - Permit procedures. 
    Prior to the issuance of a development permit, the following requirements shall be met: 
(1)  A preliminary conference shall be held with the Administrator or designated representative. 
(2)  An application for a development permit shall be presented to the Administrator, on forms available in the Administrator's Office, and shall include one or more of the following: construction plans, drainage plan, erosion and sediment control plan, engineering drainage design and analysis documentation, drainage report, and location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard; each of which shall conform to the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications. 
(3)  The Administrator shall review the required information and application form and shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the development permit. 
b.  Disapprove the development permit. 
c.  Require additional information or an engineering conference with the applicant or the applicant's engineer. 
The applicant shall be notified in writing of the action prescribed above. If the development permit has been disapproved, the specific reasons for disapproval shall be indicated in the notification. If additional information is required of the applicant, the specific requirements shall be indicated in the notification. A final determination of the approval or disapproval of the development permit, considering the additional information, shall be made and written notification to the applicant given within ten working days after receipt of said additional information. 
(4)  Any proposal which alters the floodways of the following special drainage areas: 
a.  The entirety of Carter's Creek. 
b.  The main channel and south fork of Lick Creek. 
c.  Wolf Pen Creek from SH 6 Bypass to the confluence with Carter's Creek and the Brazos River; 
Shall receive written notice of approval or disapproval of the development permit from the Floodplain Administrator within 60 working days after receipt of the proposal. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-4(D)) 
Sec. 105-61. - Conditions of permit approval. 
    Approval or denial of a development permit by the Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this division and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life or property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; 
(6)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(7)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(8)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(9)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive site plan for that area. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-4(E)) 
Sec. 105-62. - Revocation or suspension of development permit. 
(a)  Upon expiration of the time allotment for remedial or corrective measures, the Administrator shall take one of the following courses of action: 
(1)  If, in the opinion of the Administrator, the owner has made, or is making, a good faith effort to remedy the offending situation, the Administrator may extend the time allotment previously granted if such extension is requested by the owner; or 
(2)  Where an approved development permit has been issued for the development, the Administrator shall suspend the development permit. Written notice of said suspension, along with the terms and requirements for reinstating the development permit, shall be delivered to the owner. 
(b)  Upon suspension of a development permit, all portions of the work being done on the property that are regulated by this article shall cease. These activities include, but are not limited to, grading, excavation, fill, berming, stripping, clearing, paving, placement of any storm sewer, drainage structure, inlet, or appurtenance thereto; any work within a defined area of special flood hazard, or placement of any structure, temporary or permanent; or any obstruction within the area of special flood hazard. 
(c)  Upon finding no approved development permit exists for the work or property in question or suspending an existing approved development permit, the Administrator shall issue a stop-work order for all items of work on the subject property covered by this division or other ordinances, any work permitted, licensed, or otherwise regulated by the City, or any work subject to inspection or approval by the City. The Administrator may enter property to inspect and verify that the requirements of this article are being met. 
(d)  All notices required by this section shall be served upon the parties concerned either personally or by certified mail, addressed to the individual contracting parties, or permit holder, at the address given on the permit application. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-7(B)) 
Secs. 105-63-105-82. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 105-83. - Special provisions for areas of special flood hazard. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following requirements shall apply to all public and private developments: 
(1)  All new construction, any substantial improvement to a structure, and appurtenances shall be securely anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement; 
(2)  All new construction, any substantial improvement to a structure, and appurtenances shall be constructed in such a manner as to minimize flood damage and provide adequate drainage; and all electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located at least one foot above the base flood elevation so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(3)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems, including, but not limited to, septic tanks and drain fields, package treatment plants, etc., shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters; 
(4)  New and replacement water supply systems, including wells, treatment plants, distribution facilities, etc., shall be designed to prevent infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(5)  Solid or liquid waste disposal sites or systems shall be designed and located to avoid contamination from them during flooding and to avoid impairment of their operation during times of flooding; 
(6)  All new construction or any substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including all utilities, ductwork and any basement, at an elevation at least one foot above the base flood elevation. Certification that the applicable standards have been satisfied shall be submitted to the Administrator. Said certification shall bear the dated seal and signature of a registered professional engineer or registered professional land surveyor on the form provided by the Administrator; 
(7)  All new construction or any substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including all utilities, ductwork and basements, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation, or the structure with its attendant utility, ductwork, basement and sanitary facilities shall be floodproofed so that the structure and utilities, ductwork, basement and sanitary facilities shall be watertight and impermeable to the intrusion of water in all areas below the base flood elevation, and shall resist the structural loads and buoyancy effects from the hydrostatic and hydrodynamic conditions. Certification that the applicable standards have been satisfied shall bear the dated seal and signature of a registered professional engineer on the form provided by the Administrator; 
(8)  For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are used solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; 
(9)  In areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevations have not been established, base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development, including manufactured home parks, which are greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less; 
(10)  In A1-30, AH, and AE Zones, or areas of special hazard, all recreational vehicles to be placed on a site must: 
a.  Be elevated and anchored; 
b.  Be on the site for less than 180 consecutive days; and 
c.  Be fully licensed and highway ready; 
(11)  Any new construction, substantial improvement to a structure or fill that encroaches into the special flood hazard area shall be prohibited unless it can be demonstrated that same will have no adverse impacts as set forth below. Certification of this shall be required as approved by the Administrator based upon a submitted engineering report that includes hydrologic and hydraulic analysis which conform to the requirements of this division and the Bryan College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications. All submitted information required herein shall bear the dated seal and signature of a registered professional engineer: 
a.  The engineering report shall demonstrate that such construction, improvement or fill creating the encroachment does not, at any time, cause any of the following upstream, within, near, adjacent, or downstream of such encroachment: 
1.  An increase in the base flood elevations. In the event that base flood elevations are not known at the time of submitting the information required herein, base flood elevations must be determined; 
2.  Creation of additional areas of special flood hazard area; 
3.  A loss of conveyance capacity to that part of the special flood hazard area that is not in the floodway and where the velocity of flow in the base flood event is greater than one foot per second. This area can also be approximated to be either areas within 100 feet of the boundary of the regulatory floodway or areas where the depth of from the BFE to natural ground is 18 inches or greater; 
4.  A loss of base floodwater storage volume to the part of the special flood hazard area that is beyond the floodway and conveyance area where the velocity of flow in the base flood is equal to and less than one foot per second without acceptable compensation as set forth herein. Acceptable compensation for the loss of storage volume requires a demonstration of cuts and fills, must be mitigated on-site and must demonstrate no net fill. In general, excavation within the special flood hazard area and below the base flood elevation is the only acceptable method of mitigation of fill placed below the base flood elevation in the special flood hazard area; and 
5.  An increase in base flood velocities. In the event the future conditions flood data is known at the time of submittal, then the future conditions modeling must be used in lieu of the base flood modeling; 
b.  In meeting the requirements set forth in Subsection (11)a of this section, if fill is proposed a certification of compaction of fill in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01 must be submitted; 
c.  The following are exempt from Subsection (11)a of this section: 
1.  Lots where the adverse impacts are wholly contained: 
(i)  On the subject property or only impacting the subject property and other property with same ownership; 
(ii)  On a property where its owner joins the associated development permit application which causes, quantifies, and outlines the adverse impact defined above; 
(iii)  Within a private drainage easement which is specified to be privately owned and maintained, and is recorded at the Brazos County Court House; 
(iv)  Within public rights-of-way provided other requirements for use and encroachments within public rights-of-way as set forth elsewhere in this Code are met; or 
2.  Lots legally platted and recorded at Brazos County Court House prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived, unless such plat is subsequently replatted, vacated or otherwise altered. However, an amending plat does not remove this exemption; 
(12)  For all new construction, substantial improvement to a structure, or fill located within floodways, the following provisions apply in addition to the requirements of Subsection (11) of this section: 
a.  A variance must be granted; however, proposed street and public utility encroachments shall be exempt from the requirement of a variance provided that the provisions Subsection (12)b of this section is satisfied; and 
b.  It must be demonstrated as certified by a professional engineer that such construction, improvement or fill encroaching the floodway does not increase the base flood elevation. Such certification shall bear the dated seal and signature of the professional engineer; 
(13)  The following are exempt from Subsections (11) and (12) of this section: 
a.  Customary and incidental routine grounds maintenance, landscaping and home gardening provided same: 
1.  Does not increase the base flood elevation; 
2.  Does not create areas of special flood hazard upstream, within, nearby or downstream; and 
3.  Does not require a building permit, zone change request, or variance from the provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A); 
b.  Temporary emergency repairs deemed necessary for the preservation of life, health, or property, provided a permanent repair is done as soon as practicable; and provided that, to the maximum degree deemed reasonable and prudent by the City, such repair is made and maintained so as to minimize increasing water surface elevation and to minimize the creation of additional areas of special flood hazards. Certification of this shall be required on a form provided by the Administrator based upon a submitted engineering report that includes hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, conforms to the requirements of this division and the Bryan College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Standard Details, and Technical Specifications, and bears the dated seal and signature of a registered professional engineer; and 
c.  Temporary excavation for the purpose of maintaining or repairing any public street, public utility facility including service lines related thereto, or any other public infrastructure, provided such area of excavation is returned as soon as practicable to its prior condition or better with respect to meeting the requirements set forth in this division; 
(14)  Approved mitigation such as excavation must be properly approved and occur prior to any approved encroachment or fill is placed in the construction sequencing. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-5(E)) 
Sec. 105-84. - Special provisions for manufactured homes in areas of special flood hazard. 
    The following provisions are required in all areas of special flood hazard: 
(1)  No manufactured home shall be placed in a floodway; 
(2)  All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement and shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured homes, and: 
1.  On manufactured homes of 50 feet in length or less, one additional over-the-top tie shall be provided approximately at the midpoint; 
2.  On manufactured homes of over 50 feet in length, two additional over-the-top ties shall be provided at intermediate locations; 
b.  Frame ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, and: 
1.  On manufactured homes of 50 feet in length or less, four additional frame ties shall be provided at intermediate locations; 
2.  On manufactured homes of over 50 feet in length, five additional frame ties shall be provided at intermediate locations; 
c.  All components of the anchoring system for manufactured homes shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds without sustaining permanent damage; 
(3)  For new manufactured home developments; expansions to existing manufactured home developments; existing manufactured home developments where repair, reconstruction, or improvement of the streets, utilities, or building pads exceeds half of the value of the streets, utilities, and building pads before such repair, reconstruction or improvement; and for manufactured homes not placed in a manufactured home development, a registered professional engineer or land surveyor shall certify that the following applicable standards have been satisfied in a manner approved by the Administrator and shall bear the dated seal and signature of such registered professional engineer or land surveyor: 
a.  That stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill or on pilings such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be one foot above the base flood elevation and the elevation of the center of the stand shall be no more than one foot below the base flood elevation; 
b.  Adequate surface drainage and access for a hauler shall be provided; 
c.  If a manufactured home is elevated on pilings: 
1.  Lots shall be large enough to permit steps; 
2.  Piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart; 
3.  Reinforcement shall be provided for pilings more than six feet above the existing or finished ground level. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-5(F)) 
Sec. 105-85. - Special provisions for areas of shallow flooding. 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 105-31 are areas designated as areas of shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the pathway of floodwaters is indeterminate and unpredictable; therefore, the following provisions shall be required: 
(1)  All new construction or any substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basements, elevated at least one foot above the depth number specified on the community's FIRM. 
(2)  All new construction or any substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall: 
a.  Have the lowest floor, including basements, elevated at least one foot above the depth number specified on the community's FIRM; or 
b.  The structure with its attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall be floodproofed so that the structure and utility and sanitary facilities shall be watertight and impermeable to the intrusion of water in all areas below the base flood elevation, and shall resist the structural loads and buoyancy effects from hydrostatic and hydrodynamic conditions. A registered professional engineer shall certify that this standard has been satisfied in a manner approved by the Administrator and shall bear the dated seal and signature of such registered professional engineer. 
(3)  Adequate drainage paths to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures shall be provided for all proposed structures on slopes in Zones AH or AO. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  13-5(G)) 
Chapter 107 - IMPACT FEES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Texas Local Government Code ch. 395. 

ARTICLE I. - SPECIFIC IMPACT FEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- A memo dated Jan. 9, 2018 amended Ch. 107, Arts. I and II, by removing Art. I, In General, and renumbering Art. II, Specific Impact Fees, as Art. I. Section numbering has been retained and divisions have been added within Art. I, at the discretion of the editor, to maintain Code numbering and format. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 107-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Advisory Committee means the Planning and Zoning Commission or such committee as may be appointed by City Council to meet the requirements of Texas Local Government Code ch. 395 regarding impact fees. 
    Area-related facility means a capital improvement or facility expansion which is designated in the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan and which is not a site-related facility. The term "area-related facility" may include a capital improvement which is located off-site, within, or on the perimeter of the development site. 
    Assessment means the determination of the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit which can be imposed on new development pursuant to this chapter. 
    Capital improvement means either a roadway facility, a water facility, a sanitary sewer facility or a drainage facility, with a life expectancy of three or more years, to be owned and operated by or on behalf of the City. 
    Credit means the amount of the reduction of an impact fee for fees, payments or charges for the same type of capital improvements for which the fee has been assessed. 
    Facilities expansion means either a roadway expansion, a water facility expansion or a sanitary sewer facility expansion. 
    Final plat approval or approval of a final plat means the point at which the applicant has complied with all conditions of approval, and the plat has been released for filing with the County. 
    Impact fee means either a fee for roadway facilities, a fee for water facilities, or a fee for sanitary sewer facilities imposed on new development by the City pursuant to this chapter in order to fund or recoup the costs of capital improvements or facilities expansions necessitated by and attributable to such new development. Impact fees do not include the dedication of rights-of-way or easements for such facilities, or the construction of such improvements. Impact fees also do not include pro rata charges or acreage charges for sanitary sewer improvements or front footage charges for sanitary sewer and water lines imposed pursuant to Division 2 of Article II of Chapter 40; or funds deposited in escrow for the construction of roadway improvements imposed pursuant to the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
    Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan means either a roadway improvements plan, a water improvements plan or a sanitary sewer improvements plan adopted or revised pursuant to this chapter. The term "Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan" may refer to either the plan for a particular service area or to the aggregation of capital improvements or facilities expansions and the associated costs programmed for all service areas for a particular category of capital improvements or facilities expansions. 
    Land use assumptions means the projections of population and employment growth and associated changes in land uses, densities and intensities adopted by the City, as may be amended from time to time, upon which the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plans are based. 
    New development means a project involving the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure, or any use or extension of land, which has the effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements or facility expansions, measured by the number of service units to be generated by such activity, and which requires either the approval and filing with the County of a plat pursuant to the City's Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A), the issuance of a building permit, or connection to the City's water or sanitary sewer system. 
    Offset means the amount of the reduction of an impact fee designed to fairly reflect the value of area-related facilities or other roadway facilities pursuant to rules herein established or administrative guidelines, provided by a developer pursuant to the City's subdivision regulations or requirements. 
    Recoupment means the imposition of an impact fee to reimburse the City for capital improvements which the City has previously oversized to serve new development. 
    Roadway means any thoroughfare, major or minor arterials or collectors designated in the City's adopted Thoroughfare Plan, as may be amended from time to time. The term "roadway" does not include any roadway designated as a numbered highway on the official Federal or State highway system. 
    Roadway expansion means the expansion of the capacity or redesign of an existing roadway in the City, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing roadway to better serve existing development. 
    Roadway facility means an improvement or appurtenance to a roadway which includes, but is not limited to, design; rights-of-way, whether conveyed by deed or easement; intersection improvements; traffic control devices; turn lanes; drainage facilities associated with the roadway; street lighting; or curbs. The term "roadway facility" also includes any improvement or appurtenance to an intersection with a roadway officially enumerated in the Federal or State highway system. The term "roadway facility" excludes those improvements or appurtenances to a roadway which are site-related facilities. 
    Roadway Improvements Plan means the adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the roadway facilities or roadway expansions and their costs for each roadway benefit area, which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten years, which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of roadway facilities fees pursuant to this chapter. 
    Sanitary sewer facility means an improvement for providing sanitary sewer service, including, but not limited to, land or easements, treatment facilities, lift stations, or interceptor mains. The term "sanitary sewer facility" excludes sanitary sewer lines or mains which are constructed by developers, the costs of which are reimbursed from pro rata charges paid by subsequent users of the facilities. The term "sanitary sewer facility" excludes site-related facilities. 
    Sanitary sewer facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of any existing sanitary sewer improvement for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing sanitary sewer facility to serve existing development. 
    Sanitary Sewer Improvements Plan means the adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the sanitary sewer facilities or sanitary sewer expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of sanitary sewer facilities fees pursuant to this chapter. 
    Service area means either a roadway benefit area, a water benefit area, or sanitary sewer benefit area within the City, within which impact fees for capital improvements or facilities expansions will be collected for new development occurring within such area and within which fees so collected will be expended for those types of improvements or expansions identified in the type of Capital Improvements Plan applicable to the service area. 
    Service unit means the applicable standard units of measure shown on the conversion table in the Impact Fees Capital Improvements Plan which can be converted to living unit equivalents (LUE) as set out in Exhibit B in the Capital Improvements Plan, as the context indicates, which serves as the standardized measure of consumption, use or generation attributable to the new unit of development. 
    Single-family residential lot means a lot platted to accommodate a single-family dwelling unit, as authorized under the City's Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). 
    Site-related facility means an improvement or facility which is for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary purpose of safe and adequate provision of roadway, water or sanitary sewer facilities to serve the new development, and which is not included in the Impact Fees Capital Improvements Plan and for which the developer or property owner is solely responsible under chapter and other applicable regulations. 
    Water facility means an improvement for providing water service, including, but not limited to, land or easements, water treatment facilities, water supply facilities, water transmission or distribution lines. The term "water facility" excludes water lines or mains which are reimbursed from pro rata charges paid by subsequent users of the facilities. The term "water facility" excludes site-related facilities. 
    Water facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of any existing water facility for the purpose of serving new development, but does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing water facility to serve existing development. 
    Water improvement plan means the adopted plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the water facilities or water expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, for a period not to exceed ten years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of water facilities fees pursuant to this article. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(D); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(D)), 9-22-2016; altered in 2017 recodification) 
Sec. 107-2. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is intended to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities to serve new development in the City by requiring each development to pay its pro rata share of the costs of such improvements necessitated by and attributable to such new development. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(B); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(B)), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-3. - Authority. 
    This chapter is adopted pursuant to Texas Local Government Code ch. 395 and pursuant to the City Charter. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the power of the City to utilize other methods authorized under State law or pursuant to other City powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution or in conjunction with this chapter. Guidelines may be developed by resolution or otherwise to implement and administer this chapter. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(C); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(C)), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-4. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this article apply to all new development, as defined herein, within the corporate boundaries of the City. The provisions of this chapter apply uniformly within each service area. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(E); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(E)), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-5. - Impact fee as condition of development approval. 
    No application for new development shall be approved within the City without assessment of an impact fee pursuant to this chapter, and no permit shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the impact fee imposed by and calculated herein. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(F); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(F)), 9-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Time for assessment and collection of fee, Texas Local Government Code  395.016. 
Sec. 107-6. - Land use assumptions. 
(a)  Land use assumptions for the City are attached hereto as Exhibit A and is incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  The land use assumptions for the City shall be updated at least every three years, utilizing the amendment procedure set forth in Section 107-17. 
(c)  Amendments to the land use assumptions shall incorporate projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population therein over at least a ten-year period. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(G); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(G)), 9-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Land use assumptions, Texas Local Government Code  395.044 et seq. 
Sec. 107-7. - Impact fees per service unit. 
(a)  The maximum impact fee per service unit for each service area shall be computed by dividing the total costs of capital improvements necessitated by and attributable to new development in the service area identified in the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan for that category of capital improvements by the total number of service units anticipated within the service area, based upon the land use assumptions for that service area. Maximum impact fees per service unit for each service area shall be established by category of capital improvements and shall be as set forth in Exhibit C, attached hereto and made a part of this chapter by reference. 
(b)  The impact fee per service unit which is to be paid by each new development within a service area shall be that established by ordinance by the City Council, as may be amended from time to time, and shall be an amount less than or equal to the maximum impact fee per service unit established in Subsection (a) of this section. Impact fees which are to be paid shall be as set forth in Exhibit D, attached hereto and made a part of this chapter by reference. 
(c)  Impact fee Exhibits C and D may be amended from time to time utilizing the amendment procedure set forth in Section 107-17. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(H); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(H)), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-8. - Assessment of impact fees. 
(a)  The approval of any new development shall include as a condition the assessment of the impact fee applicable to such development. 
(b)  Assessment of the impact fee for any new development shall be made as follows: 
(1)  A development which is submitted for approval pursuant to the City's Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A) following the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, assessment shall be at the time of final plat approval for R Rural, E Estate, RS Restricted Suburban, GS General Suburban, D Duplex, R-3 Townhouse, and MHP and assessment for all other zoning districts shall be at the time of issuance of the building permit, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit then in effect, as set forth in Exhibit C, as computed by the procedures set forth in Section 107-7(a). The City, in its sole discretion, may provide the subdivider with a copy of Exhibit C prior to final plat approval, but such shall not constitute assessment within the meaning of this chapter. 
(2)  For a development which has received final plat approval prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and for which no replatting is necessary prior to issuance for a permit, assessment shall be on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and shall be the amount of the maximum impact fee per service unit set forth in Exhibit C. 
(3)  For land on which new development is approved to occur without platting after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, assessment shall be at the time of issuance of a permit for connection to the water or sewer system. 
(c)  Following assessment of the impact fee pursuant to Subsection (b)(2) of this section, the amount of the impact fee per service unit for that development cannot be increased, unless the owner proposes to change the approved development by the submission of a new application for final plat approval, in which case new assessment shall occur at the Exhibit C rate then in effect. 
(d)  Following the lapse or expiration of approval for a plat, a new assessment must be performed at the time a new application for such development is filed. 
(e)  An application for an amending plat made pursuant to Texas Local Government Code  212.016 is not subject to reassessment for an impact fee. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(I); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(I)), 9-22-2016; altered in 2017 recodification) 
State Law reference- Time for assessment and collection of fee, Texas Local Government Code  395.016. 
Sec. 107-9. - Computation and collection of impact fees. 
(a)  The impact fees due for the new development shall be collected prior to or at the time of final plat recordation for roadway facilities, water and sanitary sewer facilities unless an agreement between the developer and the City has been executed providing for a different time of payment. 
(b)  The impact fees due for land on which new development occurs or is proposed to occur without platting, shall be collected at the time of issuance of a permit for connection to the water or sewer system. 
(c)  Following the filing and acceptance of an application for a building permit or the request for connection to the City's water or sanitary sewer system, the City shall compute the impact fees due for the new development in the following manner: 
(1)  The amount of each impact fee due shall be determined by multiplying the number of service units generated by the new development by the impact fee due per service unit for the service area using Exhibit D. The number of service units shall be determined by using the conversion table contained in the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan. 
(2)  The amount of each impact fee due shall be reduced by an allowable offsets or credits for that category of capital improvements, in the manner provided in Section 107-11. 
(3)  The total amount of the impact fees due for the new development shall be calculated and attached to the development application or request for connection as a condition of approval. 
(d)  The amount of each impact fee due for a new development shall not exceed an amount computed by multiplying the fee assessed per service unit pursuant to Section 107-7 by the number of service units generated by the development. 
(e)  If the building permit for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, and a new application is thereafter filed, the impact fees due shall be computed using Exhibit D then in effect, with credits for previous payment of fees being applied against the new fees due. 
(f)  Whenever the property owner proposes to increase the number of service units for a development, the additional impact fees collected for such new service units shall be determined by using Exhibit D then in effect and such additional fee shall be collected either prior to or at the time of issuance of a new building permit, in the case of impact fees for roadway facilities, or prior to or at the time of enlargement of the connection to the City's water or sanitary sewer system, in the case of impact fees for water or sanitary sewer facilities. 
(g)  In its sole discretion, the City may permit the developer or property owner, upon written application, to pay impact fees for all or a portion of a single-family residential lot at the time of final plat recording for such development, in the amounts provided in Subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(J); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(J)), 9-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Time for assessment and collection of fee, Texas Local Government Code  395.016; collection of fees if services not available, Texas Local Government Code  395.019. 
Sec. 107-10. - Suspension of fee collection. 
(a)  For any new development which has received final plat approval prior to August 27, 1992, in accordance with Texas Local Government Code ch. 212 or pursuant to the City's subdivision regulations, the City may assess, but shall not collect, any impact fee as herein defined, on any service unit for which a valid building permit is issued within one year subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(b)  If the building permit, which is obtained within the period provided for in subsection (a) of this section, subsequently expires, and no new application is made and approved within such period, the new development shall be subject to the payment of an impact fee, as provided in Section 107-9. 
(c)  During such one-year period, the City may impose and collect on such new development pro rata fees including lot or acreage fees for sanitary sewer improvements or front footage charges for sanitary sewer and water lines which have been previously installed by the City pursuant to Division 2 of Article II of Chapter 40, as amended, and may accept deposits in escrow for roadway facilities pursuant to the City's Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A). After the expiration of such period, collection of all such fees, charges or deposits in escrow, unless elsewhere expressly authorized, shall be suspended and fees shall be collected for such new developments pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(K); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(K)), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-11. - Offsets and credits against impact fees. 
(a)  The City shall offset the reasonable value of any area-related facilities or other roadway facilities, pursuant to rules established in this section or pursuant to guidelines and which have been dedicated to and have been received after initial acceptance by the City on or after August 27, 1992, including the value of rights-of-way for roadways, or capital improvements constructed pursuant to an agreement with the City, against the amount of the impact fee due for that category of capital improvement. 
(b)  The City shall credit pro rata charges, including lot or acreage fees or charges, which have been paid pursuant to Division 2 of Article II of Chapter 40, as amended, and eligible escrow fees deposited for roadway facilities prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and during the one-year period following adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, during which impact fees established herein may not be collected for certain new developments pursuant to Section 107-10, against the amount of an impact fee due for that category of capital improvement, subject to guidelines established for the City. 
(c)  All offsets and credits against impact fees shall be subject to the following limitations and shall be granted based on this chapter and additional standards promulgated by the City, which may be adopted as administrative guidelines: 
(1)  No offset or credit shall be given for the dedication or construction of site-related facilities. 
(2)  No offset or credit shall exceed an amount equal to the eligible value of the offset multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the impact fee per service unit due for the new development as computed using Exhibit D and the denominator of which is the maximum impact fee per service unit for the new development as computed using Exhibit C. 
(3)  The unit costs used to calculate the offsets shall not exceed those assumed for the capital improvements included in the Impact Fees Capital Improvements Plan for the category of facility within the service area for which the impact fee is imposed. 
(4)  No offsets shall be given for roadway facilities which are not identified within the applicable Impact Fees Capital Improvements Plan, except that offsets may be given for the value of dedicated rights-of-way or the value of constructed capital improvements for roadways designated in the City's Thoroughfare Plan built to City standards and initially accepted by the City. Offsets may only be given for dedications or construction made and initially accepted after January 1, 1984. 
(5)  No credit shall be given for roadway facilities which are not identified within the applicable Impact Fees Capital Improvements Plan, except that credit may be given for money deposits (other than impact fees) paid to the City toward the costs of rights-of-way or the costs of construction capital improvements for eligible roadways designated in the City's Thoroughfare Development Plan built to City standards and initially accepted by the City. Credit may only be given for rights-of-way acquired or construction completed and initially accepted by the City. Credit may only be given for rights-of-way acquired or construction completed and initially accepted after January 1, 1984. 
(6)  Offsets or credits given for new developments which have received final plat approval prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or offsets or credits acquired for new developments during the one-year-period specified in Section 107-10, shall be reduced by subtracting an amount equal to the impact fees which would have been due for the number of existing service units using Exhibit D adopted hereby. 
(7)  If an offset or credit applicable to a plat has not been exhausted within ten years from the date of the acquisition of the first building permit issued or connection made after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or within such period as may be otherwise designated by contract, such offset or credit shall lapse. 
(8)  In no event will the City reimburse the property owner or developer for an offset or credit when no impact fees for the new development can be collected pursuant to this chapter or for any amount exceeding the total impact fees due for the development for that category of capital improvement, unless otherwise agreed to by the City. 
(d)  An applicant for new development must apply for an offset or credit against impact fees due for the development either at the time of application for final plat approval or: 
(1)  For roadway fees, at the time of building permit application; and 
(2)  For water and sewer fees, at the time of connection, unless the City agrees to a different time. 
The applicant shall file a petition for offsets or credits with the City on a form provided for such purpose. The contents of the petition shall be established by administrative guidelines. The City must provide the applicant, in writing, with a decision on the offset or credit request, including the reasons for the decision. The decision shall specify the maximum value of the offset or credit which may be applied against an impact fee, which amount and the date of the determination shall be associated with the plat for the new development. 
(e)  The available offset or credit associated with the plat shall be applied against an impact fee in the following manner: 
(1)  For single-family residential lots in a new development consisting only of single-family residential lots which have received final plat approval, such offset or credit shall be prorated equally among such lots and shall remain applicable to such lots, to be applied at the time of filing and acceptance of an application for a building permit or connection, as appropriate against impact fees due. 
(2)  For all other types of new development, including those involving mixed uses, which have received final plat approval, the offset or credit applicable to the plat shall be applied to the impact fee due at the time of issuance of the first building permit or connection to which the offset or credit is applicable, and thereafter to all subsequently issued building permits or connections, until the offset or credit has been exhausted. 
(3)  At its sole discretion, the City may authorize alternative credit or offset agreements upon petition by the owner in accordance with guidelines promulgated by the City. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(L); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(L)), 9-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Credits against roadway facilities fees, Texas Local Government Code  395.023. 
Sec. 107-12. - Establishment of accounts. 
(a)  The City's Fiscal Services Department shall establish an account to which interest is allocated for each service area for each category of capital facility for which an impact fee is imposed pursuant to this chapter. Each impact fee collected within the service area shall be deposited in such account. 
(b)  Interest earned on the account into which the impact fees are deposited shall be considered funds of the account and shall be used solely for the purposes authorized in Section 107-13. 
(c)  The City's Fiscal Services Department shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for the purposes authorized in Section 107-13. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the City at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter; provided, however, that any fee paid shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten years from the date the fee is deposited into the account. 
(d)  The City's Fiscal Services Department shall maintain and keep financial records for impact fees, which shall show the source and disbursement of all fees collected in or expended from each service area. The records of the account into which impact fees are deposited shall be open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours. The City may establish a fee for copying services. 
(e)  The City's Fiscal Services Department shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for said account which shall show the source and disbursement of all funds placed in or expended by such account. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(M); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(M)), 9-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Accounting for fees, Texas Local Government Code  395.024. 
Sec. 107-13. - Use of proceeds of impact fee accounts. 
(a)  The impact fees collected for each service area pursuant to this chapter may be used to finance or to recoup the costs of any capital improvements or facilities expansions identified in the applicable Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan for the service area, including the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees, and expert witness fees), and the fees actually paid or contracted to be paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant preparing or updating the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan who is not an employee of the political subdivision. Impact fees may also be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the City to finance such capital improvements or facilities expansions. 
(b)  Impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall not be used to pay for any of the following expenses: 
(1)  Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital improvements or assets other than those identified in the applicable Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan; 
(2)  Repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facilities expansions; 
(3)  Upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental or regulatory standards; 
(4)  Upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to provide better service to existing development; provided, however, that impact fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements in order to meet the need for new capital improvements generated by new development; 
(5)  Administrative and operating costs of the City; or 
(6)  Roadway facilities or roadway expansions in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City. 
(c)  In the event that a capital improvement or facility expansion involves more than one service area for a particular category of capital improvement, funds from each service area involved may be pooled to finance the project; provided, however, that in the event the funds expended from any service area exceed the proportionate share of the costs of the facilities attributable to the development in such service area, such account shall be credited in the amount exceeding such share, to be repaid from impact fee proceeds collected in other contributing service areas. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(N); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(N)), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-14. - Reserved. 
Sec. 107-15. - Appeals to City Council. 
(a)  The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the following decisions to the City Council: 
(1)  Applicability of an impact fee to the development; 
(2)  The amount of the impact fee due; 
(3)  The availability or the amount of an offset or credit; 
(4)  The application of an offset or credit against any impact fee due; 
(5)  The amount of a refund due, if any. 
(b)  The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the amount of the fee or the amount of the offset or credit was not calculated according to the applicable schedule of impact fees or the guidelines established for determining offsets and credits. 
(c)  The appellant must file a notice of appeal with the City Secretary within 30 days following the decision. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient surety satisfactory to the City Attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the impact fee due, the development application may be processed while the appeal is pending. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(O); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(O)), 9-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Judicial appeals, Texas Local Government Code  395.077. 
Sec. 107-16. - Refunds. 
(a)  Any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to this chapter, which has not been expended within the service area within ten years from the date of payment, shall be refunded, upon application, to the record owner of the property at the time the refund is paid or, if the impact fee was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together with interest calculated from the date of collection to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in Texas Finance Code ch. 302. 
(b)  An impact fee collected pursuant to this chapter shall be considered expended if the total expenditures for capital improvements or facilities expansions authorized in Section 107-13 within the service area within ten years following the date of payment exceeds the total fees collected for such improvements or expansions during such period. 
(c)  If a refund is due pursuant to Subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the City shall pro-rate the same by dividing the difference between the amount of expenditures and the amount of the fees collected by the total number of service units assumed within the service area for the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying the refund due per service unit by the number of service units for the development for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount. 
(d)  Upon completion of all the capital improvements or facilities expansions identified in the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan for the service area, the City shall recalculate the maximum impact fee per service unit using the actual costs for the improvements or expansions. If the maximum impact fee per service unit based on actual cost is less than the impact fee per service unit paid, the City shall refund the difference if such difference exceeds the impact fee paid by more than ten percent. The refund to the record owner shall be calculated by multiplying such difference by the number of service units for the development for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount. 
(e)  If the building permit for a new development for which an impact fee has been paid has expired, and a modified or new application has not been filed within six months of such expiration, the City shall, upon written application, refund the amount of the impact fee to the applicant. The City may establish guidelines for refunding of impact fees collected for which construction plans have been abandoned. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(P); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(P)), 9-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Refunds of impact fees, Texas Local Government Code  395.025. 
Sec. 107-17. - Updates to plan and revision of fees. 
(a)  The City shall update its land use assumptions and Impact Fees Capital Improvements Plans and shall recalculate its impact fees not less than once every five years in accordance with the procedures set forth in Texas Local Government Code  395.052, or in any successor statute. 
(b)  The City may review its land use assumptions, Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plans, and other factors such as market conditions more frequently than provided in Subsection (a) of this section to determine whether the land use assumptions and Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plans should be updated and the impact fee recalculated accordingly, or whether Exhibit D collection rates should be increased, decreased, or otherwise changed. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(Q); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(Q)), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-18. - Functions of advisory committee. 
(a)  The Advisory Committee shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Advise and assist the City in adopting land use assumptions; 
(2)  Review the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plans and file written comments thereon; 
(3)  Monitor and evaluate implementation of the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plans; 
(4)  Advise the City of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plans and impact fees; and 
(5)  File a semiannual report evaluating the progress of the City in achieving the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plans and identifying any problems in implementing the plans or administering the impact fees. 
(b)  The City Council shall adopt, by resolution, procedural rules by which the Advisory Committee may carry out its duties. 
(c)  The City shall make available to the Advisory Committee any professional reports prepared in the development or implementation of the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plans. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(R); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(R)), 9-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Advisory committees, Texas Local Government Code  395.058. 
Sec. 107-19. - Agreement for capital improvements. 
(a)  An owner of a new development may construct or finance a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan, if required or authorized by the City, by entering into an agreement with the City prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. The agreement shall be on a form approved by the City, and shall identify the estimated cost of the improvement or expansion, the schedule for initiation and completion of the improvement or expansion, a requirement that the improvement be designed and completed to City standards and such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the City. The agreement shall provide for the method to be used to determine the amount of the offset to be given against impact fees due for the development. 
(b)  In the event that the City elects to reimburse an owner for the dedication, construction or financing of a capital improvement or facility expansion designated in the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan, the terms of reimbursement shall be incorporated in the agreement required by Subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(S); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(S)), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-20. - Use of other financing mechanisms. 
(a)  The City may finance capital improvements or facilities expansions designated in the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan through the issuance of bonds, through the formation of public improvement districts or other assessment districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in addition to the use of impact fees. 
(b)  Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of an impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and due against the property. 
(c)  The City may pay all or part of impact fees due for a new development taking into account available offsets and credits pursuant to duly adopted criteria. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(T); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(T)), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-21. - Impact fee as additional and supplemental regulation. 
    Impact fees established by this chapter are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the City on the development of land or the issuance of building permits or certificates of occupancy. Such fee is intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of the City's Comprehensive Plan, the Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan, the Unified Development Ordinance (see App. A), and other City policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the City seeks to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities in conjunction with the development of land. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(U); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(U)), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-22. - Relief procedures. 
(a)  Any person who has paid an impact fee or an owner of land upon which an impact fee has been paid may petition the City Council to determine whether any duty required by this chapter has not been performed within the time so prescribed. The petition shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and request that the act be performed within 60 days of the request. If the City Council determines that the duty is required pursuant to this chapter and is late in being performed, it shall cause the duty to commence with 60 days of the date of the request and to continue until completion. 
(b)  The City Council may grant a variance or waiver from any requirement of this chapter, upon written request by a developer or owner of property subject to this chapter, following a public hearing, and only upon finding that a strict application of such requirement, when regarded as a whole, would result in confiscation of the property. 
(c)  The City Council may grant a waiver from any requirement of this chapter on other grounds, as may be set forth in administrative guidelines. 
(d)  If the City Council grants a variance or waiver to the amount of the impact fee due for a new development under Section 107-21, it shall cause to be appropriated from other City funds the amount of the reduction in the impact fee to the account for the service area in which the property is located. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(V); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(V)), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-23. - Exemption from article. 
    Any building permit application which was duly accepted for filing prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and which is subsequently granted, shall be exempt from the assessment and payment of an impact fee, unless such application thereafter expires. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-1(W); Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-1(W)), 9-22-2016) 
Secs. 107-24-107-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FEES 

Sec. 107-50. - Water facilities fees. 
(a)  Water service area. 
(1)  There is hereby established a water benefit area, constituting the service area as depicted in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
(2)  The boundaries of the water benefit area may be amended from time to time, and new water benefit areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures in Section 107-17. 
(b)  Water Improvements Plan. 
(1)  The Water Improvements Plan for the service area is hereby adopted as Exhibit B, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
(2)  The Water Improvements Plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in Section 107-17. 
(c)  Water facilities fees. 
(1)  The maximum impact fees per service unit for water facilities are hereby adopted and incorporated in Exhibit C, attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference. 
(2)  The impact fees per service unit for water facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, are hereby adopted and incorporated in Exhibit D, attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference. 
(3)  The impact fees per service unit for water facilities may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in Section 107-17. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-3; Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-3), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-51. - Sewer facilities fees. 
(a)  Sanitary sewer service area. 
(1)  There is hereby established a sanitary sewer benefit area, constituting the service area as depicted in Exhibit A, attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
(2)  The boundaries of the sanitary sewer benefit area may be amended from time to time, and new sanitary sewer benefit areas may be delineated, pursuant to the procedures in Section 107-17. 
(b)  Sanitary Sewer Improvements Plan. 
(1)  The Sanitary Sewer Improvements Plan for the service area is hereby adopted as Exhibit B, attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein. 
(2)  The Sanitary Sewer Improvements Plan may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in Section 107-17. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer facilities fees. 
(1)  The maximum impact fees per service unit for sanitary sewer facilities are hereby adopted and incorporated in Exhibit C, attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference. 
(2)  The impact fees per service unit for sanitary sewer facilities, which are to be paid by each new development, are hereby adopted and incorporated in Exhibit D, attached hereto and made a part hereof by reference. 
(3)  The impact fees per service unit for sewer facilities may be amended from time to time, pursuant to the procedures in Section 107-17. 
(Code 2011 (Repub.),  15-4; Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-4), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit A: Land Use Assumptions 
Figure 2-1: Impact Fee Service Areas 

Table 2-1A 
    Population and Land Use Projections for Area 92-01, Graham Road Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Land Use 2013 2023 Full Buildout Acres Percent Acres Percent Acres Percent Business Park 15.2 3.02 20.5 4.07 24.3 4.81 General Suburban 196.6 38.93 196.8 38.97 196.9 38.99 Institutional/Public 38.3 7.58 38.3 7.58 38.3 7.58 Medical Use 0.0 0.00 8.8 1.75 15.0 2.97 Natural Areas - Protected 0.0 0.00 15.9 3.15 27.0 5.35 Natural Areas - Reserved 0.0 0.00 4.0 0.79 6.8 1.35 Neighborhood Conservation 15.2 3.01 15.3 3.02 15.3 3.03 Suburban Commercial 66.6 13.19 70.8 14.02 73.7 14.59 Urban 16.9 3.35 16.9 3.35 16.9 3.35 Right-of-Way 90.8 17.99 90.8 17.99 90.8 17.99 Subtotal Developed Land Uses 439.7 87.06 478.1 94.67 505.0 100.00 Undeveloped 65.3 12.94 26.9 5.33 0.0 0.00 Total Gross Acres 505.0 100.00 505.0 100.0 505.0 100.00 Population 2,725 2,725 2,725 Population per Urban Acres 6.20 5.70 5.40 Population per Total Acres 5.40 5.40 5.40  
    Source: City of College Station, 2013, College Impact Fee Update 92-01 Graham Road Wastewater (Template from Staff 2013 9 3).xlsx. Assumes full buildout by 2030, Per Jennifer Prochazka, 8 30 2013. 
Figure 2-3: Future Land Uses, Graham Road Sewer 

Table 2-1B 
    Population and Land Use Projections for Area 97-01, Springcreek Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Land Use 2013 2023 Full Buildout Acres Percent Acres Percent Acres Percent Estate 112.7 4.70 113.7 4.74 117.8 4.91 General Commercial 37.9 1.58 42.4 1.77 60.3 2.52 General Suburban 296.1 12.35 307.4 12.82 352.5 14.71 Institutional/Public 70.0 2.92 70.7 2.95 73.6 3.07 Medical 0.0 0.00 17.1 0.71 85.7 3.58 Natural Areas - Protected 0.0. 0.00 21.4 0.89 107.2 4.47 Natural Areas - Reserved 0.0 0.00 53.4 2.23 267.6 11.16 Restricted Suburban 261.7 10.92 319.0 13.31 548.6 22.89 Suburban Commercial 31.1 1.30 36.2 1.51 56.7 2.37 Urban 38.6 1.61 84.1 3.51 266.4 11.11 Utilities 1.3 0.05 1.3 0.05 1.3 0.05 Village Center 0.0 0.00 12.3 0.51 61.5 2.57 Right-of-Way 394.0 16.44 394.0 16.44 394.0 16.44 Subtotal Developed Land Uses 1,243.4 51.87 1,473.0 61.45 2,393.2 99.84 Undeveloped 1,153.6 48.13 924.0 38.55 3.8 0.16 Total Gross Acres 2,397.0 100.00 2,397.0 100.00 2,397.0 100.00 Population 5,193 6,525 11,864 Population per Urban Acres 4.18 4.43 4.96 Population per Total Acres 2.17 2.72 4.95  
    Source: City of College Station, 2013, College Station Impact Fee Update 97-01 Springcreek Wastewater (Template from Staff 4013 8 30).xlsx. 
Figure 2-5: Future Land Uses, Spring Creek Sewer Line 

Table 2-1C 
    Population and Land Use Projections for Area 97-01B, Alum Creek Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Land Use 2013 2023 Full Buildout Acres Percent Acres Percent Acres Percent Business Park 1.2 0.16 13.8 1.83 24.1 3.20 Estate 0.0 0.00 3.0 0.40 5.4 0.72 General Suburban 6.0 0.80 132.9 17.68 236.7 31.48 Natural Areas - Protected 0.0 0.00 2.4 0.32 4.4 0.59 Natural Areas - Reserved 0.0 0.00 64.5 8.58 117.3 15.60 Restricted Suburban 28.9 3.84 92.1 12.24 143.7 19.11 Rural 0.2 0.03 0.2 0.03 0.2 0.03 Suburban Commercial 0.0 0.00 0.1 0.01 0.2 0.03 Urban 55.4 7.37 75.8 10.07 92.4 12.29 Utilities 9.7 1.29 9.7 1.29 9.7 1.29 Right-of-Way 107.1 14.24 107.1 14.24 107.1 14.24 Subtotal Developed Land Uses 208.5 27.73 501.6 66.70 741.2 98.57 Undeveloped 543.5 72.27 250.4 33.30 10.8 1.43 Total Gross Acres 752.0 100.00 752.0 100.00 752.0 100.00 Population 183 2,306 4,042 Population per Urban Acres 0.88 4.60 5.45 Population per Total Acres 0.24 3.07 5.38  
    Source: City of College Station, 2013, College Station Impact Fee Update 97-02B Alum Creek Wastewater (Template from Staff 213 8 30).xlsx. 
Figure 2-7: Future Land Uses, Alum Creek Sewer Line 

Table 2-1D 
    Population and Land Use Projections for Area 99-01, Harley Water Line 
    Water Utility 
    City of College Station 
Land Use 2013 2023 Full Buildout Acres Percent Acres Percent Acres Percent General Commercial 8.0 5.16 9.2 5.94 23.0 14.84 General Suburban 0.0 0.00 0.2 0.15 0.6 0.39 Medical Use 12.9 8.32 19.6 12.65 49.0 31.61 Natural Area - Reserved 0.0 0.00 5.1 3.28 12.7 8.19 Suburban Commercial 1.0 0.65 26.3 16.98 65.8 42.45 Right-of-Way 3.9 2.52 3.9 2.52 3.9 2.52 Subtotal Developed Land Use 25.8 16.65 64.3 41.51 155.0 100.00 Undeveloped 129.2 83.35 90.7 58.49 0.0 0.00 Total Gross Acres 155.0 100.00 155.0 100.00 155.0 100.00 Population 0 0 0 Population per Urban Acres 0.00 0.00 0 Population per Total Acres 0.00 0.00 0.00  
    Source: City of College Station Impact Fee Update 99-01 Harley Water Line (Template from Staff 2013 8 30).xlsx. 
Figure 2-9: Future Land Uses, Harley Water Line 

Table 2-1E 
    Population and Land Use Projections for Area 03-02, Steeplechase Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Land Use 2013 2023 Full Buildout Acres Percent Acres Percent Acres Percent Business Park 0.2 0.03 12.4 1.60 23.6 3.05 Estate 0.0 0.03 0.1 0.02 0.1 0.01 General Suburban 74.1 9.57 151.6 19.58 222.8 28.78 Restricted Suburban 8.1 1.05 68.4 8.84 123.9 16.00 Rural 0.1 0.01 0.3 0.03 0.4 0.05 Suburban Commercial 14.3 1.85 17.3 2.24 20.1 2.60 Urban 76.8 9.92 198.0 25.57 309.4 39.96 Right-of-Way 74.0 9.56 74.0 9.56 74.0 9.56 Subtotal Developed Land Uses 247.6 31.98 522.1 67.43 774.3 100.00 Undeveloped 526.7 68.02 252.2 32.57 0.0 0.00 Total Gross Acres 774.3 100.00 774.3 100.00 774.3 100.00 Population 911 8,259 15,016 Population per Urban Acres 3.68 15.82 19.39 Population per Total Acres 1.18 10.67 19.39  
    Source: City of College Station 2013, College Station Impact Fee Update 03-02 Steeplechase Wastewater (Template from Staff 2013 8 30).xlsx. 
Figure 2-11: Future Land Uses, Steeplechase Sewer Line 

(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 15, exh. A; Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. A), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit B: Capital Improvements Programs 
Table 2-2 
    Capacity Demand for Each New LUE 
    City of College Station 
Area Basis Capacity per LUE for
water/sewer lines Area 92-01 Graham Road Sewer Line Peak Day 1,068 gallons daily Area 97-01 Spring Creek Sewer Line Peak Day 1,068 gallons daily Area 97-02B Alum Creek Sewer Line Peak Day 1,068 gallons daily Area 99-01 Harley Water Line Peak Day 668 gallons daily Area 03-02 Steeplechase Sewer Line Peak Day 1,068 gallons daily  
    Source: College Station City Staff. 
Table 2-3 
    Conversion of Land Uses to Living Units Equivalent 
    City of College Station 
Land Use Water LUEs Per Acre (a) Sewer Harley Graham Spring Crk Alum Crk Steeplechase Business Park 2.00 2.00 2.00 Estate 1.00 1.00 1.00 General Commercial 5.50 5.50 General Suburban 8.00 6.97 6.97 8.00 Institutional/Public 2.50 2.50 Medical 5.55 5.55 5.50 Natural Areas - Protected Natural Areas - Reserved Neighborhood Conservation 4.00 Restricted Suburban 4.00 4.11 4.00 Rural 0.33 0.33 Suburban Commercial 4.55 4.55 4.55 4.55 Urban 5.92 5.92 20.00 Utilities Village Center 35.00 Reserved from Development Right-of-Way Undeveloped  
    Sources: City of College Station, 2013, College Station Impact Fee Update 97-01 Springcreek Wastewater (Template from Staff 4013 8 30).xlsx; College Station Impact Fee Update 92-01 Graham Road Wastewater (Template from Staff 2013 9 3).xlsx; College Station Impact Fee Update 03-02 Steeplechase Wastewater (Template from Staff 2013 8 30).xlsx; College Station Impact Fee Update 99-01 Harley Water Line (Template from Staff 2013 8 30).xlsx; and College Station Impact Fee Update 97-02B Alum Creek Wastewater (Template from Staff 2013 8 30).xlsx. Not all uses are found in all areas. 
Table 2-4 
    LUE Equivalencies for Various Types and Sizes of Water Meters 
Meter Type Meter Size Continuous Duty Maximum Rate (gpm) Ratio to 5/8" Meter Simple 5/8 "  3/4" 10 1.000 Simple 3/4" 15 1.000 Simple 1" 25 2.500 Simple 11/2" 50 5.000 Simple 2" 80 8.000 Compound 2" 80 8.000 Turbine 2" 100 10.000 Compound 3" 160 16.000 Turbine 3" 240 24.000 Compound 4" 250 25.000 Turbine 4" 420 42.000 Compound 6" 500 50.000 Turbine 6" 920 92.000 Compound 8" 800 80.000 Turbine 8" 1600 160.000 Compound 10" 1150 115.000 Turbine 10" 2500 250.000 Turbine 12" 3300 330.000  
    Source: AWWA Standards C700, C701, C702, C703. By policy, a 3/4-inch meter will be charged for one LUE of service. 
TABLE 2-5A 
    Estimation of Living Units Equivalent for Area 92-01, Graham Road Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Land Use LUEs Per Acre (a) Estimate LUEs 2013 2023 Buildout Business Park 2.00 30 41 49 General Suburban 8.00 1,000 1,001 1,002 Institution/Public 2.50 95 95 96 Medical Use 5.55 0 25 30 Natural Areas - Protected 0.00 0 0 0 Natural Areas - Reserved 0.00 1 1 1 Neighborhood Conservation 4.00 47 47 47 Suburban Commercial 4.55 241 260 317 Urban 0.00 168 168 168 Right-of-Way 0.00 0 0 0 Undeveloped 0.00 0 0 0 Totals 1,582 1,638 1,710 Population per LUE 1.72 1.66 1.59  
    Source: City of College Station, 2013, College Station Impact Fee Update 92-01 Graham Road Wastewater (Template from Staff 2013 9 3).xlsx. 
Table 2-5B 
    Estimation of Living Units Equivalent for Area 97-01, Springcreek Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Land Use LUEs Per Acre (a) Estimate LUEs 2013 2023 Buildout Estate 1.00 35 36 40 General Commercial 5.50 208 233 332 General Suburban 6.97 1,129 1,207 1,580 Institutional/Public 2.50 175 177 184 Medical 5.50 0 94 171 Natural Areas - Protected 0.00 0 0 0 Natural Areas - Reserved 0.00 0 0 0 Restricted Suburban 4.00 1,052 1,281 2,200 Suburban Commercial 4.55 21 44 279 Urban 5.92 84 353 1,626 Utilities 0.00 0 0 0 Village Center 35.00 0 430 2,153 Right-of-Way 0.00 0 0 0 Undeveloped 0.00 0 0 0 Totals 2,704 3,855 8,565 Population per LUE 1.92 1.69 1.39  
    Source: City of College Station, 2013, College Station Impact Fee Update 97-01 Springcreek Wastewater (Template from Staff 4013 8 30).xlsx. 
Table 2-5C 
    Estimation of Living Units Equivalent for Area 97-02b, Alum Creek Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Land Use LUEs Per Acre (a) Estimate LUEs 2013 2023 Buildout Business Park 2.00 2 27 48 Estate 1.00 0 3 5 General Suburban 6.97 8 892 1,623 Natural Areas - Protected 0.00 1 1 1 Natural Areas - Reserved 0.00 0 0 0 Restricted Suburban 4.11 88 348 483 Rural 0.33 0 0 0 Suburban Commercial 4.55 0 1 1 Urban 5.92 239 360 495 Utilities 0.00 0 0 0 Undeveloped 0.00 0 0 0 Totals 338 1,631 2,656 Population per LUE 0.54 1.41 1.52  
    Source: City of College Station, 2013, College Station Impact Fee Update 97-02B Alum Creek Wastewater (Temple from Staff 2013 8 30).xlsx. 
Table 2-5D 
    Estimation of Living Units Equivalent for Area 99-01, Harley Water Line 
    Water Utility 
    City of College Station 
Land Use LUEs per Acre (a) Estimate LUEs 2013 2023 Buildout General Commercial 5.50 44 51 127 General Suburban 0.00 0 0 0 Medical Use 5.50 71 108 270 Natural Areas - Reserved 0.00 0 0 0 Suburban Commercial 0.00 0 0 0 Right-of-Way 0.00 0 0 0 Undeveloped 0.00 0 0 0 Totals 115 158 396 Population per LUE 0.00 0.00 0.00  
    Source: City of College Station, 2013, College Station Impact Fee Update 99-01 Harley Water Line (Template from Staff 2013 8 30).xlsx. 
Table 2-5E 
    Estimation of Living Units Equivalent for Area 03-02, Steeplechase Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Land Use LUEs per Acre (a) Estimate LUEs 2013 2023 Buildout Business Park 2.00 0 24 47 Estate 1.00 0 0 0 General Suburban 8.00 261 931 1,542 Restricted Suburban 4.00 16 257 479 Rural 0.33 0 0 0 Suburban Commercial 4.55 65 79 97 Urban 20.00 234 2,657 4,886 Undeveloped 0.00 0 0 0 Totals 576 3,949 7,051 Population per LUE 1.58 2.09 2.13  
    Source: City of College Station, 2013, College Station Impact Fee Update 03-02 Steeplechase Wastewater (Template from Staff 2013 8 30).xlsx. 
Table 2-6A 
    Estimated Service Demand by Facility Type for Area 92-01 Graham Road Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Land Use Volume 2013 2023 Buildout Peak Flow (MGD)(a): 1.690 1.775 1.826 Gallons per LUE Daily 1,068 1,068 1,068 Total LUEs 1,582 1,662 1,710 (a) Peak 1,068 gals/LUE/daily  
    Existing Capacity details are contained in Table 2-7A. 
Table 2-6B 
    Estimated Service Demand by Facility Type for Area 97-01 Springcreek Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Land Use Volume 2013 2023 Buildout Peak Flow (MGD)(a): 2.888 4.117 9.147 Gallons per LUE Daily 1,068 1,068 1,068 Total LUEs 2,704 3,855 8,565 (a) Peak 1,068 gals/LUE/daily  
    Existing Capacity details are contained in Table 2-7B. 
Table 2-6C 
    Estimate Service Demand by Facility Type for Area 97-02b Alum Creek Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Land Use Volume 2013 2023 Buildout Peak Flow (MGD)(a): 0.361 1.742 2.837 Gallons per LUE Daily 1,068 1,068 1,068 TOTAL LUEs 338 1,631 2.656 (a) Peak 1,068 gals/LUE/daily  
    Existing Capacity details are contained in Table 2-7C. 
Table 2-6D 
    Estimate Service Demand by Facility Type for Area 99-01, Harley Water Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Land Use Volume 2013 2023 Buildout Peak Flow (MGD)(a): 0.077 0.106 0.264 Gallons per LUE Daily 668 668 668 Total LUEs 115 158 396 (a) Peak 668 gals/LUE/daily  
    Existing Capacity details are contained in Table 2-7D. 
Table 2-6E 
    Estimated Service Demand by Facility Type for Area 03-02, Steeplechase Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Land Use Volume 2013 2023 Buildout Peak Flow (MGD)(a): 0.615 4.217 7.530 Gallons per LUE Daily 1,068 1,068 1,068 Total LUEs (b) 576 3,949 7,051 (a) Peak 1,068 gals/LUE/daily  
    Existing Capacity details are contained in Table 2-7E. 
Table 2-7A 
    CIP Inventory and Costing for Area 92-01, Graham Road Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Name Total Construction Cost Facility Capacity 2013-2023 Total Current Customers 2013-2023 Growth Post 2023 Growth Capital Cost Cost per LUE Major Collection Lines Existing Facilities Percent Percent Percent Percent Phase I $372,994.00 100.00 92.51 3.28 4.20 $12,251.00 Phase II $46,735.00 100.00 100.00 0.00 0.00 $0.00 Phase III $53,789.00 100.00 92.51 3.28 4.20 $1,767.00 Subtotal Existing Facilities $473,519.00 100.00 93.25 2.96 3.79 $14,017.00 Future Facilities Percent Percent Percent Percent None Subtotal Future Facilities $0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 $0.00 Total Collection Lines $473,519.00 100.00 93.25 2.96 3.79 $14,017.00 $249.58.00 Construction Cost Total $473,519.00 $14,017.00 $249.58.00  
Table 2-7B 
    CIP Inventory and Costing Area 97-01, Springcreek Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Name Total Construction Cost Facility Capacity 2013-2023 Total Current Customers 2013-2023 Growth Post 2023 Growth Capital Cost Cost per LUE Major Collection Lines Existing Facilities Percent Percent Percent Percent Phase I $631,215.00 100.00 31.57 13,44 54.99 $84,861.00 Phase II $813,752.00 100.00 31.57 13.44 54.99 $109,401.00 Subtotal Existing Facilities $1,444,967.00 100.00 31.57 13.44 54.99 $194,262.00 Future Facilities Percent Percent Percent Percent Subtotal Future Facilities $0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 $0.00 Total Collection Lines $1,444,967.00 100.00 31.57 13.44 54.99 $194,262.00 $168.71.00 Construction Cost Total $1,444,967.00 $194,262.00 $168.71.00  
Table 2-7C 
    CIP Inventory and Costing for Area 97-02B, Alum Creek Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Name Total Construction Cost Facility Capacity 2013-2023 Total Current Customers 2013-2023 Growth Post 2023 Growth Capital Cost Cost per LUE Major Collection Lines Existing Facilities Percent Percent Percent Percent Phase I $214,271.00 100.00 12.73 48.67 38.60 $104,294.00 Subtotal Existing Facilities $214,271.00 100.00 12.73 48.67 38.60 $104,294.00 Future Facilities Percent Percent Percent Percent Subtotal Future Facilities $0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 $0.00 Total Collection Lines $214,271.00 100.00 12.73 48.67 38.60 $104,294.00 $80.67.00 Construction Cost Total $214,271.00 $104,294.00 $80.67.00  
Table 2-7D 
    CIP Inventory and Costing for Area 99-01, Harley Water Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Name Total Construction Cost Facility Capacity 2013-2023 Total Current Customers 2013-2023 Growth Post 2023 Growth Capital Cost Cost per LUE Major Transmission Lines Existing Facilities Percent Percent Percent Percent Phase I $342,978.00 100.00 29.04 10.97 59.99 $37,628.00 Subtotal Existing Facilities $342,978.00 100.00 29.04 10.97 59.99 $37,628.00 Future Facilities Percent Percent Percent Percent Subtotal Future Facilities $0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 $0.00 Total Transmission Lines $342,978.00 100.00 29.04 10.97 59.99 $37,628.00 $866.00 Construction Cost Total $342,978.00 $37,628.00 $866.00  
Table 2-7E 
    CIP Inventory and Costing for Area 03-02, Steeplechase Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Name Total Construction Cost Facility Capacity 2013-2023 Total Current Customers 2013-2023 Growth Post 2023 Growth Capital Cost Cost per LUE Major Collection Lines Existing Facilities LUEs LUEs LUEs LUEs Sanitary Sewer Facilities $1.130,147.00 3,800 576 3,224 0 $958,841.00 Subtotal Existing Facilities $1,130,147.00 3,800 576 3,224 0 $958,841.00 Future Facilities 
None LUEs LUEs LUEs LUEs Subtotal Future Facilities $0.00 0 0 0 0 $0.00 Total Collection Lines $1,130,147.00 3,800 576 3,224 0 $958,841.00 $284.30.00 Construction Cost Total $1,130,147.00 $958,841.00 $284.30.00  
Table 2-8 
    Summary of Capital Costs 
Utility Area Facility Cost/LUE* Wastewater 92-01 Major Collection $249.58 Graham Road Study Costs $100.60 Total Capital Costs 92-01 Graham Road Wastewater $350.18 Wastewater 97-01 Major Collection $168.71 Spring Creek Study Costs $4.91 Total Capital Costs 97-01 Spring Creek Wastewater $173.61 Wastewater 97-02B Major Collection $80.67 Alum Creek Study Costs $4.37 Total Capital Costs 97-02B Alum Creek Wastewater $85.04 Water 99-01 Major Transmission $866.00 Harley Study Costs $130.03 Total Capital Costs 99-01 Harley Water Line $996.03 Wastewater 03-02 Major Collection $284.30 Steeplechase Study Costs $2.72 Total Capital Costs 03-02 Steeplechase Wastewater $287.02  
    *An LUE is equal to use by a typical household with a five-eighths-inch water meter for existing customers or a three-fourths-inch water meter for new customers. Totals may not add due to rounding. 
Table 3-1A 
    Categorization of Utility for Area 92-01, Graham Road Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Name Bond Issue Facility Capacity Total Debt Principal Per Current Issuance Issuance Remaining Total For Current Major 
Collection Percent Percent Phase I 1993 $196,927 $14,091 100 92.51 $8.24 Phase II 1993 $24,674 $1,766 100 100.00 $1.12 Phase III 1993 $28,399 $2,032 100 92.51 $1.19 Subtotal Wastewater Collection $250,000 $17,889 $10.54 Outstanding Debt Total 250,000 $17,889 $10.54  
    Source for outstanding principal: City of College Station Impact Fee Update 92-01 Graham Road Wastewater (Template from Staff 2013 9 3).xlsx. 
Table 3-1B 
    Categorization of Utility for Area 97-01, Springcreek Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Name Bond Issue Facility Capacity Total Debt Principal Per Current Issuance Issuance Remaining Total For Current Major Collection Percent Percent Phase I 1998 $314,523.00 $110,742.00 100 31.57 $12.93 Phase II 1998 $405,477.00 $142,766.00 100 31.57 $16.67 Subtotal Wastewater Collection $720,000.00 $253,508.00 $29.60 Outstanding Debt Total $720,000.00 $253,508.00 $29.60  
    Source for outstanding principal: City of College Station Impact Fee Update 97-01, Springcreek Wastewater (Template from Staff 4013 8 30).xlsx. 
Table 3-1C 
    Categorization of Utility Debt for Area 97-02B, Alum Creek Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Name Bond Issue Facility Capacity Total Debt Principal Per Current Issuance Issuance Remaining Total For Current Major 
Collection Phase I 1998 $396,000.00 $139,429.00 100 % 12.73 % $52.50 Subtotal Wastewater Collection $396,000.00 $139,429.00 $52.50 Outstanding Debt Total $396,000.00 $139,429.00 $52.50  
    Source for outstanding principal: City of College Station Impact Fee Update 97-02B Alum Creek Wastewater (Template from Staff 2013 8 30).xlsx. 
    Area 99-01, Harley Water Line, is not funded by debt, and thus the calculated rate credit is zero and not shown in Table 3-1C. 
Table 3-1E 
    Categorization of Utility Debt for Area 03-02, Steeplechase Wastewater Line 
    Wastewater Utility 
    City of College Station 
Facility Type/Name Bond Issue Facility Capacity Total Debt Principal Per Current Issuance Issuance Remaining Total For
Current Major 
Collection Percent Percent Sanitary Sewer Facilities 2004 $1,000,000.00 $677,642.00 100 15.16 $178.33 Subtotal Wastewater Collection $1,000,000.00 $677,642.00 $178.33 Outstanding Debt Total $1,000,000.00 $677,642.00 $178.33  
    Source for outstanding principal: City of College Station Impact Fee Update 03-02 Steeplechase Wastewater (Template from Staff 2013 8 30).xlsx. 
Table 3-2A 
    Derivation of Maximum Fees for Area 92-01, Graham Road Wastewater Line 
    Through the Equity Residual Model 
    City of College Station 
Utility/
Facility Type Construction Costs Alternation Adjustment Maximum Fee Amount Higher of A or B A:

Rate Credit B:

50 Percent Adjustment A:

Rate Credit B:

50 Percent Adjustment Wastewater Utility Major Collection $249.58 $10.54 $124.79 $239.04 $124.79 $239.04 CIP/Study Costs $100.60 $0.00 $50.30 $100.60 $50.30 $100.60 Subtotal Wastewater $350.18 $10.54 $175.09 $339.63 $175.09 $339.63 Totals $350.18 $10.54 $175.09 $339.63 $175.09 $339.63  
Table 3-2B 
    Derivation of Maximum Impact Fees for Area 97-01, Springcreek Wastewater Line 
    Through the Equity Residual Model 
    City of College Station 
Utility/
Facility Type Construction Costs Alternation Adjustment Maximum Fee Amount Higher of A or B A:
Rate Credit B:
50 Percent Adjustment A:
Rate Credit B:
50 Percent Adjustment Wastewater Utility Major Collection $168.71 $29.60 $84.35 $139.11 $84.35 $139.11 CIP/Study Costs $4.91 $0.00 $2.45 $4.91 $2.45 $4.91 Subtotal Wastewater $173.61 $29.60 $86.81 $144.01 $86.81 $144.01 Totals $173.61 $29.60 $86.81 $144.01 $86.81 $144.01  
Table 3-2C 
    Deviation of Maximum Impact Fees for Area 97-02b, Alum Creek Wastewater Line 
    Through the Equity of Residual Model 
    City of College Station 
Utility/
Facility Type Construction Costs Alternation Adjustment Maximum Fee Amount Higher of A or B A:
Rate Credit B:
50 percent Adjustment A:
Rate Credit B:
50 percent Adjustment Wastewater Utility Major Collection $80.67 $52.50 $40.34 $28.18 $40.34 $40.34 CIP/Study Costs $4.37 $0.00 $2.19 $4.37 $2.19 $4.37 Subtotal Wastewater $85.04 $52.50 $42.52 $44.71 $42.52 $44.71 Totals $85.04 $52.50 $42.52 $32.55 $42.52 $44.71  
Table 3-2D 
    Derivation of Maximum Impact Fees for Area 99-01, Harley Water Line 
    Through the Equity Residual Model 
    City of College Station 
Utility/
Facility Type Construction Costs Alternation Adjustment Maximum Fee Amount Higher of A or B A:
Rate Credit B:
50 percent Adjustment A:
Rate Credit B:
50 percent Adjustment Wastewater Utility Major Collection $866.00 $0.00 $433.00 $866.00 $433.00 $866.00 CIP/Study Costs $130.03 $0.00 $65.02 $130.03 $65.02 $130.03 Subtotal Wastewater $996.03 $0.00 $498.02 $996.03 $498.02 $996.03 Totals $996.03 $0.00 $498.02 $996.03 $498.02 $996.03  
Table 3-2E 
    Derivation of Maximum Impact Fees for Area 03-02, Steeplechase Wastewater Line 
    Through the Equity Residual Model 
    City of College Station 
Utility/
Facility Type Construction Costs Alternation Adjustment Maximum Fee Amount Higher of A or B A:
Rate Credit B:
50 percent Adjustment A:
Rate Credit B:
50 percent Adjustment Wastewater Utility Major Collection $284.30 $178.33 $142.15 $105.98 $142.15 $142.15 CIP/Study Costs $2.72 $0.00 $1.36 $2.72 $1.36 $2.72 Subtotal Wastewater $287.02 $178.33 $143.51 $108.70 $143.51 $144.87 Totals $287.02 $178.33 $143.51 $108.70 $143.51 $144.87  
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 15, exh. B; Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. B), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit C: Maximum Impact Fees 
Table 3-3A 
    Maximum and Effective Impact Fees for Various Water Meter Sizes for Area 92-01, Graham Road Wastewater Line 
    City of College Station 
Meter Type Meter Size Multiplier Fee Amounts Maximum Effective Simple 5/8 "  3/4" 1.000 $339.63 $339.63 Simple 3/4" 1.000 $339.63 $339.63 Simple 1" 2.500 $849.09 $849.09 Simple 11/2" 5.000 $1,698.17 $1,698.17 Simple 2" 8.000 $2,717.08 $2,717.08 Compound 2" 8.000 $2,717.08 $2,717.08 Turbine 2" 10.000 $3,396.34 $3,396.34 Compound 3" 16.000 $5,434.15 $5,434.15 Turbine 3" 24.000 $8,151.23 $8,151.23 Compound 4" 25.000 $8,490.86 $8,490.86 Turbine 4" 42.000 $14,264.65 $14,264.65 Compound 6" 50.000 $16,981.72 $16,981.72 Turbine 6" 92.000 $31,246.37 $31,246.37 Compound 8" 80.000 $27,170.75 $27,170.75 Turbine 8" 160.000 $54,341.51 $54,341.51 Compound 10" 115.000 $39,057.96 $39,057.96 Turbine 10" 250.000 $84,908.61 $84,908.61 Turbine 12" 330.000 $112,079.36 $112,079.36  
Table 3-3B 
    Maximum and Effective Impact Fees for Various Water Meter Sizes for Area 97-01, Springcreek Wastewater Line 
    City of College Station 
Meter type Meter Size Multiplier Fee Amounts Maximum Effective Simple 5/8 "  3/4" 1.000 $144.01 $144.01 Simple 3/4" 1.000 $144.01 $144.01 Simple 1" 2.500 $360.04 $360.04 Simple 11/2" 5.000 $720.07 $720.07 Simple 2" 8.000 $1,152.12 $1,152.12 Compound 2" 8.000 $1,152.12 $1,152.12 Turbine 2" 10.000 $1,440.15 $1,440.15 Compound 3" 16.000 $2,304.23 $2,304.23 Turbine 3" 24.000 $3,456.35 $3,456.35 Compound 4" 25.000 $3,600.36 $3,600.36 Turbine 4" 42.000 $6,048.61 $6,048.61 Compound 6" 50.000 $7,200.73 $7,200.73 Turbine 6" 92.000 $13,249.34 $13,249.34 Compound 8" 80.000 $11,521.16 $11,521.16 Turbine 8" 160.000 $23,042.33 $23,042.33 Compound 10" 115.00 $16,561.67 $16,561.67 Turbine 10" 250.000 $36,003.64 $36,003.64 Turbine 12" 330.000 $47,524.80 $47,524.80  
Table 3-3C 
    Maximum and Effective Impact Fees for Various Water Meter Sizes for Area 97-02b, Alum Creek Wastewater Line 
    City of College Station 
Meter type Meter size Multiplier Fee Amounts Maximum Effective Simple 5/8 "  3/4" 1.000 $44.71 $44.71 Simple 3/4" 1.000 $44.71 $44.71 Simple 1" 2.500 $111.77 $111.77 Simple 11/2" 5.000 $223.54 $223.54 Simple 2" 8.000 $357.66 $357.66 Compound 2" 8.000 $357.66 $357.66 Turbine 2" 10.000 $447.08 $447.08 Compound 3" 16.000 $715.32 $715.32 Turbine 3" 24.000 $1,072.98 $1,072.98 Compound 4" 25.000 $1,117.69 $1,117.69 Turbine 4" 42.000 $1,877.72 $1,877.72 Compound 6" 50.000 $2,235.38 $2,235.38 Turbine 6" 92.000 $4,113.10 $4,113.10 Compound 8" 80.000 $3,576.61 $3,576.61 Turbine 8" 160.000 $7,153.21 $7,153.21 Compound 10" 115.000 $5,141.37 $5,141.37 Turbine 10" 250.000 $11,176.89 $11,176.89 Turbine 12" 330.000 $14,753.50 $14,753.50  
Table 3-3D 
    Maximum and Effective Impact Fees for Various Water Meter Sizes for Area 99-01, Harley Water Line 
    City of College Station 
Meter type Meter size Multiplier Fee Amounts Maximum Effective Simple 5/8 "  3/4" 1.000 $996.03 $996.03 Simple 3/4" 1.000 $996.03 $996.03 Simple 1" 2.500 $2,490.08 $2,490.08 Simple 11/2" 5.000 $4,980.15 $4,980.15 Simple 2" 8.000 $7,968.24 $7,968.24 Compound 2" 8.000 $7,968.24 $7,968.24 Turbine 2" 10.000 $9,960.31 $9,960.31 Compound 3" 16.000 $15,936.49 $15,936.49 Turbine 3" 24.000 $23,904.73 $23,904.73 Compound 4" 25.000 $24,900.76 $24,900.76 Turbine 4" 42.000 $41,833.28 $41,833.28 Compound 6" 50.000 $49,801.53 $49,801.53 Turbine 6" 92.000 $91,634.81 $91,634.81 Compound 8" 80.000 $79,682.44 $79,682.44 Turbine 8" 160.000 $159,364.89 $159,364.89 Compound 10" 115.000 $114,543.51 $114,543.51 Turbine 10" 250.000 $249,007.64 $249,007.64 Turbine 12" 330.000 $328,690.08 $328,690.08  
Table 3-3E 
    Maximum and Effective Impact Fees for Various Water Meter Sizes for Area 03-02, Steeplechase Wastewater Line 
    City of College Station 
Meter Type Meter size Multiplier Fee Amounts Maximum Effective Simple 5/8 "  3/4" 1.000 $144.87 $144.87 Simple 3/4" 1.000 $144.87 $144.87 Simple 1" 2.500 $362.18 $362.18 Simple 11/2" 5.000 $724.37 $724.37 Simple 2" 8.000 $1,158.99 $1,158.99 Compound 2" 8.000 $1,158.99 $1,158.99 Turbine 2" 10.000 $1,448.73 $1,448.73 Compound 3" 16.000 $2,317.97 $2,317.97 Turbine 3" 24.000 $3,476.96 $3,476.96 Compound 4" 25.000 $3,621.83 $3,621.83 Turbine 4" 42.000 $6,084.67 $6,084.67 Compound 6" 50.000 $7,243.66 $7,243.66 Turbine 6" 92.000 $13,328.33 $13,328.33 Compound 8" 80.000 $11,589.85 $11,589.85 Turbine 8" 160.000 $23,179.71 $23,179.71 Compound 10" 115.000 $16,660.42 $16,660.42 Turbine 10" 250.000 $36,218.30 $36,218.30 Turbine 12" 330.000 $47,808.15 $47,808.15  
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 15, exh. C; Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. C), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit D: Impact Fees Charged 
Table 3-3A 
    Maximum and Effective Impact Fees for Various Water Meter Sizes for Area 92-01, Graham Road Wastewater Line 
    City of College Station 
Meter Type Meter Size Multiplier Fee Amounts Maximum Effective Simple 5/8 "  3/4" 1.000 $339.63 $339.63 Simple 3/4" 1.000 $339.63 $339.63 Simple 1" 2.500 $849.09 $849.09 Simple 11/2" 5.000 $1,698.17 $1,698.17 Simple 2" 8.000 $2,717.08 $2,717.08 Compound 2" 8.000 $2,717.08 $2,717.08 Turbine 2" 10.000 $3,396.34 $3,396.34 Compound 3" 16.000 $5,434.15 $5,434.15 Turbine 3" 24.000 $8,151.23 $8,151.23 Compound 4" 25.000 $8,490.86 $8,490.86 Turbine 4" 42.000 $14,264.65 $14,264.65 Compound 6" 50.000 $16,981.72 $16,981.72 Turbine 6" 92.000 $31,246.37 $31,246.37 Compound 8" 80.000 $27,170.75 $27,170.75 Turbine 8" 160.000 $54,341.51 $54,341.51 Compound 10" 115.000 $39,057.96 $39,057.96 Turbine 10" 250.000 $84,908.61 $84,908.61 Turbine 12" 330.000 $112,079.36 $112,079.36  
Table 3-3B 
    Maximum and Effective Impact Fees for Various Water Meter Sizes for Area 97-01, Springcreek Wastewater Line 
    City of College Station 
Meter Type Meter Size Multiplier Fee Amounts Maximum Effective Simple 5/8 "  3/4" 1.000 $144.01 $144.01 Simple 3/4" 1.000 $144.01 $144.01 Simple 1" 2.500 $360.04 $360.04 Simple 11/2" 5.000 $720.07 $720.07 Simple 2" 8.000 $1,152.12 $1,152.12 Compound 2" 8.000 $1,152.12 $1,152.12 Turbine 2" 10.000 $1,440.15 $1,440.15 Compound 3" 16.000 $2,304.23 $2,304.23 Turbine 3" 24.000 $3,456.35 $3,456.35 Compound 4" 25.000 $3,600.36 $3,600.36 Turbine 4" 42.000 $6,048.61 $6,048.61 Compound 6" 50.000 $7,200.73 $7,200.73 Turbine 6" 92.000 $13,249.34 $13,249.34 Compound 8" 80.000 $11,521.16 $11,521.16 Turbine 8" 160.000 $23,042.33 $23,042.33 Compound 10" 115.00 $16,561.67 $16,561.67 Turbine 10" 250.000 $36,003.64 $36,003.64 Turbine 12" 330.000 $47,524.80 $47,524.80  
Table 3-3C 
    Maximum and Effective Impact Fees for Various Water Meter Sizes for Area 97-02b, Alum Creek Wastewater Line 
    City of College Station 
Meter Type Meter size Multiplier Fee Amounts Maximum Effective Simple 5/8 "  3/4" 1.000 $44.71 $44.71 Simple 3/4" 1.000 $44.71 $44.71 Simple 1" 2.500 $111.77 $111.77 Simple 11/2" 5.000 $223.54 $223.54 Simple 2" 8.000 $357.66 $357.66 Compound 2" 8.000 $357.66 $357.66 Turbine 2" 10.000 $447.08 $447.08 Compound 3" 16.000 $715.32 $715.32 Turbine 3" 24.000 $1,072.98 $1,072.98 Compound 4" 25.000 $1,117.69 $1,117.69 Turbine 4" 42.000 $1,877.72 $1,877.72 Compound 6" 50.000 $2,235.38 $2,235.38 Turbine 6" 92.000 $4,113.10 $4,113.10 Compound 8" 80.000 $3,576.61 $3,576.61 Turbine 8" 160.000 $7,153.21 $7,153.21 Compound 10" 115.000 $5,141.37 $5,141.37 Turbine 10" 250.000 $11,176.89 $11,176.89 Turbine 12" 330.000 $14,753.50 $14,753.50  
Table 3-3D 
    Maximum and Effective Impact Fees for Various Water Meter Sizes for Area 99-01, Harley Water Line 
    City of College Station 
Meter Type Meter Size Multiplier Fee Amounts Maximum Effective Simple 5/8 "  3/4" 1.000 $996.03 $996.03 Simple 3/4" 1.000 $996.03 $996.03 Simple 1" 2.500 $2,490.08 $2,490.08 Simple 11/2" 5.000 $4,980.15 $4,980.15 Simple 2" 8.000 $7,968.24 $7,968.24 Compound 2" 8.000 $7,968.24 $7,968.24 Turbine 2" 10.000 $9,960.31 $9,960.31 Compound 3" 16.000 $15,936.49 $15,936.49 Turbine 3" 24.000 $23,904.73 $23,904.73 Compound 4" 25.000 $24,900.76 $24,900.76 Turbine 4" 42.000 $41,833.28 $41,833.28 Compound 6" 50.000 $49,801.53 $49,801.53 Turbine 6" 92.000 $91,634.81 $91,634.81 Compound 8" 80.000 $79,682.44 $79,682.44 Turbine 8" 160.000 $159,364.89 $159,364.89 Compound 10" 115.000 $114,543.51 $114,543.51 Turbine 10" 250.000 $249,007.64 $249,007.64 Turbine 12" 330.000 $328,690.08 $328,690.08  
Table 3-3E 
    Maximum and Effective Impact Fees for Various Water Meter Sizes for Area 03-02, Steeplechase Wastewater Line 
    City of College Station 
Meter Type Meter Size Multiplier Fee Amounts Maximum Effective Simple 5/8 "  3/4" 1.000 $144.87 $144.87 Simple 3/4" 1.000 $144.87 $144.87 Simple 1" 2.500 $362.18 $362.18 Simple 11/2" 5.000 $724.37 $724.37 Simple 2" 8.000 $1,158.99 $1,158.99 Compound 2" 8.000 $1,158.99 $1,158.99 Turbine 2" 10.000 $1,448.73 $1,448.73 Compound 3" 16.000 $2,317.97 $2,317.97 Turbine 3" 24.000 $3,476.96 $3,476.96 Compound 4" 25.000 $3,621.83 $3,621.83 Turbine 4" 42.000 $6,084.67 $6,084.67 Compound 6" 50.000 $7,243.66 $7,243.66 Turbine 6" 92.000 $13,328.33 $13,328.33 Compound 8" 80.000 $11,589.85 $11,589.85 Turbine 8" 160.000 $23,179.71 $23,179.71 Compound 10" 115.000 $16,660.42 $16,660.42 Turbine 10" 250.000 $36,218.30 $36,218.30 Turbine 12" 330.000 $47,808.15 $47,808.15  
(Code 2011 (Repub.), ch. 15, exh. D; Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. D), 9-22-2016) 
Secs. 107-52-107-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SYSTEM-WIDE IMPACT FEES 

Sec. 107-71. - System-wide impact fee for water services. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is intended to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities to serve new development in an identified service area by requiring each such new development to pay a share of the costs of water improvements necessitated by and attributable to it as set forth herein and in accordance with Texas Local Government Code ch. 395. 
(b)  Authorization. 
(1)  This section is adopted pursuant to Texas Local Government Code ch. 395 and other applicable law. Said Chapter 395 supplements this section to the extent that its provisions may be applicable hereto and, to such extent, its provisions are incorporated herein. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit the power of the City to utilize other methods authorized under State law or pursuant to other City powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution or in conjunction with this section. Guidelines may be developed by ordinance, resolution, or otherwise to implement and administer this section. 
(2)  Impact fees established by this section are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the City on the development or subdivision of land, the issuance of building permits, or the sale of water or wastewater taps. 
(c)  Service area. The impact fee service area for this section is established, consisting of land within the City limits and portions of the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction as shown in the Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Study prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc., dated July 2016, a portion showing the service area which is attached hereto as Exhibit E, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office along with a copy of the entire Study. 
(d)  Land use assumptions. The land use assumptions for the impact fee imposed under this section upon which the Capital Improvements Plan for water facilities are based are as set forth in the Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Study prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc., dated July 2016, a portion showing the land use assumptions which is attached hereto as Exhibit F, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office. 
(e)  Capital Improvements Plan. The Capital Improvements Plan for this section identifying capital improvements for the provision of water services in the service area is as set forth in the Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Study prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc., dated July 2016, a portion showing the Capital Improvements Plan which is attached hereto as Exhibit G, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office. 
(f)  Service unit. Service units used to determine the amount of impact fees under this section shall be expressed in terms of land use equivalents (LUEs) with one LUE representing one typical water meter for one single-family residence receiving water service. 
(g)  Impact fee. In accordance with this section and based upon the land use assumptions and Capital Improvements Plan herein, the maximum impact fee per service unit for water services is as set forth in Exhibit H, attached hereto, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office. In accordance with this section and based upon the land use assumptions and Capital Improvements Plan herein, there is hereby imposed a system-wide water services impact fee per service unit as set forth in Exhibit I, attached hereto, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office. 
(h)  Assessment and collection. Assessment and collection of the impact fees established under this section shall be as set forth herein and in accordance with applicable State law, and with assessment to occur at time of final plat approval by the City Planning and Zoning Commission when platting is required. If platting is not required, assessment shall occur at the earliest time allowed by law or by agreement as allowed by law. 
(i)  Accounting. Funds collected through the adoption of the impact fees set forth in this section shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts clearly identifying the category of capital improvements or facility expansions within the service area for which the fee is adopted. 
(j)  Certification. The City Council certifies that none of the impact fee under this section will be used or expended for an improvement or expansion not identified in the Capital Improvements Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-6), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit E: Service Area for System-Wide Water Services 

(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. E), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit F: Land Use Assumptions for System-Wide Water Services 

(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. F), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit G-1: Capital Improvements Plan for System-Wide Water Services 

(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. G-1), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit G-2: Map of Capital Improvements Plan for System-Wide Water Services 

(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. G-2), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit H: Maximum Impact Fee Per Service Unit for Water Services 

(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. H), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit I: Impact Fee Imposed Per Service Unit for System-Wide Water Services 
Water Meter Size Water Impact Fee Per Meter Eff. December 1, 2016 Water Impact Fee Per Meter Eff. December 1, 2017 5/8 " $250.00 $500.00 1" $425.00 $850.00 11/2" $2,675.00 $5,350.00 2" $2,675.00 $5,350.00 3" $6,675.00 $13,350.00 4" $13,325.00 $26,650.00 6" $26,675.00 $53,350.00 8" $45,000.00 $90,000.00 10" $66,675.00 $133,350.00  
(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. I), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-72. - System-wide impact fees for wastewater services. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is intended to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities to serve new development in an identified service area by requiring each such new development to pay a share of the costs of wastewater collection and treatment improvements necessitated by and attributable to it as set forth herein and in accordance with Texas Local Government Code ch. 395. 
(b)  Authorization. 
(1)  This section is adopted pursuant to Texas Local Government Code ch. 395 and other applicable law. Said Chapter 395 supplements this section to the extent that its provisions may be applicable hereto and, to such extent, its provisions are incorporated herein. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit the power of the City to utilize other methods authorized under State law or pursuant to other City powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution or in conjunction with this section. Guidelines may be developed by ordinance, resolution, or otherwise to implement and administer this section. 
(2)  Impact fees established by this section are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the City on the development or subdivision of land, the issuance of building permits, or the sale of water or wastewater taps. 
(c)  Service area. The impact fee service area for this section is established, consisting of land within the City limits and portions of the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction as depicted in the Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Study prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc., dated July 2016, a portion showing the service area which is attached hereto as Exhibit J, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office along with a copy of the entire Study. 
(d)  Land use assumptions. The land use assumptions for the impact fee imposed under this section upon which the Capital Improvements Plan for wastewater facilities are based are set forth in the Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Study prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc., dated July 2016, a portion showing the land use assumptions which is attached hereto as Exhibit K, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office. 
(e)  Capital improvements plan. The Capital Improvements Plan for this section identifying capital improvements for the provision of wastewater services in the service area is as set forth in the Water and Wastewater Impact Fee Study prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc., dated July 2016, a portion showing the Capital Improvements Plan which is attached hereto as Exhibit L, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office. 
(f)  Service units. Service units used to determine the amount of impact fees under this section shall be expressed in terms of land use equivalents (LUEs) with one LUE representing one typical water meter for one single-family residence receiving wastewater services. 
(g)  Impact fee. In accordance with this section and based upon the land use assumptions and Capital Improvements Plan above, the maximum impact fee per service unit for wastewater collection and treatment services is as set forth in Exhibit M, attached hereto, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office. In accordance with this section and based upon the land use assumptions and Capital Improvements Plan above, there is hereby imposed a system-wide wastewater collection and treatment impact fee per service unit as set forth in Exhibit N, attached hereto, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office. 
(h)  Assessment and collection. Assessment and collection of the impact fees established under this section shall be as set forth herein and in accordance with applicable State law, and with assessment to occur at time of final plat approval by the City Planning and Zoning Commission when platting is required. If platting is not required, assessment shall occur at the earliest time allowed by law or by agreement as allowed by law. 
(i)  Accounting. Funds collected through the adoption of the impact fees set forth in this section shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts clearly identifying the category of capital improvements or facility expansions within the service area for which the fee is adopted. 
(j)  Certification. The City Council certifies that none of the impact fees under this section will be used or expended for an improvement or expansion not identified in the Capital Improvements Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-7), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit J: Service Area for System-Wide Wastewater Collection and Treatment Services 

(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. J), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit K: Land Use Assumption for System-Wide Wastewater Collection and Treatment Services 

(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. K), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit L-1: Capital Improvements Plan for System-Wide Wastewater Collection and Treatment Services 

(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. L-1), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit L-2: Map of Capital Improvements Plan for System-Wide Wastewater Collection and Treatment Services 

(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. L-2), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit M: Maximum Impact Fee Per Service Unit for Wastewater Collection and Treatment Services 

(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. M), 9-22-2016) 
Exhibit N: Impact Fee Imposed Per Service Unit for System-Wide Wastewater Collection and Treatment Services 
Water Meter Size Wastewater Impact Fee - per meter Eff. December 1, 2016 Wastewater Impact Fee - per meter Eff. December 1, 2017 5/8 " $1,500.00 $3,000.00 1" $2,550.00 $5,100.00 11/2" $8,025.00 $16,050.00 2" $8,025.00 $16,050.00 3" $20,025.00 $40,050.00 4" $39,975.00 $79,950.00 6" $80,025.00 $160,050.00 8" $135,000.00 $270,000.00 10" $200,025.00 $400,050.00  
(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(exh. N), 9-22-2016) 
Sec. 107-73. - System-wide roadway impact fees. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is intended to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities to serve new development in an identified service area by requiring each such development to pay its pro rata share of the costs of roadway improvements necessitated by and attributable to such new development as set forth herein and consistent with Texas Local Government Code ch. 395. 
(b)  Authorization. 
(1)  This section is adopted pursuant to Texas Local Government Code ch. 395 and other applicable law. Chapter 395 supplements this section to the extent that its provisions may be applicable hereto and, to such extent, its provisions are incorporated herein by reference. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit the power of the City to utilize other methods authorized under State law or pursuant to other City powers to accomplish the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution or in conjunction with this section. Guidelines may be developed by ordinance, resolution, or otherwise to implement and administer this section. 
(2)  Impact fees established by this section are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the City on the development or subdivision of land or the issuance of building permits. 
(c)  Service area. There are four roadway service areas established for this section, consisting of land within the City limits as shown in Exhibit 1 of the Roadway Impact Fee Study prepared by Kimley Horn, dated July 2016, and which is attached hereto as Exhibit O, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office along with a copy of the entire Study. 
(d)  Land use assumptions. The land use assumptions for the impact fee imposed under this section upon which the Capital Improvements Plan for roadway facilities are based are as set forth in Table 1 of the Roadway Impact Fee Study prepared by Kimley Horn, dated July 2016, and which is attached hereto as Exhibit P, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office along with a copy of the entire Study. 
(e)  Capital Improvements Plan. The Capital Improvements Plan for this section identifying capital improvements for the provision of roadway services in the four service areas is as set forth in Tables 2A-D and Exhibits 2A-D of the Roadway Impact Fee Study prepared by Kimley Horn, dated July 2016, and which is attached hereto as Exhibit Q, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office along with a copy of the entire Study. 
(f)  Service units. Service units used to determine the amount of impact fees under this section shall be expressed in terms of vehicle-mile which shall be the capacity consumed in a single lane in the p.m. peak hour by a vehicle making a trip one mile in length and as further described in the Roadway Impact Fee Study prepared by Kimley Horn, dated July 2016, a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office. 
(g)  Impact fee. In accordance with this section and based upon the land use assumptions and Capital Improvements Plan herein, calculations and other information presented in the study prepared by Kimley Horn, the maximum impact fee per service unit for each service area for roadway impact fees shall be as set forth in Exhibit R, attached hereto, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office. In accordance with this section and based upon the land use assumptions and Capital Improvements Plan herein, there is hereby imposed a roadway impact fee per service unit for each service area for roadway impact fees again as set forth in Exhibit R but with a waiver for the actual amount to be collected as set forth in Exhibit S attached hereto, incorporated herein for all purposes and a copy of which shall be made available to view at the City Secretary's Office. 
(h)  Assessment and collection. Assessment and collection of the impact fees established under this section shall be as set forth herein and in accordance with applicable State law. Assessment shall occur at time of final plat approval by the City Planning and Zoning Commission when platting is required. If platting is not required, assessment shall occur at the earliest time allowed by law or by agreement as allowed by law. 
(i)  Credits. The City may credit the contribution of land, construction of improvements or funding for construction of any capital improvement that is a part of the Capital Improvements Plan adopted under this section or that otherwise affects it and that is required or agreed to by the City, pursuant to rules established in this section or pursuant to administrative guidelines promulgated by the City which may be amended from time to time. In determining such credit, the maximum impact fee set forth in Exhibit R may be used to assist in approximating and determining the appropriate roadway contributions related to new development. It is expressly declared that where the roadway impact fee collected is less than the maximum, same shall not automatically create a credit equal to the maximum impact fee, nor automatically create an exception to other applicable rules and regulations. 
(k)  Accounting. Funds collected through the adoption of the impact fees set forth in this section shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts clearly identifying the category of capital improvements or facility expansions within the service area for which the fee is adopted. 
(l)  Certification. The City Council certifies that none of the impact fees under this section will be used or expended for an improvement or expansion not identified in the Capital Improvements Plan. 
Exhibit O: Service Areas for City-Wide Roadway Impact Fees 

Exhibit P: Land Use Assumptions for City-Wide Roadway Impact Fees 
Table 1. Residential and Nonresidential/Employment 10-Year Projections Residential Nonresidential/Employment Service 
Area Single 
Family Multi-Family Basic Service Retail Dwelling Units Sq. Ft. Sq. Ft. Sq. Ft. A 459 1,520 80,000 1,133,000 320,000 B 587 2,251 100,000 599,000 604,000 C 2,316 861 307,000 483,000 729,000 D 1,552 24 348,000 495,000 625,000 Sub-Total 4,914 4,656 835,000 2,670,000 2,278,000 Total 9,570 5,783,000  
Exhibit Q: Capital Improvements Plans for City-Wide Roadway Impact Fees 
Table 2.A. 10-Year Roadway Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan-Service Area A 
Service 
Area Proj. # IF Class Roadway Limits Length 
(mi) % In 
Service 
Area SA A A-1 MAJ2 Pavilion Ave. Extension Sebesta Rd. to SH 6 NBFR 0.48 100% A-2 MAJ2 Dartmouth St. Extension Emerald Pkwy. to S. Texas Ave. 0.48 100% A-3 MAJ2 Lassie Ln. Extension Sterling St. to Manuel Dr. 0.06 100% A-4, B-1 MAJ6(1/3) S. Texas Ave. Harvey Mitchell Pkwy. to Deacon Dr. 0.68 50% A-5, D-1 MAJ4 Rock Prairie Rd. (1) Medical Ave. to Bird Pond Rd. 0.45 50% A-6 MAJ4 Harvey Rd. Appomattox Dr. to Boonville Rd. (CL) 2.18 100% A-7, D-2 MIN4 Bird Pond Rd. Rock Prairie Rd. to 4,830' NE of Bird Pond Estate (CL) 1.33 50% A-8 MIN4 Linda Lane Harvey Rd. to 560' SE of Harvey Rd. (CL) 0.11 100% I-1 S. Texas Ave. and Deacon Dr. Signal 50% I-2 Holleman Rd. and S. Texas Ave. Improvement 50% I-3 S. Texas Ave. and Walton Dr. Signal 50% I-4 University Dr. and University Towne Center Signal 100%  
Note: The 10-Year Roadway Impact Fee CIP is not in a prioritized order. 
Table 2.B. 10-Year Roadway Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan-Service Area B 
Service 
Area Proj. # IF Class Roadway Limits Length 
(mi) % In 
Service 
Area SA B A-4, B-1 MAJ6(1/3) S. Texas Ave Harvey Mitchell Pkwy. to Deacon Dr. 0.68 50% B-2, C-1 MAJ6 Rock Prairie Rd. (1) Normand Dr. to SH 6 0.48 50% B-3, C-2 MAJ2 Rock Prairie Rd. (2) 1,500' E. of Holleman Dr. (CL) to Wellborn Rd. 0.64 50% B-4 MAJ2 Rock Prairie Rd. (3) 360' W. of Great Oaks Dr. (CL) to Holleman Dr. 0.74 100% B-5 MIN4 Holleman Dr. (1) Rock Prairie Rd. to N. Graham Rd. 0.31 100% B-6 MIN4 Holleman Dr. (2) N. Dowling Rd. to Rock Prairie Rd. 1.54 100% B-7 MAJ6(1/3) Wellborn Rd. University Dr. to Harvey Mitchell Pkwy. 2.40 100% B-8 MAJ2 Luther St. Penberthy Rd. to Marion Pugh Dr. 0.27 100% B-9 MIN4 Penberthy Rd. George Bush Dr. to Luther St. 0.40 100% B-10 MAJ2 Turkey Creek Rd. S. Traditions Dr. to Raymond Stotzer Pkwy. 0.63 100% B-11 MAJ2 F and B Rd. Turkey Creek Rd. to Harvey Mitchell Pkwy. 0.46 100% B-12 MAJ6(1/3) University Dr. Harvey Mitchell Pkwy. to Wellborn Rd. 1.31 100% I-1 S. Texas Ave. and Deacon Dr. Signal 50% I-2 Holleman Rd. and S. Texas Ave. Improvement 50% I-3 S. Texas Ave. and Walton Dr. Signal 50% I-5 Wellborn Rd. and George Bush Dr. 50%  
Note: The 10-Year Roadway Impact Fee CIP is not in a prioritized order. 
Table 2.C. 10-Year Roadway Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan-Service Area C 
Service 
Area Proj. # IF Class Roadway Limits Length 
(mi) % In 
Service 
Area SA C B-2, C-1 MAJ6 Rock Prairie Rd. (1) Normand Dr. to SH 6 0.48 50% B-3, C-2 MAJ2 Rock Prairie Rd. (2) 1,500' E. of Holleman Dr. (CL) to Wellborn Rd. 0.64 50% C-3 MAJ2 N. Graham Rd. Old Wellborn Rd. to 2,075' W. of Old Wellborn Rd. (CL) 0.39 100% C-4 MAJ4 Wellborn Rd. (1) Capstone Dr. to Greens Prairie Rd. 1.24 100% C-5 MAJ4 Wellborn Rd. (2) Greens Prairie Rd. to 540' S. of Greens Prairie Trl. 1.13 100% C-6 MIN4 Capstone/Barron Realignment Wellborn Rd. to 210' W. of Piccadilly Cir. 0.31 100% C-7 MIN4 Barron Rd. (1) 210' W. of Piccadilly Cir. to Barron Cut off Rd. 0.13 100% C-8 MIN4(1/2) Barron Rd. (2) Barron Cut Off Rd. to William D. Fitch Pkwy. 0.13 100% C-9 MIN4 Barron Rd. (3) William D. Fitch Pkwy. to Decatur Dr. 1.27 100% C-10 MIN4(1/2) WS. Phillips Pkwy. (1) Barron Rd. to 1,740' S. of Barron Cut Off Rd. 0.52 100% C-11 MIN4(1/2) WS Phillips Pkwy. (2) 1,740' S. of Barron Cut Off Rd. to Odell Ln. 0.44 100% C-12 MAJ2 Etonburg Barron Cut Off Rd. to McCullough Rd. Extension 0.33 100% C-13 MAJ2 McCullough Rd. Extension 2,530' E. of Wellborn Rd. to WS Phillips Pkwy. 0.60 100% C-14 MAJ2 S. Dowling/McCullough I & G Rd. to 2,485' E. of I & G Rd. 0.47 100% C-15 MAJ2 Future 2 Lane Major Collector S. Dowling/McCullough to Greens Prairie Rd. Extension 0.27 100% C-16 MAJ2 Greens Prairie Rd. Extension (1) I & G rd. to 565' E. of I & G Rd. (CL) 0.11 100% C-17 MAJ2 Greens Prairie Rd. Extension (2) 965' W. of Wellborn Rd. (CL) to Wellborn Rd. 0.19 100% C-18 MIN4 Greens Prairie Rd. (1) Wellborn Rd. to Royder Rd. 0.08 100% C-19 MAJ2 Greens Prairie Rd. (2) Royder Rd. to 750' E. of Turnberry Cir. 0.64 100% C-20 MAJ2 Greens Prairie Rd. (3) 750' E. of Turnberry Cir. to Greens Prairie Trl. 0.52 100% C-21 MIN4 Royder Rd. Greens Prairie Rd. to 885' S. of Greens Prairie Trl. 1.07 100% C-22 MIN4 Greens Prairie Trl. (1) Wellborn Rd. to 1,000' W. of Woodlake Dr. 1.28 100% C-23 MIN4 Greens Prairie Trl. (4) 465' E. of Future Etonburg to Arrington Rd. 1.44 100% C-24 MIN4 WS Phillips Pkwy. Extension Greens Prairie Rd. to Arrington Rd. 1.54 100% C-25 MAJ2 Victoria Ave. Southern Plantation Dr. to William D. Fitch Pkwy. 0.48 100% I-6 William D. Fitch Pkwy. and Victoria Ave. Signal 100% I-7 Wellborn Rd. and S. Dowling Rd. Signal 100%  
 Note: The 10-Year Roadway Impact Fee CIP is not a prioritized order. 
Table 2.D. 10-Year Roadway Impact Fee Capital Improvements Plan-Service Area D 
Service 
Area Proj. # IF Class Roadway Limits Length 
(mi) % In 
Service 
Area A-5, D-1 MAJ4 Rock Prairie Rd. (1) Medical Ave. to Bird Pond Rd. 0.45 50% A-7, D-2 MIN4 Bird Pond Rd. Rock Prairie Rd. to 4,830' NE of Bird Pond Estate (CL) 1.33 50% D-3 MAJ4 Rock Prairie Rd. (2) Bird Pond Rd. to Bradley Rd. 0.68 100% D-4 MIN4 Rock Prairie Rd. (3) Bradley Rd. to 2,610' E. of Campbell Ct. (CL) 3.21 100% D-5 MAJ2 Lakeway Dr. (1) Medical Ave. to Pebble Creek Pkwy. 1.10 100% D-6 MAJ2 Lakeway Dr. (2) Pebble Creek Pkwy. to 1,910' N. of William D. Fitch Pkwy. 0.49 100% D-7 MAJ2 Lakeway Dr. (3) 1,910' N. of William D. Fitch Pkwy. to William D. Fitch Pkwy. 0.36 100% D-8 MAJ2 Lakeway Dr. (4) 940' S. of Technology Way to Future Nantucket Dr. 0.61 100% D-9 MAJ2 Ritchey Rd. SH 6 NBFR to Rock Prairie Rd. 0.79 100% D-10 MIN4 Bird Pond Rd. Extension SH 6 to Rock Prairie Rd. 0.94 100% D-11 MAJ2 Pebble Creek Pkwy. (1) SH 6 NBFR to William D. Fitch Pkwy. 1.52 100% D-12 MAJ2 Pebble Creek Pkwy. (2) Royal Adelade Dr. to St. Andrews Dr. 0.36 100% D-13 MAJ2 Pebble Creek Pkwy. (3) St. Andrews Dr. to Future Nantucket Dr. 0.69 100% D-14 MAJ6(1/3) William D. Fitch Pkwy. (1) Lakeway Dr. to Rock Prairie Rd. 1.51 100% D-15 MAJ6 William D. Fitch Pkwy. (2) Rock Prairie Rd. to 9,700' E. of Tonkaway Lake Rd. (CL) 3.74 100% D-16 MIN4 Future Nantucket Dr. SH 6 to Easy City Limits 2.60 100% D-17 MAJ2 Future East-West Major Collector Pebble Creek Pkwy. to East City Limits 1.11 100% D-18 MAJ2 Future North-South Major Collector Future East-West Major Collector to Future Nantucket Dr. 0.63 100% D-19 MIN4 Barron Rd. Extension Lakeway Dr. to Rock Prairie Rd. 1.14 100%  
 Note: The 10-Year Roadway Impact Fee CIP is not in a prioritized order. 




Exhibit R: Maximum Fee Per Service Unit for Roadway Impact Fees 
Service Areas Maximum Assessable 
Roadway Impact Fee 
Per Service Unit Service Area A $       1,061 Service Area B $       1,072 Service Area C $       2,556 Service Area D $       4,004  
  
Exhibit S: Collection Rate Per Service Unit for Roadway Impact Fees 
Date of building 
permit 
application 12/1/2016-11/30/2017 12/1/2017-11/30/2018 On or After 12/1/2018 Service Areas Land Use Type Land Use Type Land Use Type Res. Non-Res. Res. Non-Res. Res. Non-Res. A $0.00 $0.00 $187.50 $40.00 $375.00 $80.00 B $0.00 $0.00 $187.50 $40.00 $375.00 $80.00 C $0.00 $0.00 $187.50 $40.00 $375.00 $80.00 D $0.00 $0.00 $187.50 $40.00 $375.00 $80.00  
(Ord. No. 2016-3840, pt. 1(15-8), 11-10-2016) 
Secs. 107-74-107-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS 

Sec. 107-94. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  The property owner or applicant for new development may appeal the following decisions to the Director of Planning and Development Services, or his or her designee: 
(1)  The applicability of an impact fee to the development; 
(2)  The value of the impact fee due; 
(3)  The availability or the value of an offset or credit; 
(4)  The application of an offset or credit against an impact fee due; and/or 
(5)  The amount of the refund due, if any. 
(b)  All appeals shall be taken within 30 days of notice of the action from which the appeal is taken. 
(c)  The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the value of the fee or the value of the offset or credit was not calculated according to the applicable impact fee schedule or the guidelines established for determining offsets and credits. 
(d)  The appellant may appeal the decision of the Director of Planning and Development Services to the Council. A notice of appeal to the Council must be filed by the applicant with the City Secretary within 30 days following the Director's decision. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient surety satisfactory to the City Attorney in an amount equal to the Director's determination of the impact fee due, the development application, utility application, subdivision plat, building permit or other required City permit or authorization for development may be processed and issued while the appeal is pending. 
(Ord. No. 2016-3814, exh. A(15-9), 9-22-2016) 
State Law reference- Judicial appeals, Texas Local Government Code  395.077. 
Appendix A - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- A memo dated Jan. 5, 2018, changed the numbering of former App. A. by removing "12-" from the section numbers. All cross references have been updated. 

Article 1. - General Provisions 

Sec. 1.1. - Short Title. 
This Ordinance shall be officially known and cited as the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) of the City of College Station, Texas. References to "this Ordinance" or "this UDO" shall be interpreted as references to this Unified Development Ordinance. 
Sec. 1.2. - Authority. 
This UDO is adopted under authority of the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including particularly Chapters 211 and 212, Texas Local Government Code, and pursuant to the provisions of the Charter and Ordinances of the City of College Station, Texas. 
Sec. 1.3. - Scope and Purpose. 
This UDO is adopted for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of College Station. More specifically, this UDO provides for the division of land into different districts, regulations pertaining to such districts, regulations for the subdivision of land and drainage regulations pertaining thereto. These regulations are designed in accordance with a comprehensive plan. The City of College Station's Comprehensive Plan is the fundamental guide to all decisions made under this UDO. In order to implement the broad goals of the plan, this UDO regulates land use and the division of land in order to achieve objectives of the plan that include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  Promote the beneficial, economic, and appropriate development of all land and the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well-considered plan; 
B.  Protect the character and the established pattern of desirable development in each area; 
C.  Prevent or minimize land-use incompatibilities and conflicts among different land uses; 
D.  Establish a process that effectively and fairly applies the regulations and standards of this UDO and respects the rights of property owners and the interests of citizens; and 
E.  Implements the Comprehensive Plan through compliance with its individual elements. 
Sec. 1.4. - Jurisdiction. 
A.  Land Within the City Limits. 
Except as set forth below, this UDO applies to all land within the City limits of the City of College Station. All structures and land uses constructed or commenced after the effective date of this UDO, and all enlargements of, additions to, changes in, and relocations of existing structures and uses occurring after the effective date of this UDO shall be subject to this UDO. 
B.  Land Within the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction of College Station. 
The City of College Station and Brazos County are, jointly, the primary platting authority in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) in Brazos County. Burleson County is the primary platting authority in that portion of the City's ETJ which lies in Burleson County. The following Sections of this UDO shall apply to all properties outside the City limits of College Station, but lying within the City's ETJ as established by the Municipal Annexation Act: 
1.  Applicable portions of Section 7.5, Signs (ref. Section 1-30, City of College Station Code of Ordinances); 
2.  Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements; 
3.  Articles 10, Enforcement; and 
4.  Applicable definitions within Article 11, Definitions. 
C.  Land Zoned BioCorridor Planned Development District. 
The City of College Station and the City of Bryan have adopted common development processes and standards for land zoned BioCorridor Planned Development District in each City's jurisdiction. The following Sections of the UDO shall not apply to property zoned BioCorridor Planned Development District: 
1.  Article 3, Development Review Procedures; 
2.  Article 6, Use Regulations; 
3.  Article 7, General Development Standards; and 
4.  Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements, with the exception of the Requirements for Park Land Dedication Section. Parkland Dedication shall remain in effect for property within the BioCorridor Planned Development District. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 1.5. - Applicability. 
A.  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this UDO shall be held to be minimum requirements (including cases where minimum requirements are stated as a maximum standard) adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, and general welfare. 
B.  Whenever the requirements of this UDO are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the requirement that is most restrictive or that imposes higher standards as determined by the Administrator shall govern. 
C.  The issuance of any permit, certificate, or approval in accordance with the standards and requirements of this UDO shall not relieve the recipient of such permit, certificate, or approval from the responsibility of complying with all other applicable requirements of any other City, state, or federal agency having jurisdiction over the structures or land uses for which the permit, certificate, or approval was issued. 
Sec. 1.6. - Relationship to the Comprehensive Plan. 
A.  It is intended that this UDO implement the City's planning policies as adopted as part of the City's Comprehensive Plan, as amended and periodically updated. 
B.  The City's Comprehensive Plan, and any associated plans or studies adopted by the City Council, shall be required prior to, or concurrent with, permitting development which would conflict with such plan. 
C.  The alignments of proposed thoroughfares, bicycle and pedestrian facilities, and other linear public facilities and infrastructure described and/or depicted as part of the City's Comprehensive Plan and associated master plans or studies are generalized locations that are subject to modifications to fit local conditions, budget constraints, and right-of-way and easement availability that warrant further refinement as development occurs. Alignments approved by the Administrator that are within one thousand (1,000) feet of the alignment described and/or shown on the adopted plan documents will not require an ordinance amendment to the associated plan. The Administrator may update Geographical Information Systems (GIS) map layers and other representations within the aforementioned discretion to reflect existing, approved or studied conditions as development occurs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-3961 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.7. - Effective Date. 
This UDO shall become effective and be in full force and effect ninety (90) days from its passage and approval by the City Council, as duly attested by the Mayor and City Secretary. 
Sec. 1.8. - Annual Review. 
The City Council shall review annually the Comprehensive Plan and this UDO. The review, or any delay in the review by the City Council, shall not affect the legality of the Comprehensive Plan or this UDO. 
Sec. 1.9. - Severability. 
Should any section or provision of this UDO be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Sec. 1.10. - Transitional Provisions. 
A.  Pending Construction. 
1.  Building Permits. 
As provided by Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code, nothing in this UDO shall require any change in plans, construction, size or designated use of any building, structure or part thereof that has been granted a building permit prior to the effective date of this UDO, or any amendment to this UDO, provided construction shall begin consistent with the terms and conditions of the building permit and proceed to completion in a timely manner. 
2.  Approved Site Plans. 
Nothing in this UDO shall require a change in a site plan approved prior to the effective date of this UDO, provided a building permit is issued prior to expiration of the site plan, and construction begins consistent with the terms and conditions of the building permit and proceeds to completion in a timely manner. 
B.  Zoning Districts. 
1.  Retained Districts. 
The following zoning districts and district names in effect prior to the effective date of this UDO and represented on the official zoning map of the City of College Station shall remain in effect. Those districts are shown on the following table: 
District Name Effective Date WPC Wolf Pen Creek Dev. Corridor June 13, 2003 NG-1 Core Northgate June 13, 2003 NG-3 Residential Northgate June 13, 2003 CU College and University June 13, 2003 PDD Planned Development June 13, 2003 OV Corridor Overlay June 13, 2003  
2.  Renamed Districts. 
The following district, M-1, known as Planned Industrial prior to the adoption of this UDO, shall henceforth be renamed M-1, Light Industrial. 
District New Name Effective Date M-1 Light Industrial June 13, 2003  
The following district, R-6, known as Apartment High Density prior to the adoption of this UDO, shall hence forth be designated R-6, High Density Multi-Family. 
District New Name Effective Date R-6 High Density Multi-Family June 13, 2003  
The following district, NG-2, known as NG-2, Commercial Northgate prior to this amendment of this UDO, shall henceforth be renamed NG-2, Transitional Northgate. 
District New Name Effective Date NG-2 Transitional Northgate April 2, 2006  
The following district, O, known as A-P Administrative Professional prior to this amendment of this UDO, shall henceforth be renamed O, Office. 
District New Name Effective Date O Office October 7, 2012  
The following district, GC, known as C-1 General Commercial prior to this amendment of this UDO, shall henceforth be renamed GC, General Commercial. 
District New Name Effective Date GC General Commercial October 7, 2012  
The following district, CI, known as C-2 Commercial Industrial prior to this amendment of this UDO, shall henceforth be renamed CI, Commercial Industrial. 
District New Name Effective Date CI Commercial Industrial October 7, 2012  
The following district, R, known as A-O Agricultural Open prior to the amendment of this UDO, shall henceforth be renamed R, Rural. 
District New Name Effective Date R Rural September 22, 2013  
The following district, E, known as A-OR Rural Residential Subdivision prior to the amendment of this UDO, shall henceforth be designated E, Estate. 
District New Name Effective Date E Estate September 22, 2013  
The following district, GS, known as R-1 Single-Family Residential prior to this amendment of this UDO, shall henceforth be renamed GS, General Suburban. 
District New Name Effective Date GS General Suburban September 22, 2013  
The following district, D, known as R-2 Duplex Residential prior to this amendment of this UDO, shall henceforth be renamed D, Duplex. 
District New Name Effective Date D Duplex September 22, 2013  
The following district, T, known as R-3 Townhouse prior to this amendment of this UDO, shall henceforth be renamed T, Townhouse. 
District New Name Effective Date T Townhouse September 22, 2013  
The following district, MHP, known as R-7 Manufactured Home Park prior to this amendment of this UDO, shall henceforth be renamed MHP, Manufactured Home Park. 
District New Name Effective Date MHP Manufactured Home Park September 22, 2013  
3.  Combined Districts. 
The districts listed below are hereby combined into the single zoning district hereafter designated as R-4, Multi-Family. 
Combined
Districts Name Effective Date R-4 Apartment/Low Density June 13, 2003 R-5 Apartment/Medium Density  
The districts listed below are hereby combined into the single zoning district hereafter designated as GC, General Commercial. 
Combined
Districts Name Effective Date C-B Business Commercial June 13, 2003 C-1 General Commercial  
The districts listed below are hereby combined into the single zoning district hereafter designated as C-3, Light Commercial. 
Combined
Districts Name Effective Date C-3 Planned Commercial June 13, 2003 C-N Neighborhood Business  
4.  Retired Districts. 
The following districts are no longer eligible for Zoning Map Amendment requests. Properties with the following designations at the time of this amendment retain all uses, regulations, and requirements associated with these districts. 
Retired
District Name Effective Date R-1B Single-Family Residential September 22, 2013 Retired
District Name Effective Date R-4 Multi-Family December 28, 2014 R-6 High Density Multi-Family December 28, 2014 C-3 Light Commercial October 7, 2012 R&D Research & Development October 7, 2012 M-1 Light Industrial October 7, 2012 M-2 Heavy Industrial October 7, 2012  
5.  New Districts. 
The following districts are hereby created and added to those in effect at the time of adoption of this UDO. 
New District Name Effective Date RDD Redevelopment District June 13, 2003 P-MUD Planned Mixed Use Development June 13, 2003 NAP Natural Areas Protected October 7, 2012 SC Suburban Commercial October 7, 2012 BP Business Park October 7, 2012 BPI Business Park Industrial October 7, 2012 RS Restricted Suburban September 22, 2013 MF Multi-Family December 28, 2014 MU Mixed-Use December 28, 2014 WE Wellborn Estate August 7, 2016 WRS Wellborn Restricted Suburban August 7, 2016 WC Wellborn Commercial August 7, 2016  
6.  Redesignated District. 
Henceforth all areas designated Existing Rural Residential (A-OX) shall be redesignated A-O Agricultural-Open. 
Previous
District Name Effective Date A-OX Existing Rural Residential June 13, 2003 Redesignated 
District Name A-O Agricultural-Open  
Henceforth all areas designated Planned Unit Development (PUD) shall be redesignated Planned Development Districts (PDD). The individual ordinances that created the PUDs shall remain in effect, along with all provisions and conditions listed therein. Any modification of a former PUD shall follow the provisions for PDDs listed herein. 
Previous
District Name Effective Date PUD Planned Unit Development June 13, 2003 Redesignated 
District Name PDD Planned Development Districts  
Henceforth all areas designated R-1A shall be redesignated R-1, Single-Family Residential. 
Previous
District Name Effective Date R-1A Single-Family Residential June 13, 2003 Redesignated 
District Name R-1 Single-Family Residential  
7.  Deleted Districts. 
The following districts not existing on the official zoning map on the effective date of this UDO are hereby deleted: 
Deleted
District Name Effective Date C-PUD Commercial Planned Unit Dev. June 13, 2003 C-NG Commercial Northgate June 13, 2003 KO Krenek Tap Overlay April 22, 2018  
(Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-4001 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-2018) 
Article 2. - Development Review Bodies 

Sec. 2.1. - City Council. 
A.  General. 
The City Council will be responsible for final action regarding the text of this UDO and the Official Zoning Map. 
B.  Powers and Duties. 
As provided and established within the City of College Station Charter, the City Council has the following powers and duties regarding this UDO: 
1.  Appointments. 
The City Council shall have the responsibility of appointing and removing any member of the Planning and Zoning Commission (P&Z), Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA), Landmark Commission (LC), Design Review Board (DRB), and Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Advisory Board. 
2.  Final Action. 
The City Council shall hear and take final action on the following: 
a.  Development agreements and oversize participation agreements for City participation in cost-sharing of infrastructure improvements; 
b.  Conditional use permits; 
c.  Zoning map amendments (rezoning); 
d.  Concept Plans for Planned Development Districts (PDD) and Planned Mixed-Use Districts (P-MUD); 
e.  Text amendments; 
f.  Comprehensive Plan amendments; 
g.  Impact fee land use decisions and Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) priorities; 
h.  Annexations; 
i.  Appeal of the P&Z's decision regarding a development exaction appeal; 
j.  Appeal of the DRB's denial of a Gateway Grant; 
k.  Appeal of the LC's denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness; 
l.  Appeal of the LC's decision of a Certificate of Demolition; and 
m.  Petitions to form a Municipal Utility District. 
(Ord. No. 2015-3640 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 2.2. - Planning and Zoning Commission. 
A.  Creation. 
The City Council shall provide for the appointment of a Planning and Zoning Commission and the regulations and restrictions adopted shall be pursuant to the provisions of applicable statutory requirements of the State of Texas. 
B.  Membership and Terms. 
1.  Number, Appointment. 
A Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby created to consist of seven (7) members. Members shall be residents of the City and eligible voters. Additionally, one (1) or more ad hoc members may be appointed as needed or desired to review impact fee land use assumptions and capital improvements plans and to perform such other duties in accordance with Chapter 395 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
2.  Terms. 
The term of office is three years, provided, however, that: (a) two of the four (4) commissioners whose terms expire January 2020 shall be appointed to a two year term; and (b) the three commissioners whose terms expire January 2022 shall be appointed to a two year term. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three years. 
3.  Term Limits. 
Terms of office shall be limited to two consecutive three-year terms or six (6) consecutive years. A person appointed to fill an unexpired term may be appointed to only one (1) additional consecutive term. 
4.  Vacancies. 
Vacancies shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term of any member whose position becomes vacant. 
C.  Officers, Meetings, Quorum. 
1.  Officers. 
A Chairperson shall be appointed annually by the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall select a Vice-Chair from among its members as needed. 
2.  Meetings. 
Members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet regularly and the Chairperson shall designate the time and place of such meetings. All meetings of the Commission where a quorum is present shall be open to the public. 
3.  Quorum. 
Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. Any recommendation advanced to the City Council without a majority of positive votes from those members present shall be deemed a negative report. 
4.  Rules of Proceeding. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure. 
5.  Minutes. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Administrator and shall be a public record. 
D.  Powers and Duties . 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Comprehensive Plan . 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make recommendations for the effective coordination of the various City departments, committees, and boards, in implementing the Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  Recommendations . 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and make recommendations to the City Council subject to the terms and conditions set forth for such uses in this UDO for the following: 
a.  Conditional use permits; 
b.  Zoning map amendments (rezoning); 
c.  Concept Plans for Planned Development Districts (PDD) and Planned Mixed-Use Districts (P-MUD); 
d.  Text amendments; 
e.  Comprehensive Plan amendments; 
f.  Impact fee land use decisions; 
g.  Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) priorities; 
h.  Annexations; and 
i.  Petitions to form a Municipal Utility District. 
3.  Final Action . 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear and take final action on the following: 
a.  Applicable appeals of decisions of the Design Review Board; 
b.  Preliminary plans, final plats, replats, development plats, and minor plats not approved by staff as set forth in the Plat Review Section in Article 3 of this UDO; 
c.  Waivers of the standards in Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements; 
d.  Development exaction appeal; 
e.  Appeal of the Administrator's denial of a final minor or amending plat; 
f.  Appeal of the Administrator's determination regarding applicability of plat requirements; 
g.  Appeal of the Administrator's denial of an alternative parking plan; and 
h.  Appeal of the Administrator's interpretation of the provisions of Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
E.  Staff. 
1.  The Administrator shall provide staff, as needed, to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
2.  Where ministerial acts have not been completed, the staff shall insure that the changes to plats are completed as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2015-3640 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-26-2015; Ord. No. 2016-3749 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3967 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-14-2017; Ord. No. 2018-3991 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4030 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 7-26-2018; Ord. No. 2019-4089 , Pt. 4(Exh. C), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 2.3. - Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
A.  Creation. 
The City Council shall provide for the appointment of a Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) and the regulations and restrictions adopted shall be pursuant to the provisions of applicable statutory requirements of the State of Texas. 
B.  Membership and Terms. 
1.  Number, Appointment. 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of five (5) members who are residents of the City and eligible voters. Appointment of members shall be made by the City Council. The City Council may provide for the appointment of four (4) alternate members of the Board of Adjustment who shall serve in the absence of one (1) or more regular members when requested to do so. 
2.  Terms. 
Each member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, except that two (2) members appointed initially shall have terms of only one (1) year. After the initial appointments, two (2) members shall be appointed in odd-numbered years to maintain a membership of five (5) members. Any alternate members appointed shall serve for the same period as the regular members and any vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the regular members. 
3.  Vacancies. 
Vacancies shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
C.  Officers, Meetings, Quorum. 
1.  Officers. 
A Chairperson shall be appointed annually by the City Council. The ZBA shall select a Vice-Chair from among its members as needed. 
2.  Meetings. 
Meetings of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. Such Chairperson, or in his absence the acting Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board where a quorum is present shall be open to the public. 
3.  Quorum. 
All cases heard by the Zoning Board of Adjustment will always be heard by a minimum number of four (4) members. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for transaction of business and no variance or appeal shall be granted without a concurring vote of four (4) members. 
4.  Rules of Proceeding. 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt its own rules of procedure. 
5.  Minutes. 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, indicating the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or fails to vote, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes and records shall be filed in the office of the Administrator and shall be a public record. 
D.  Powers and Duties. 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Variances. 
To hear and decide requests for variance from the setback, parking number or dimensions, parking island number or dimensions, sign (excluding sign regulations in the ETJ), maximum height, or lot size or dimension requirements of this UDO. Also, to hear and decide drainage variances (excluding landscaping provisions) when strict application of the provisions of the ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship. 
Specifically excluded from the variance process are requests for relief from a site plan requirement imposed by the Administrator when the requirement was necessary to gain compliance with the criteria for approval of a site plan in Section 3.6.E, Site Plan Review Criteria. Such requests will be heard and decided by the Design Review Board. 
Also excluded are roadway and infrastructure construction criteria and other subdivision regulations contained with Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements. Such requests shall require waivers granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
2.  Administrative Appeals. 
To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, interpretation, or determination made by the Administrator or his designee in the enforcement of this UDO. 
3.  Official Zoning Map. 
To interpret the intent of the Official Zoning Map where uncertainty exists because the physical features on the ground vary from those on the Official Zoning Map. 
4.  Easterwood Field Airport Zoning. 
To hear and decide requests for appeals, special exemptions, and variances related to the Easterwood Field Airport Zoning Ordinance. 
E.  Staff. 
The Administrator shall provide staff, as needed, to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-10-2013) 
Sec. 2.4. - Landmark Commission. 
A.  Creation. 
A Landmark Commission is hereby established by the City of College Station for the purpose of enhancing the City's ability to identify and protect historically and/or culturally significant districts, areas, sites, buildings, and structures by bringing expertise from the community in those areas related to the designation of Historic Preservation Overlay Districts and protection of the contributing elements within them. 
B.  Membership and Terms. 
1.  The Landmark Commission shall consist of seven (7) regular members and two (2) alternate members. Six (6) of the regular members and the two (2) alternate members shall be appointed by the City Council. City Council shall apportion membership according to the following fields of expertise or specialized knowledge: 
a.  One (1) member shall represent one (1) of the following fields or professions: 
1)  History or 
2)  Archaeology 
b.  Two (2) members shall be the owners of the following: 
1)  Property in the City of College Station Historic Marker Program or 
2)  Property within a Historic Preservation Overlay District. If no Historic Preservation Overlay District has yet been applied to property in the City of College Station, a property owner(s) of land platted prior to 1970 may be considered. 
c.  Two (2) members shall represent any combination of the following fields or professions: 
1)  Architecture: an architect, previously registered architect, architect registered in another state, or professor in the field of architecture; 
2)  Landscape architecture: a landscape architect, previously registered landscape architect, landscape architect registered in another state, or professor in the field of landscape architecture; 
3)  Urban planning: a certified planner, previously certified planner, a planner with at least three (3) years of municipal planning experience, or professor in the field of urban planning; or 
4)  Historical preservation specialist: an experienced professional who provides technical and strategic expertise to promote the viability, reuse, and integrity of historic buildings and/or property. 
d.  One (1) member shall represent one (1) of the following fields or professions: 
1)  Banking, finance, or economics; 
2)  Real estate; or 
3)  Law. 
e.  One (1) alternate shall represent the membership criteria identified above in subsection b. 
f.  One (1) alternate shall represent any of the fields identified above in subsections a, c, or d. 
The seventh regular member shall be the Chairman of the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee or his designee. 
The City Council shall prioritize Landmark Commission candidates within each subsection above by their demonstrated expertise and interest in historic preservation. In the event any of the memberships assigned to a particular field of expertise or specialized knowledge identified above in subsections a, b, c, or d cannot be timely filled (in the judgment of the City Council) with a qualified candidate, the City Council may appoint citizens-at-large that have demonstrated interest in historic preservation to fill such places. 
2.  Members shall be appointed for three-year terms or until their successors are appointed. Initially, one (1) member from subsection b and one (1) member from subsection c shall have terms of only one (1) year; the members of subsections a and d shall have terms of only two (2) years; and one (1) member from subsection b and one (1) member from subsection c shall have terms of three (3) years. After the initial appointments, two (2) members shall be appointed each year. 
3.  The Landmark Commission shall comply with the Open Meetings Act. 
C.  Officers, Meetings, Quorum. 
1.  Officers. 
A Chairperson shall be appointed annually by the City Council. The Commission shall select a Vice-Chair from among its members, as needed. 
2.  Meetings. 
Members of the Landmark Commission shall meet monthly and the Chairperson shall designate the time and place of such meetings. All meetings of the Commission where a quorum is present shall be open to the public. 
3.  Quorum. 
Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. Any recommendation or decision which does not receive a majority of positive votes shall be deemed a negative report. 
4.  Rules of Proceeding. 
The Landmark Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure. 
5.  Minutes. 
The Landmark Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Administrator and shall be a public record. 
D.  Powers and Duties. 
The Landmark Commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Duties. 
a.  Review and approve surveys conducted and maintained by the City that include an inventory of significant historic, architectural, and cultural resources within the City of College Station according to guidelines established by the Texas Historical Commission; 
b.  Utilize such surveys to identify potential property appropriate for the application of Historic Preservation Overlays; 
c.  Review and approve surveys conducted and maintained by the City that include an inventory of all properties located within a Historic Preservation Overlay District within the City of College Station; 
d.  Nominate properties to the National Register of Historic Places; 
e.  Establish an ad hoc three-person Economic Review Panel when a property owner in a Historic Preservation Overlay District requests a Certificate of Demolition based on the reason that no economically viable use of the property exists. The Economic Review Panel must be comprised of three (3) independent experts knowledgeable in one (1) or more of the following fields: the economics of real estate, building renovation, or redevelopment. "Independent" as used in this subparagraph means that the expert has no financial interest in the property, its renovation, or redevelopment; is not an employee of the property owner; is not a City employee; is not a member of the Landmark Commission; and is not compensated for serving on the Economic Review Panel. The Economic Review Panel must consist of one (1) person selected by the Landmark Commission, one (1) person selected by the property owner, and one (1) person selected by the first two (2) appointees. If the first two (2) appointees cannot agree on a third appointee within thirty (30) calendar days after submission of all of the required documentation supporting the application, the third appointee will be selected by the Administrator within five (5) days. Within thirty-five (35) calendar days after submission of all of the required documentation supporting the application, all appointments to the Economic Review Panel shall be made; 
f.  Act in an advisory role to the City Council of the City of College Station, all appointed boards and commissions, and City departments regarding the protection of local historic, architectural, and cultural resources; 
g.  Review and make recommendations to the appropriate County Historical Commission of all proposed National Registration nominations for properties within the City of College Station; and 
h.  Prepare and submit annually to the City Council a report summarizing the work completed during the previous year. 
2.  Recommendations. 
The Landmark Commission shall make recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission subject to the terms and conditions set forth for such uses in this UDO for the following: 
a.  The effective coordination of the various City departments, committees, and boards, in implementing the Comprehensive Plan as it relates to historic preservation; 
b.  The adoption of text amendments as they relate to the designation of Historic Preservation Overlay Districts and the processes and standards for properties within Historic Preservation Overlay Districts; and 
c.  The designation of Historic Preservation Overlay Districts. 
The Landmark Commission shall make recommendations to the City Council for the following: 
a.  The utilization of state, federal, or private funds to promote the preservation of Historic Preservation Overlay Districts within the City of College Station, and 
b.  The acceptance of the dedication of Historic Preservation Easements for the purpose of historic preservation. 
3.  Final Action. 
The Landmark Commission shall hear and take final action on the following: 
a.  Applications for Certificates of Appropriateness, 
b.  Applications for Certificates of Demolition, and 
c.  Certifications of properties of Demolition by Neglect, notices to owners of certified Demolition by Neglect properties, and referrals for enforcement. 
E.  Staff. 
The Administrator shall provide staff, including a Historic Preservation Officer, as needed, to the Landmark Commission. 
Sec. 2.5. - Design Review Board. 
A.  Creation. 
A Design Review Board is hereby established by the City of College Station for the purpose of enhancing the City's ability to review sign, building, and site design issues, including architectural issues as specified in this UDO, by bringing expertise from the community to bear on these issues in designated design districts. 
B.  Membership and Terms. 
1.  The Design Review Board shall consist of seven (7) members. Six (6) of the members shall be appointed by the City Council. 
a.  The City Council shall appoint a representative with expertise from each of the following disciplines or groups: 
1)  Architecture; 
2)  Landscape architecture; 
3)  Business; and 
4)  Design district connection (e.g., developer, land owner, business owner, resident, or employee within a design district). 
b.  The City Council shall appoint two members that are citizens-at-large. 
c.  The seventh regular member shall be the Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission or his/her designee. 
2.  With the exception of the Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission or his/her designee who shall serve on this Board as long as the Chairperson serves as chair of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the term of office is three years, provided, however, that one (1) of the three members whose terms expire January 2020 shall be appointed to a two year term and two of the three members whose terms expire January 2022 shall be appointed to a two year term. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three years. 
3.  The Design Review Board is a governmental body and shall comply with the Open Meetings Act. 
C.  Officers, Meetings, Quorum. 
1.  Officers. 
A Chairperson shall be appointed annually by the City Council. The Board shall select a Vice-Chair from among its members as needed. 
2.  Meetings. 
Members of the Design Review Board shall meet regularly and the Chairperson shall designate the time and place of such meetings. All meetings of the Board where a quorum is present shall be open to the public. 
3.  Quorum. 
Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. Any recommendation or decision which does not receive a majority of positive votes from those members present shall be deemed a negative report. 
4.  Rules of Proceeding. 
The Design Review Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure. 
5.  Minutes. 
The Design Review Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Administrator and shall be a public record. 
D.  Powers and Duties. 
The Design Review Board has the following powers and duties: 
1.  Wolf Pen Creek District Review 
The Design Review Board shall hear and decide requests for waivers from the standards in the Wolf Pen Creek (WPC) subsection of the Design Districts Section of Article 5 of this UDO as limited to the possible waivers authorized by that subsection. 
2.  Wolf Pen Creek Parking Waivers. 
The Design Review Board shall hear and decide requests to vary from the amount of required parking in the Wolf Pen Creek District (WPC). 
3.  Northgate District Standards Waivers. 
The Design Review Board shall hear and decide requests to vary from the standards in the Northgate Districts (NG) subsection of the Design Districts Section of Article 5 of this UDO as limited to the possible Waivers authorized by that subsection. 
4.  Driveway Appeals. 
The Design Review Board shall hear appeals to decisions of the Development Engineer regarding driveway appeals. 
5.  Appeal of Requirement Based on Site Plan Review Criteria. 
The Design Review Board shall hear and decide appeals of the Administrator's application of site plan requirements to assure compliance with Sections 3.6.E, Site Plan Review Criteria, and 3.7.D, Additional Review Criteria for the WPC District. 
6.  Buffer Appeals. 
The Design Review Board shall hear appeals of buffer requirements listed in Section 7.7, Buffer Requirements. 
7.  Non-Residential Architectural Standards Appeals. 
The Design Review Board shall hear and decide waiver requests as specified in the Non-Residential Architectural Standards Section. 
8.  Non-Residential Architectural Standards Alternative Compliance. 
The Design Review Board shall hear and decide proposals for alternative compliance to the Non-Residential Architectural Standards. 
E.  Staff. 
The Administrator shall provide staff, as needed, to the Design Review Board. 
(Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-10-2013; Ord. No. 2015-3663 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-28-2015; Ord. No. 2016-3835 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-10-2016; Ord. No. 2018-3985 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-8-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4001 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 4-12-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4030 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 7-26-2018; Ord. No. 2019-4089 , Pt. 4(Exh. C), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 2.6. - Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Advisory Board. 
A.  Creation. 
A Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Advisory Board is hereby established by the City of College Station for the purpose of advising and recommending to the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission, and other appointed boards and commissions on all matters concerning bicycling, walking, and greenways. 
B.  Membership and Terms. 
1.  Number, Appointment. 
The Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Advisory Board shall consist of seven (7) members who are residents of the City and eligible voters. Appointment of members shall be made by the City Council. The Board shall consist of the following: 
a.  One (1) member shall represent one (1) of the following fields or professions: 
1)  Real estate; 
2)  Banking, finance, or economics; 
3)  Law. 
b.  One (1) member shall represent one (1) of the following fields or professions: 
1)  Recreation; 
2)  Health; 
3)  Kinesiology. 
c.  Two (2) members that are residents with a demonstrated interest in walking, running, bicycling or open space preservation. 
d.  One (1) member shall represent one (1) of the following fields or professions: 
1)  Environmental/Ecological Sciences; 
2)  Stormwater/Floodplain Management; 
3)  Natural Resources. 
e.  One (1) member shall represent one (1) of the following fields or professions: 
1)  Transportation Planning; 
2)  Engineering; 
3)  Architecture; 
4)  Landscape architecture; 
5)  Urban planning. 
The seventh regular member shall be the Chairman of the Council Transportation Committee or his designee. 
The City Council shall prioritized Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Advisory Board candidates within each subsection above by their demonstrated expertise. In the event any of the memberships assigned to a particular field of expertise or specialized knowledge identified in the above subsections cannot be timely filled (in the judgment of the City Council) with a qualified candidate, the City Council may appoint citizens-at-large that have demonstrated interest in bicycling, walking, and greenways to fill such places. 
2.  Terms. 
With the exception of the Chairman of the Council Transportation Committee or his/her designee who shall serve on this Board for as long as the Chairman serves on the Council Transportation Committee, the term of office is three years, provided, however, that: (a) two of the four (4) members whose terms expire January 2020 shall be appointed to a two year term; and (b) the two members whose terms expire January 2022 shall be appointed to a two year term. Thereafter, all appointments shall be for three years. 
3.  Vacancies. 
Vacancies shall be filled by the City Council for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. 
C.  Officers, Meetings, Quorum. 
1.  Officers. 
A Chairperson shall be appointed annually by the City Council. The Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Advisory Board shall select a Vice-Chairperson from among its members as needed. 
2.  Meetings. 
Members of the Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Advisory Board shall meet monthly and the Chairperson shall designate the time and place of such meetings. All meetings of the Board where a quorum is present shall be open to the public. 
3.  Quorum. 
Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for transaction of business. Any recommendation or decision which does not receive a majority of positive votes shall be deemed a negative report. 
4.  Rules of Proceeding. 
The Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Advisory Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure. 
5.  Minutes. 
The Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Advisory Board Shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the Administrator and shall be public record. 
D.  Powers and Duties. 
The Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Advisory Board shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Duties. 
a.  Support the implementation of the Transportation element of the Comprehensive Plan and the Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Master Plan; 
b.  Promote and encourage bicycling and walking as an accepted (alternate) form of transportation; 
c.  Review project designs related to bicycle, pedestrian, and greenway improvements, including review of plats, site plans, and capital improvement projects; 
d.  Assist in identifying and applying for alternative funding sources for bicycle, pedestrian, and greenway facilities, programs, services and projects; 
e.  Promote education and safety programs for bicyclists, pedestrians, and motorists; 
f.  Facilitate citizen participation in local governments' consideration of matters involving bicycle, pedestrian and greenway issues; 
g.  Promote intergovernmental and public/private coordination on bicycle, pedestrian, and greenway matters including working with local businesses and other organizations; and 
h.  Perform other duties as may be assigned it by the City; 
2.  Recommendations. 
The Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Advisory Board shall make recommendations to the Planning and Zoning Commission subject to the terms and conditions set forth for such uses in this UDO for the following: 
a.  The adoption of comprehensive plan amendments as they relate to bicycling, walking, and greenways; 
b.  The adoption of text amendments as they relate to bicycling, walking, and greenways; 
c.  The setting of impact fee/CIP priorities as they relate to bicycling, walking, and greenways. 
The Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Advisory Board shall make recommendations to the City Council for the following: 
a.  The adoption of comprehensive plan amendments as they relate to bicycling, walking, and greenways; 
b.  The adoption of text amendments as they relate to bicycling, walking, and greenways; 
c.  The setting of impact fee/CIP priorities as they relate to bicycling, walking, and greenways. 
E.  Staff. 
The Administrator shall provide staff, as needed, to the Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Advisory Board. 
(Per Ordinance No. 3265 (August 12, 2010); Ord. No. 2018-4030 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 7-26-2018; Ord. No. 2019-4089 , Pt. 4(Exh. C), 4-25-2019) 
Sec. 2.7. - BioCorridor Board. 
A.  Creation. 
A BioCorridor Board is hereby created for the purpose of enhancing the community's ability to consistently review subdivision, building, and site design issues of the unique, multi-jurisdictional BioCorridor Planned Development District. The BioCorridor Board shall bring governing expertise from each City and a representative of Texas A&M University to bear on these issues within the BioCorridor area. 
B.  Membership and Terms. 
1.  Number, Appointment. 
A BioCorridor Board is hereby created to consist of seven (7) members as follows: 
a.  Appointment of three (3) members shall be made by the College Station City Council. Two (2) of these appointments shall be members of the City's Planning and Zoning Commission. One (1) appointment shall be a member of the City Council. 
b.  Appointment of three (3) members shall be made by the Bryan City Council. Two (2) of these appointments shall be members of the City of Bryan's Planning and Zoning Commission. One (1) appointment shall be a member of the Bryan City Council. 
c.  Appointment of one (1) member shall be made by the Chancellor of the Texas A&M University System or his designee. This appointment shall be an employee of the Texas A&M University System. 
2.  Terms. 
a.  Terms of members of the BioCorridor Board shall be for two (2) years or until their successors are appointed. 
b.  Should a BioCorridor Board member no longer qualify for his or her position, that member's term shall be ended immediately upon such qualifying event (for example, if an appointed Planning and Zoning Commissioner is no longer a Commissioner for the City). 
3.  Vacancies. 
Vacancies shall be filled by the governing entity/person responsible for the appointment. 
C.  Officers, Meetings, Quorum. 
1.  Officers. 
A Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson shall be selected every two (2) years from among its members. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be municipal representatives and shall not be appointees from the same municipality. The Vice-Chairperson may act as Chairperson when the Chairperson is not available. 
2.  Meetings. 
Members of the BioCorridor Board shall meet as needed and the Chairperson shall designate the time and place of such meetings. All meetings of the Board where a quorum is present shall be open to the public. The BioCorridor Board shall comply with the Open Meetings Act. 
3.  Quorum. 
Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business. Any recommendations advanced to a different regulatory entity without a majority of positive votes from those members present shall be deemed a negative recommendation. 
4.  Rules of Proceeding. 
The BioCorridor Board may adopt its own rules of procedure consistent with this Ordinance. 
5.  Minutes. 
The BioCorridor Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the Planning and Development Services office of the City of Bryan and shall be a public record. A copy of all such records shall be delivered to the Planning and Development Services office of the City of College Station by the City of Bryan within ten (10) working days of filing. 
D.  Powers and Duties. 
The BioCorridor Board shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Recommendations. 
a.  The BioCorridor Board shall review and make recommendations to City Staff of College Station and Bryan regarding improvements in the public realm that further the aesthetics, identity, and access to and within the BioCorridor Planned Development District. 
b.  The BioCorridor Board shall review and make recommendations to the City's Planning and Zoning Commission regarding Waivers of the standards in the Subdivision Design and Improvements Section of the BioCorridor Planned Development District ordinance. 
2.  Final Action. 
The BioCorridor Board shall hear and take final action on the following: 
a.  Special District Identification Signs as set forth in the BioCorridor Planned Development District ordinance; 
b.  Temporary signs promoting positive communications as set forth in the BioCorridor Planned Development District ordinance; 
c.  Works of art and their locations when located in public right-of-way or other public area as set forth in the BioCorridor Planned Development District ordinance; 
d.  Appeal of the BioCorridor Review Committee's determination regarding applicability of plat requirements; 
e.  Appeal of the BioCorridor Review Committee's denial of a site plan as set forth in the Site Plan Review Section of the BioCorridor Planned Development District ordinance; 
f.  Waivers to the dimensional requirements and number of parking spaces required in the Off-Street Parking Requirements of the BioCorridor Planned Development District ordinance; 
g.  Appeal of the BioCorridor Review Committee's denial of an alternative parking plan; 
h.  Alternative Highway Buffers Standards as allowed in the BioCorridor Planned Development District ordinance; and 
i.  Appeal of the terms of the Highway Buffer Standards as set forth the BioCorridor Planned Development District ordinance. 
E.  Staff. 
The City of College Station and the City of Bryan shall provide staff support, as needed, to the BioCorridor Board. 
1.  BioCorridor Review Committee. 
The BioCorridor Review Committee will provide background information and recommendations to the Board as set forth in the BioCorridor Planned Development District ordinance. 
2.  Administrative Support. 
The City of College Station and/or the City of Bryan shall provide administrative support functions for each meeting, such as agenda posting and the filing of minutes. 
3.  Planning Representative. 
Where ministerial acts have not been completed, the Planning representative of the City in which the project is located shall ensure that the changes to plats and/or plans are completed as approved by the BioCorridor Board. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 2.8. - Administrator. 
A.  Designation . 
The City Manager shall designate the Administrator for the City of College Station. Where this UDO assigns a responsibility, power, or duty to the Administrator, the Administrator may delegate that responsibility, power, or duty to any other agent or employee of the City whom the Administrator may reasonably determine. 
B.  Powers and Duties . 
The Administrator shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Administration and Enforcement . 
The Administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this UDO. 
2.  Interpretation . 
The Administrator is responsible for interpreting the provisions of this UDO. The Administrator shall make written interpretations of this UDO when requested, setting forth the reasons and explanation therefore. 
3.  Building Permits. 
The Administrator shall review and certify that the proposed construction, moving, alteration, or use of the land either does or does not comply with the provisions of this UDO prior to issuance of a Building Permit by the Building Official. 
4.  Final Action . 
The Administrator shall review and take final action on the following: 
a.  Sign permits; 
b.  Site plans; 
c.  Architectural reviews; 
d.  Administrative adjustments; 
e.  Preliminary Plans as set forth in Section 3.4, Plat Review, of this UDO; 
f.  Minor and amending plats; 
g.  Determination of building plot (Section 7.2, General Provisions); 
h.  Certificate of Appropriateness Routine Maintenance Work reviews; 
i.  Determination regarding applicability of plat requirements; and 
j.  Alternative parking plans (Section 7.3, Off-Street Parking). 
5.  Other Duties . 
a.  The Administrator, or his designee, shall serve as the Historic Preservation Officer (HPO) for the City of College Station. As such, the HPO shall serve as a representative of the Landmark Commission and shall be responsible for coordinating the Landmark Commission's preservation activities with the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee, those of state and federal agencies, and with local, state, and national nonprofit preservation organizations. 
b.  The Administrator shall perform other duties imposed under the provisions of the City of College Station Code of Ordinances, as amended from time-to-time. 
c.  The Administrator shall administer and enforce the regulations of the Easterwood Field Airport Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-10-2013; Ord. No. 2015-3663 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 5-28-2015; Ord. No. 2017-3967 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 12-14-2017; Ord. No. 2018-3991 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 2-22-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4034 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-23-2018) 
Sec. 2.9. - Building Official. 
A.  Designation. 
The Administrator shall designate the Building Official for the City of College Station. The Building Official may delegate that responsibility, power, or duty to any other agent or employee of the City whom the Building Official may reasonably determine. 
B.  Powers and Duties. 
The Building Official shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Building Inspections. 
The Building Official shall have the power to conduct inspections of buildings and premises to carry out his duties herein and to determine compliance with the provisions of this UDO. 
2.  Building Permits. 
The Building Official shall issue Building Permits. 
3.  Certificate of Occupancy. 
The Building Official shall issue Certificates of Occupancy. 
4.  Certificates of Completion. 
The Building Official shall issue Certificates of Completion. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 2.10. - Development Engineer. 
A.  Designation. 
The City Engineer shall designate the Development Engineer for the City of College Station. 
B.  Responsibility. 
The Development Engineer, or his designee, shall implement, administer, and oversee the provisions, terms, and conditions of all engineering and flood hazard protection requirements within this UDO. The Development Engineer may delegate that responsibility, power, or duty to any other agent or employee of the City whom the Development Engineer may reasonably determine. 
C.  Powers and Duties. 
The Development Engineer has the following powers and duties in regard to engineering requirements and flood hazard protection: 
1.  Review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny driveway applications; 
2.  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of the flood hazard protection regulations; 
3.  Review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny all applications for development permits; 
4.  Assure that adequate inspection of construction permitted under the terms and provisions of this UDO are carried out in accordance with the permitted plan; 
5.  Maintain, update, and provide to interested parties at a reasonable cost the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Technical Specifications and Standard Details; 
6.  Assure that adequate maintenance of drainage pathways, including altered or relocated waterways, is provided such that capacity for carrying stormwater flows is maintained; 
7.  Provide interpretation, where required, of boundaries of Areas of Special Flood Hazard, location of floodway, and water surface elevations, when disputes arise during review; 
8.  Provide information to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, Municipal Court, or City Council, as applicable on all variance requests, administrative appeals, enforcement actions, and proposed amendments to the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Technical Specifications and Standard Details as required; 
9.  Review and utilize any acceptable new flood study data in accordance with the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Technical Specifications and Standard Details; 
10.  Notify adjacent communities and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; 
11.  Review and make recommendations to the City Council concerning Development Agreements; 
12.  Interpret the terms and provisions of Section 7.9, Flood Hazard Protection, as required, as they apply to each project, in accordance with the stated purpose of that Section; 
13.  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State, or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required; 
14.  Review and approve or deny alternative materials or standards for site construction; and 
15.  Review, evaluate and provide recommendations regarding development exaction appeals. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 2.11. - BioCorridor Review Committee. 
A.  Creation. 
A BioCorridor Review Committee is hereby created for the purpose of implementing the BioCorridor Planned Development District ordinance. The Committee is comprised of staff from both cities, with the Committee serving as the designated administrative officer as set forth in the BioCorridor Planned Development District ordinance and state law. The BioCorridor Review Committee shall bring planning, engineering, and other areas of municipal expertise from each City to bear on proposals within the BioCorridor Planned Development District. 
B.  Membership. 
The BioCorridor Review Committee shall consist of four (4) core members. Other City employees may be invited to participate on an ad hoc basis. 
1.  Core members. 
a.  The City Manager of each municipality shall designate two (2) city employees from his/her municipality. One (1) employee shall be a planner and one (1) an engineer or engineer in training familiar with development review procedures. 
b.  The BioCorridor Review Committee's main point of contact for a development project proposal shall be the planner on the Committee from the city in which the majority of the project is located. 
2.  Ad hoc members. 
As the BioCorridor Review Committee determines appropriate, ad hoc members may be called upon for their expertise on particular matters. 
Ad hoc members may consist of governmental and utility employees such as: 
a.  A representative from College Station Utilities or Bryan Texas Utilities; 
b.  A representative from the Fire Marshall's office; 
c.  A representative from the Sanitation department; or 
d.  The City's transportation planner or transportation engineer. 
Ad hoc members shall be designated by their respective City Manager. 
C.  Powers and Duties. 
The BioCorridor Review Committee shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Administration and Enforcement. 
The BioCorridor Review Committee shall carry out their duties as set forth in the BioCorridor Planned Development District ordinance, including ensuring compliance with the BioCorridor Site Design Guidelines, Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, boundaries of Areas of Special Flood Hazard, location of floodway, and water surface elevations. 
The BioCorridor Review Committee shall review and take action on the following as set forth in the BioCorridor Planned Development District ordinance: 
a.  Minor and amending plats; 
b.  Site plans; 
c.  Construction documents; 
d.  Structure plans as they relate to exterior aesthetic design standards (not Building Code review); 
e.  Sign permits; 
f.  Development permits; 
g.  Administrative adjustments; 
h.  Alternative parking plans; 
i.  Driveway applications; 
j.  Determination of building plot; and 
k.  Determination of plat applicability. 
2.  In the event the BioCorridor Review Committee is unable to reach a consensus, the Planning or Engineering representative (as appropriate) from the city in which the majority of the project will be located shall make the final determination. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 2.12. - Summary of Review Authority. 
The following table summarizes the authority of the various review bodies and staff. 
PROCEDURE City
Council P&Z
Comm. Zoning
Bd. of
Adj. Design
Rev. Bd. Land.
Comm. Bike, Ped.
& Grnwy Admin.Building
Official Dev.
Engr. CITY COUNCIL (CC) Oversize Participation D RR Development Agreement D RR R Conditional Use permit D R RR Zoning Map Amendment D R RR Zoning Map Amendment (HP) D R R RR PDD/P-MUD Concept Plan D R RR Text Amendment D R R RR Comp. Plan Amendment D R R RR Impact Fee/CIP Priorities D R R RR Annexations D R RR Municipal Utility Districts D R RR PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION (P&Z) Preliminary Plan*** 
(with waiver or discretionary item) D RR R Final Plat D RR R Development Plat D RR R Waiver of Subdivision Standard D RR R Development Exaction Appeal A D RR ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT (ZBA) Variance D RR R RR Administrative Appeal D RR Zoning Map Interpretation D RR DESIGN REVIEW BOARD (DRB) WPC District Site Plan A D R WPC District Building/Sign Review A D WPC Parking Waivers A D RR NG Waivers D RR Non-Residential Arch. Stand. Waiver D RR Non-Residential Arch. Stand. Alt. Compliance D RR LANDMARK COMMISSION (LC) Certificates of Appropriateness A D RR Certificates of Demolition A D RR ADMINISTRATOR Architectural Reviews D Interpretation A** A D Sign Permit A D Site Plan A* D R Administrative Adjustment A D WPC District Building or Sign, Minor A D Preliminary Plan*** D R Minor or Amending Plat A D R PD Concept Plan Minor Amend. A D Certificate of Appropriateness, Routine A D NG Roof Color Palette Amendment A D Alternative Parking Plans A D Determination of Plat Applicability A D R BUILDING OFFICIAL (BO) Building Permit D Certificate of Occupancy R D R Certificate of Completion R D R DEVELOPMENT ENGINEER (DE) Development Permit D Driveway Application A D Alternative Const. Material A D * Section 3.6.E. Site Plan Review Criteria and 3.7.F. Wolf Pen Creek Design District General Site Plan Review Criteria only. 

** Subdivision Regs. only. 

*** See UDO Section 3.4, Plat Review, for specific review authority. 
KEY: A =Appeal R =Recommend D =Final Action/Decision RR =Review/Report  
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2015-3640 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-26-2015; Ord. No. 2015-3663 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 5-28-2015; Ord. No. 2017-3967 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 12-14-2017; Ord. No. 2018-3985 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 2-8-2018) 
Article 3. - Development Review Procedures 

Sec. 3.1. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to land zoned BioCorridor Planned Development District. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. F), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 3.2. - General Approval Procedures. 
A.  Conformity with Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) and the Comprehensive Plan. 
The provisions of this UDO and the Comprehensive Plan shall apply to and be binding on any and all persons seeking to develop, redevelop, or otherwise change existing land uses within the corporate limits of the City of College Station and, where applicable, its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). Compliance with the UDO and the Comprehensive Plan includes the dedication and construction of identified infrastructure, right-of-way, and improvement of specified facilities including but not limited to pedestrian facilities, bicycle facilities, thoroughfares, etc. 
B.  Preapplication Conference. 
Prior to the submission of any application required by this UDO, applicants are encouraged to schedule and attend an optional preapplication conference with the City Staff. Preapplication conferences with City Staff may be used to discuss, in general, procedures, standards, or regulations relating to a proposed development. If a preapplication conference is requested, the Administrator may require the applicant to submit information prior to the preapplication conference to allow City Staff time to review the proposal. Any proposed development submitted or discussed as a part of a preapplication conference shall not be considered a plan, plat, or permit application but will be considered an informal request for information prior to the actual plat, plan, or permit application. 
C.  Application Forms and Fees. 
The following regulations shall apply to all applications: 
1.  Forms. 
Applications required under this UDO shall be submitted using correct, completed forms, where applicable, along with any requested information and attachments, and in such numbers as required by the City, including any checklists for submittals. The Administrator shall have the authority to request any other pertinent information required to ensure compliance with this UDO. 
2.  Electronic Submission Required. 
All plats and site plans shall be prepared and submitted upon request in an electronic form acceptable to the Administrator and compatible with the City's Geographic Information System (GIS). 
3.  Fees. 
Filing fees shall be established from time-to-time by resolution of the City Council for the purpose of defraying the actual cost of processing the application. 
a.  All required fees shall be made payable to "The City of College Station." 
b.  An applicant who has paid the appropriate fee pursuant to submission of an application, but who chooses to withdraw such application prior to any notification, review, or action taken, shall be entitled to a refund of fifty (50) percent of the total amount paid upon written request to the City except that the filing fee required for text or map amendments shall not be refundable. 
c.  The Administrator may waive or reduce development-related fees on a case-by-case basis pursuant to applicable law or when the City is the applicant. 
D.  Application Deadline. 
All applications shall be completed and submitted to the Administrator in accordance with a submittal deadline schedule established by the City. All applications not delivered to the City by a date and time according to the submittal deadline schedule shall be considered timely received for the next official submittal deadline. An application shall not be considered officially submitted until application completeness has been determined in accordance with this UDO. 
E.  Application Completeness. 
An application shall be considered submitted only after the Administrator has determined it is complete as set forth herein. This includes determining whether it is accompanied with any required forms, mandatory information (including all exhibits), and the applicable fee. A determination of completeness does not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of this UDO nor precludes that additional information and/or documents may still be required as identified during the formal review of the application. If an application is determined to be incomplete, no further processing of the application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected. An application of any kind under this Article expires and application fee forfeited on or after the forty-fifth (45th) day after the application is deemed incomplete if: 
1.  The applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to comply with the technical requirements of this UDO as to form and content of the submittal; 
2.  The City notifies the applicant, in writing, of the failure to provide specific documents or other information within ten (10) business days from the filing date, noting the date the application will expire if same is not provided; and 
3.  The applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information within the time provided in the notice. 
No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has expired pursuant to this Section, or from the filing of a complete application that is subsequently denied. 
F.  Standards of Review. 
Applications shall be reviewed based on the ordinances which are in effect at the time the permit application is submitted with the City. It is the responsibility of the applicant to inform the Administrator if vesting is claimed on a specific project application and to which ordinance the claim is vested in accordance with Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code. This information shall be conveyed to the Administrator as part of the permit application. The Administrator may attempt to inform the applicant if a project is able to vest to a previously adopted ordinance. Notwithstanding anything in this UDO to the contrary, vesting is limited to that which is provided in Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code or other applicable law. 
G.  Required Public Notice. 
1.  Summary of Notice Required. 
Notice shall be required for development review as shown in the following table. 
Application Type Published Mailed Agenda Posted Comprehensive Plan Amendment X X Zoning Map Amend. (Rezoning) X X X UDO Text Amendment X X Conditional Use Permit X X X Subdivision - Replats* X* X* X Design District - Site Plan/Bldg. X Certificate of Appropriateness X Certificate of Demolition (No economically viable use) X X X Variances - ZBA X X X Appeals - Site Plan & Driveway X Waiver - Subdivision Design X Waiver - Buffer Requirements X Administrative Appeals X X Development Exaction Appeal X  
* Only when required per the Texas Local Government Code. 
2.  Specific Notice Requirements. 
a.  Published Notice. 
A Public Hearing Notice shall be placed by the Administrator at least once in the official newspaper of the City before the fifteenth (15th) day before the date of the hearing for the purpose of notifying the public of the time and place of such public hearing and the substance of the public hearing agenda items that may be considered or reviewed. 
b.  Mailed Notice. 
A notice of public hearing shall be sent to owners of record of real property, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll, within two hundred (200) feet of the parcel under consideration. The notice may be served by its deposit, properly addressed with postage paid, in U.S. mail before the fifteenth (15th) day before the date of the hearing. 
c.  Content of Notice. 
A published or mailed notice shall provide at least the following specific information: 
1)  The general location of land that is the subject of the application; 
2)  The substance of the application, including the magnitude of proposed development and the current zoning district; 
3)  The time, date, and location of the public hearing; and 
4)  A phone number to contact the City. 
3.  Public Hearing Signs. 
In addition to meeting the minimum statutory notice requirements, for the purpose of notifying the public the Administrator may require the installation of a sign on the property advertising the public hearing. The specifications including size, location, and content of public hearing signs shall be established by the Administrator. 
4.  Required Hearings and Reviewing Body. 
The following table illustrates the types of review requiring a public hearing and the review body responsible for conducting the hearing. 
Application Type Zoning
Board of
AdjustmentLandmark
Commission Planning and
Zoning
Commission City
Council Comprehensive Plan Amendment X X Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning) X X Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning - Historic Preservation Overlay District) X X X Certificate of Demolition (No economically viable use) X UDO Text Amendment X X Conditional Use Permit X X Subdivision* X Variances - ZBA X Administrative Appeals X Development Exaction Appeal X X**  
* Only when required per the Texas Local Government Code. 
** Request is considered by Council only if Planning and Zoning Commission's decision is appealed. 
H.  Simultaneous Processing of Applications . 
Two (2) or more forms of review and approval are typically required in the development process. Development proposals that require applications for Zoning Map Amendments (Rezoning) are required to be acted upon by the City Council before plat and other development applications will be accepted for review by the City. In addition, Preliminary Plans are to be acted upon by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the Administrator before a subsequent Final Plat will be accepted for review by the City. At the discretion of the Administrator, plat and other applications for development approvals may be processed simultaneously, so long as the approval procedures for each individual application can be completed pursuant to the requirements of this UDO. Such processing shall occur at the applicant's own risk. 
I.  Expiration of Applications, Permits, and Projects. 
1.  Expiration of Inactive Applications. 
An application that has been determined to be administratively complete and written staff review comments provided to the applicant shall be deemed expired and closed in ninety (90) calendar days from the date the most recent written review comments were provided by the City to the applicant, if the applicant has not taken action by providing written response comments and revised documents to the Administrator that seek to address the review comments. 
2.  Expiration of Approved Permits. 
a.  Unless otherwise specified by this UDO, any individual permit, authorization or approval required in this UDO expires twenty-four (24) months from the date of approval, or as may be further extended pursuant to the terms of this UDO, if no progress has been made towards completion of the project. For purposes of this Section, progress towards completion of the project is as defined by Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
b.  If no expiration date was in effect at the time the approval of the permit occurred, an expiration date of twenty-four (24) months from the approval shall apply. 
3.  Expiration of Projects. 
a.  For projects requiring more than one (1) permit, authorization or approval, there shall be a project expiration date of five (5) years from the date the first complete application is filed for the project or from the date vesting occurs pursuant to Chapter 245 Texas Local Government Code if no progress is made towards completion of the project or if the expiration date is not otherwise further extended pursuant to the terms of this UDO. For purposes of this Section, progress towards completion of the project is as defined by Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
b.  Any application for a new permit, authorization for approval or application to replace an existing approved permit shall be deemed to commence a new development project, as of the date it is filed, if the new application is not compatible with the permits preceding it in regards to the type of proposed use(s), nature of the development, or significant changes to density or infrastructure demands. 
J.  Appeals from Development Exaction Requirements. 
1.  Purpose. 
The purpose of a petition for relief from a dedication or public infrastructure requirement is to ensure that the application of uniform dedication and construction standards to a proposed development does not result in a disproportionate burden on the property when considering the nature and extent of the demands created by the proposed development on the City's roadways and other public infrastructure. 
2.  Applicability. 
A petition for relief under this Section may be filed by the applicant to contest any requirement to dedicate land or to construct public improvements as required by this UDO, the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, or any other public infrastructure standards in any ordinance or regulation to a plat application or to any related development related development application authorized by the City or attached as a condition to approval of the application. A petition for relief shall not be used to waive a standard on grounds subject to other appeal and waiver criteria outlined in this UDO. 
3.  Petition Requirements. 
a.  Form of Petition. 
The petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement shall allege that application of the standard relating to the dedication or construction requirement is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks, roadway system or other public infrastructure. 
b.  Required Supporting Documentation. 
The applicant shall provide information in support of the petition for relief that includes the following: 
1)  Total capacity of the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks, roadway system or other public infrastructure to be utilized by the proposed development, employing standard measures of capacity and equivalency tables relating the type of development proposed to the quantity of system capacity to be consumed by the development. If the proposed development is to be developed in phases, such information also shall be provided for the entire development proposed, including any phases already developed; 
2)  Total capacity to be supplied to the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks, roadway system or other public infrastructure by the proposed dedication of an interest in land or construction of public infrastructure. If the application is part of a phased development, the information shall include any capacity supplied by prior dedications or construction of public infrastructure; 
3)  Comparison of the capacity of the City's public facilities system(s) to be consumed by the proposed development with the capacity to be supplied to such system(s) by the proposed dedication of an interest in land or construction of public infrastructure. In making this comparison, the impacts on the City's public infrastructure system(s) from the entire development shall be considered; 
4)  The effect of any City participation in the costs of oversizing the public improvement to be constructed in accordance with the City's requirements; 
5)  Any and all other information that alleges the dedication or construction requirement imposed by the City is not roughly proportional to the impacts created by the proposed development; 
6)  The proportionality analysis should not only be based on any immediate plans for the property but should be based on the size of the property, existing and proposed use of the property, and the development potential permitted by the existing zoning; and 
7)  Only costs directly related to the dedication or construction requirements should be included in the analysis. Indirect costs, such as applications, permits, and fees, shall not be included. 
c.  Time for Filing Petition and Supporting Documentation. 
A petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement shall be filed with the Development Engineer within fourteen (14) calendar days following the Commission's decision to approve, conditionally approve or deny an application for approval of an application. The information in support of the petition as set forth above shall be filed with the Development Engineer within sixty (60) calendar days following the initial decision, unless the applicant (petitioner for relief) seeks an extension in writing. The Development Engineer may extend the time for submitting the information for a period not to exceed an additional thirty (30) calendar days for good cause shown. 
d.  Land in Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). 
Where land or facilities to be dedicated are located in the ETJ of the City and are to be dedicated to the applicable county, a petition for relief or documentation in support of the petition shall be accepted as complete for review by the Development Engineer only when such petition or study is accompanied by verification that a copy has been delivered to and accepted by the applicable county. 
4.  Processing of Petitions and Decision. 
a.  Responsible Official. 
The Development Engineer shall be the responsible official for reviewing a petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement. Where the petition is for relief from dedication of land or construction of a facility in the City's ETJ that is to be dedicated to the applicable county, the Development Engineer shall coordinate a recommendation with the appropriate county official responsible for reviewing plats. 
b.  Evaluation and Recommendation. 
1)  The Development Engineer shall evaluate the petition and supporting documentation and shall make a recommendation to the Commission for their consideration and recommendation to the City Council, if applicable. 
2)  In evaluating the petition and documentation, the Development Engineer shall take into account the maximum amount of any impact fees to be charged against the development for the type of public infrastructure that is the subject of the petition, or similar developments on the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks, roadway system or other public infrastructure. The Development Engineer may utilize any reasonable methodology to evaluate, affirm, or refute the applicant's petition and supporting documentation. 
3)  In order to achieve proportionality between the demands created by a proposed development on public facilities and the obligation to provide adequate public facilities, the City may participate in the costs of public infrastructure, credit or offset developer's proposed obligations or otherwise relieve the property owner of any of the obligations in response to a petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement. 
c.  Decision-Maker. 
The Commission shall decide the petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement. 
d.  Public Hearing. 
The Commission shall conduct a public hearing within thirty (30) calendar days after the final documentation supporting the petition is filed by the applicant with the Development Engineer. 
e.  Burden of Proof. 
The applicant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the application of a dedication or construction requirement imposes a disproportionate burden on the applicant. 
f.  Decision. 
The Commission shall consider the petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement based upon the following criteria: 
1)  The Commission shall determine whether the application of the standard or condition is roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks, roadway system or other public infrastructure, and whether the application of the standard or condition reasonably benefits the development. 
2)  In making such determination, the Commission shall consider the documentation submitted by the applicant, the report and recommendation of the Development Engineer and, where the property is located within the City's ETJ, any recommendations from the county official, as applicable. 
g.  Action. 
Based on the decision criteria stated above, the Commission may take one (1) or more of the following actions: 
1)  Deny the petition for relief, and impose the dedication or construction requirement as required by this UDO; 
2)  Deny the petition for relief in whole or in part, upon finding that the proposed dedication or construction requirements are inadequate to offset the impacts of the development on the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks, roadway system or other public infrastructure; or 
3)  Grant the petition for relief in whole or in part, and waive any dedication or construction requirement to the extent necessary to achieve proportionality, including consideration of alternative designs for the public infrastructure systems or improvements. 
h.  Notification of Decision on Petition. 
The applicant shall be notified of the decision on the petition for relief by the Development Engineer within fourteen (14) calendar days following the Commission's decision. 
5.  Appeal of the Decision on a Petition for Relief. 
a.  Initiation of an Appeal. 
The applicant, the Administrator, or no less than four (4) voting members of City Council may appeal the decision of the Commission within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of the Commission's decision: 
1)  For an applicant-initiated appeal, a letter stating the reasons for the appeal, citing the specific section(s) of the applicable ordinance requirement, shall be submitted by the applicant. 
2)  The Administrator may, on his/her own initiative, appeal the decision of the Commission by scheduling an appeal on the City Council's next available regularly scheduled meeting that occurs after the Commission meeting at which the decision was made. 
3)  For a City Council-initiated appeal, the Council shall consider and act on whether it will appeal the Commission's decision at its next available regularly scheduled meeting that occurs after the Commission meeting at which the decision was made. 
b.  Notification of Appeal. 
Both the applicant and the City shall be notified of the appeal request within fourteen (14) calendar days. Appeals by the applicant shall include all documentation submitted for the appeal. 
c.  Council Decision. 
The City Council shall consider a properly submitted appeal at its next available regularly scheduled meeting. The City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Commission by simple majority vote. The decision of the City Council is final. 
6.  Expiration or Failure to File Application. 
Where an application was denied based upon the imposition of the standard requiring dedication of land or construction of a required public infrastructure and the Commission's decision, if not further appealed (or the City Council's decision if further appealed as applicable), is to grant some level of relief, the applicant must resubmit the application within sixty (60) calendar days following the date the relief is granted. If such re-submittal of the application is not made within the sixty-day period, the relief granted by the Commission (or City Council as applicable) on the petition shall expire. 
7.  Effect of Relief. 
a.  The Development Engineer may require the applicant to submit a modified application or supporting materials consistent with the relief granted by the Commission on the petition. 
b.  The relief granted on the petition shall remain in effect for the period the application is in effect, and shall expire upon expiration of the plat or related application. 
K.  Figures and Flow Charts. 
The figures and flow charts provided in this UDO are intended to be graphical representations of procedures or standards set forth in this UDO to assist in understanding the requirements of this UDO and are not intended to be requirements themselves. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2017-3967 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 12-14-2017) 
Sec. 3.3. - Zoning Map Amendment (Rezoning). 
A.  Purpose. 

To establish and maintain sound, stable, and desirable development within the territorial limits of the City, the Official Zoning Map may be amended based upon changed or changing conditions in a particular area or in the City generally, or to rezone an area or extend the boundary of an existing zoning district. All amendments shall be in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan as may, from time to time, be amended. 
B.  Initiation of Amendments. 
An amendment to the Official Zoning Map may be initiated by: 
1.  City Council on its own motion; 
2.  The Planning and Zoning Commission; 
3.  The Administrator; or 
4.  The property owner(s). 
C.  Amendment Application. 
A complete application for a zoning map amendment shall be submitted to the Administrator as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO and herein. 
As applicable, applicants shall submit the information, documents, and materials set forth in the Traffic Impact Analyses Section in Article 7 of this UDO. 
1.  Application requests for a Planned Development District (PDD) and Planned Mixed-Use District (P-MUD) shall provide the following additional information: 
a.  A written statement of the purpose and intent of the proposed development; 
b.  A list and explanation of the potential land uses permitted; and 
c.  A Concept Plan as described in Concept Plan Review Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
2.  Application requests for a Neighborhood Prevailing Overlay District (NPO) shall provide the following additional information: 
a.  An original plat of the subdivision; and 
b.  A petition including dated signatures by fifty (50) percent plus one (1) of current property owners in the neighborhood in support of the overlay; and 
c.  Contact information for all Neighborhood Association or Homeowners Association committee members. 
3.  Application requests for a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District (NCO) shall provide the following additional information: 
a.  An original plat of the subdivision; 
b.  A petition including dated signatures by fifty (50) percent plus one (1) of the property owners in the neighborhood in support of the overlay; 
c.  Contact information for all Neighborhood Association or Homeowners Association committee members; 
d.  A list of six (6) property owners in the neighborhood to serve on neighborhood stakeholder committee; and 
e.  A checklist of the proposed items to be included in the Conservation Study. 
4.  Application request for a Historic Preservation Overlay District shall provide the following additional information: 
a.  An inventory and survey of structures to be included in the rezoning, submitted on a form provided by the Historic Preservation Officer; 
b.  A current photograph of each property included in the rezoning, and its improvements; 
c.  Historical photographs, where available; and 
d.  A completed Designation Report. Upon initiation of the historic designation procedure, the Historic Preservation Officer shall coordinate research to compile a written report regarding the historical, cultural, and architectural significance of the place or area proposed for historic designation at the request of the applicant, but the rezoning application will not be considered complete until the report has been completed. A Designation Report shall include a statement on each of the following to the extent that they apply: 
1)  A listing of the architectural, archaeological, paleontological, cultural, economic, social, ethnic, political, or historical characteristics upon which the nomination is based; 
2)  A description of the historical, cultural and architectural significance of the structures and sites; 
3)  Identification of contributing and noncontributing resources to the proposed district; and 
4)  A description of the boundaries of the proposed Historic Preservation Overlay District, including subareas and areas where new construction will be prohibited. 
D.  Approval Process. 
1.  Preapplication Conference. 
Prior to the submission of an application for a Zoning Map Amendment, applicants are encouraged to schedule and attend an optional preapplication conference in accordance with and for the purposes as set forth elsewhere in this UDO for preapplication conferences. 
If the Administrator determines that the map amendment request is not in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, he shall not accept the application for the map amendment, and no further processing shall occur until the map amendment is in conformity. 
2.  Required Meetings. 
a.  Neighborhood Meeting. 
Prior to the submission of an application for a Zoning Map Amendment for a NPO or NCO Overlay Rezoning, all potential applicants shall request to set up a Neighborhood Meeting with City Staff. 
b.  Historic Preservation Officer. 
Prior to the submission of an application for a Zoning Map Amendment for a Historic Preservation Overlay District rezoning, all potential applicants shall request a Neighborhood Meeting with the Historic Preservation Officer. The purpose of the meeting is to present information about the proposed overlay and explain the process of rezoning to the neighborhood. 
3.  Review and Report by Administrator. 
With the exception of applications for Historic Preservation Overlay Districts, once the application is complete, the Administrator shall review the proposed amendment to the Official Zoning Map in light of the Comprehensive Plan, subject to the criteria enumerated in Article 4, Zoning Districts, and give a report to the Planning and Zoning Commission on the date of the scheduled public hearing. 
4.  Review and Report by Historic Preservation Officer. 
An application for a Historic Preservation Overlay District rezoning shall be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Officer, who shall review the proposed amendment in light of the Comprehensive Plan, subject to the criteria enumerated in Article 4, Zoning Districts, and the Historic Preservation Overlay District Section in Article 5, and give a report to the Landmark Commission on the date of the scheduled public hearing. 
5.  Referral to Landmark Commission. 
The Historic Preservation Officer, upon receipt of an application to amend the Official Zoning Map to a Historic Preservation Overlay District, shall refer the same to the Landmark Commission for study, hearing, and report. The Planning and Zoning Commission may not hold a public hearing or make a report to the City Council until it has received a report from the Landmark Commission. 
6.  Recommendation by Landmark Commission. 
The Landmark Commission shall publish, post, and mail public notice in accordance with the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO. The Landmark Commission shall hold a public hearing and make a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
7.  Referral to Planning and Zoning Commission. 
With the exception of applications for Historic Preservation Overlay Districts, the Administrator, upon receipt of petition to amend the Official Zoning Map, shall refer the same to the Commission for study, hearing, and report. For an application to amend the Official Zoning Map to a Historic Preservation Overlay District, the Historic Preservation Officer shall refer the same to the Planning and Zoning Commission for study, hearing, and report with the report of the Landmark Commission. The City Council may not enact the proposed amendment until the Planning and Zoning Commission makes its report to the City Council. 
8.  Recommendation by Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall publish, post, and mail public notice in accordance with the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO. The Commission shall hold a public hearing and recommend to the City Council such action as the Commission deems proper. 
9.  City Council Action. 
a.  Notice. 
The City Council shall publish, post, and mail public notice in accordance with the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO, and hold a public hearing before taking final action on an application to amend the Official Zoning Map. 
b.  Public Hearing. 
The City Council shall hold a public hearing and approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the application to amend the Official Zoning Map. 
c.  Effect of Protest to Proposed Amendment. 
If a proposed change to this UDO or rezoning is protested in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, the proposed change must receive, in order to take effect, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the City Council. The protest must be written and signed by the owners of at least twenty (20) percent of either the area of lots covered by the proposed change, or of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed change and extending two hundred (200) feet from that area. 
d.  Review Criteria. 
In determining whether to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the proposed Official Zoning Map amendment, the City Council shall consider the following matters regarding the proposed amendment: 
1)  Whether the proposal is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 
2)  Whether the uses permitted by the proposed zoning district will be appropriate in the context of the surrounding area; 
3)  Whether the property to be rezoned is physically suitable for the proposed zoning district; 
4)  Whether there is available water, wastewater, stormwater, and transportation facilities generally suitable and adequate for uses permitted by the proposed zoning district; 
5)  The marketability of the property; and 
6)  In addition, for proposed amendments to Historic Preservation Overlay Districts, the City Council shall consider if the proposed amendment contains property(ies) and an environmental setting which meets two (2) or more of the criteria for designation of a Historic Preservation Overlay District as described in the Historic Preservation Overlay District Section in Article 5 of this UDO. 
e.  Effect of Historic Preservation Overlay District Zoning Upon Official Public Records . 
Upon designation of a property with a Historic Preservation Overlay District, the City Council shall cause the designation to be recorded in the Official Public Records of Real Property of Brazos County, Texas, the tax records of the City of College Station, and the Brazos County Appraisal District, as well as the official zoning map of the City of College Station. 
E.  Limitation on Reapplication. 
If an application for rezoning is denied by the City Council, another application for reclassification of the same property or any portion thereof shall not be considered within a period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of denial, unless the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that one (1) of the following factors are applicable: 
1.  There is a substantial change in circumstances relevant to the issues and/or facts considered during review of the application that might reasonably affect the decision-making body's application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed in the application; 
2.  New or additional information is available that was not available at the time of the review that might reasonably affect the decision-making body's application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed; 
3.  A new application is proposed to be submitted that is materially different from the prior application (e.g., proposes new uses or a substantial decrease in proposed densities and intensities); or 
4.  The final decision on the application was based on a material mistake of fact. 
F.  Repeal of a Single-Family Overlay District. 
A repeal of a single-family overlay district may be initiated by: 
1.  City Council on its own motion; 
2.  The Planning and Zoning Commission; 
3.  The Administrator; or 
4.  By petition of fifty (50) percent plus one (1) of the property owner(s) in the subject district. 
A repeal of a single-family overlay district is considered a rezoning and is subject to the Zoning Map Amendment requirements herein. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2018-3984 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-8-2018) 
Sec. 3.4. - Plat Review. 
A.  Applicability. 

This Section applies to the subdivision and development of property as set forth herein. 
1.  Subdivision Plat Required. 
a.  Subdivision of property within the City limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City of College Station is required to be approved in accordance with applicable state law and as set forth herein when one (1) or more of the following occurs: 
1)  The division of land (for any purpose) into two (2) or more parcels to lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an addition to the City, to lay out suburban, building, or other lots, or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on to or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks or other parts; 
2)  Development on a parcel not previously legally subdivided; 
3)  Resubdivision of land that has previously been platted; or 
4)  Amendment of any approved plat. 
b.  Types of Subdivision Filings. 
1)  Preliminary Plans. 
A Preliminary Plan is required for the subdivision of all tracts of land within the City limits or ETJ of the City of College Station, except as otherwise set forth in this UDO. A Preliminary Plan shall include the entire parent survey or tract of land under common ownership. 
2)  Final Plats and Replats. 
A Final Plat is required for the subdivision of all property within the City limits or ETJ of the City of College Station. A Final Plat shall include the entire Preliminary Plan area or less when the Final Plat adheres to the phasing identified on the approved Preliminary Plan. The Final Plat shall conform to the Preliminary Plan as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, provided it incorporates all changes, modifications, corrections, and conditions imposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission; and provided further, that it conforms to all requirements of these regulations and the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
3)  Minor Plats and Amending Plats. 
A Preliminary Plan shall not be required prior to the application of a Minor Plat or Amending Plat. Pursuant to the Delegation of Approval Responsibility Section of Subchapter A, "Regulations of Subdivisions," Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, the City Council of the City of College Station delegates the Administrator the ability to approve the following plats in accordance with the procedure set forth herein: 
(a)  Amending Plats described in the Amending Plat Section of Subchapter A, "Regulations of Subdivisions," Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code; 
(b)  Minor Plats or Replats involving four (4) or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities; 
(c)  A Replat under Section 212.0145 Replatting Without Vacating Preceding Plat: Certain Subdivisions, Subchapter A, "Regulations of Subdivisions," Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, and that does not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. 
4)  Vacating Plats. 
A Vacating Plat shall adhere to the requirements of Vacating Plat Section of Subchapter A, "Regulations of Subdivisions," Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. Vacating plats be processed and reviewed in the same manner as a Final Plat. 
c.  Exemptions from Subdivision Plat Requirement. 
The following subdivisions are exempt from Subdivision Plat requirements: 
1)  A division of land into parts greater than five (5) acres within the City limits and greater than ten (10) acres in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of College Station, where each part has access and no public improvement is being dedicated; 
2)  Division of property that results from a governmental entity's land acquisition for public facilities such as expansion of street right-of-way; 
3)  Any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to July 15, 1970, the effective date of the City of College Station Subdivision Regulations, or prior to the date in which the Subdivision Regulations applied to the property through extension of the City of College Station extraterritorial jurisdiction; 
4)  A division of land performed by a political subdivision of the state, as defined in Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code. Such entities that choose to plat voluntarily shall comply with all of the applicable requirements; or 
5)  A division of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
2.  Development Plat Required. 
a.  The City of College Station chooses to be covered by Subchapter B, "Regulation of Property Development," Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code. Any person who proposes the development of a tract of land or lot of record not located within a recorded subdivision within the City limits or the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City of College Station must have a Development Plat of the tract prepared in accordance with this Section. New development may not begin on the property until the Development Plat is filed with and approved by the City. For purposes of this Section, "Development" means the new construction or the enlargement of any exterior dimension of any building, structure, or improvement. 
b.  Exemptions from Development Plat Requirement. 
The following developments are exempt from Development Plat requirements: 
1)  When an applicant is required to file a Preliminary Plan or Final Plat pursuant to other requirements of this Section, a Development Plat is not required in addition thereto. 
2)  The development of a tract of land within the City limits or the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of College Station that meets all of the following criteria is not required to file a Development Plat: 
(a)  The tract is at least five (5) acres; 
(b)  The tract has access; and 
(c)  The development is a single-family home for the use of the property owner or a member of the property owner's family, an accessory structure(s) of the home, and/or an accessory structure(s) for the benefit of agricultural uses. 
3)  Development by a political subdivision of the state, as defined in Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code. Such entities that choose to plat voluntarily shall comply with all of the applicable requirements. 
4)  The Administrator may waive the requirement for a Development Plat within the City limits when no parkland, public infrastructure, or public dedication is required on the subject tract. 
B.  Determination of Plat Applicability. 
Upon written application and in compliance with the Texas Local Government Code, Section 212.0115 as amended, the Administrator shall make the following determinations regarding the tract of land identified in the request: 
1.  Whether a plat is required under this UDO for the tract of land; and 
2.  If a plat is required, whether it has been prepared and whether it has been reviewed and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission or Administrator, as applicable. 
The Administrator may require additional information and documents be provided by the applicant in order to make the requested determination. 
C.  Application Requirements . 
1.  Preapplication Conference . 
Prior to the submission of a preliminary plan or a plat application required by this UDO, applicants are encouraged to schedule and attend an optional preapplication conference in accordance with and for the purposes set forth elsewhere in this UDO for preapplication conferences. 
2.  A complete application for review shall be submitted to the Administrator including payment of a fee as set forth in this UDO. Upon request, all preliminary plans and all plats shall be submitted in an electronic form acceptable to the Administrator and compatible with the City's Geographic Information System (GIS). The signatures of all owners of land within the boundary of the preliminary plan or the plat shall be required on the application. A representative of an owner may sign the application provided a written letter of agency is provided to the City with the application. If the property owner is not an individual but an entity (e.g., business or trust), the application must be accompanied by proof of authority for the individual to sign on behalf of the entity. 
3.  When required to submit the following, the applications shall comply with and/or show the following information: 
a.  Preliminary Plans . 
When submitting preliminary plans, the following information is required: 
1)  The preliminary plan shall conform to the general requirements of this UDO and minimum standards of design and improvements as set forth in Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements; 
2)  The words "PRELIMINARY PLAN - NOT FOR RECORD" shall appear on the plan; 
3)  The proposed name of the subdivision or development, which shall not have the same spelling as or be pronounced similar to the name of any other subdivision located within the county it is located; 
4)  The name and address of all property owners, developers and subdividers, engineers, and surveyors; 
5)  Description by metes and bounds of the subdivision which shall close within accepted land survey standards (labeled on boundary lines, not separate metes and bounds description). An accurate location of the subdivision or development shall be provided by reference to an established survey or league corner, City of College Station horizontal control monument, subdivision corner, or other known point. Primary control points or descriptions and ties to such control point, to which, later, all dimensions, angles, bearings, block numbers, and similar data shall be referred. The preliminary plan shall be located with respect to a corner of the survey or tract, or an original corner of the original survey of which it is a part; 
6)  Subdivision boundary lines shall be indicated by heavy lines and the computed acreage of the subdivision or development shown; 
7)  Indicate whether the contiguous property is platted and provide the name of all contiguous subdivisions or names of owners of contiguous, unplatted parcels; 
8)  The following existing features shall be shown: 
(a)  The location, dimension, name and description of all recorded streets, alleys, reservations, easements, or other public or private rights-of-way within the subdivision or development, intersecting or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such boundaries. In the case of pipelines carrying flammable gas or fuel, the approximate location, size of line, design pressure and product transported through the line shall be shown; 
(b)  The location, dimension, description and name of all existing or recorded lots, parks, public areas, permanent structures and other sites within or contiguous with the subdivision or development; 
(c)  The location, dimensions, description, and flow line of existing watercourses and drainage structures within the subdivision, development or contiguous thereto; 
(d)  The location of the one hundred-year floodplain according to the most recent best available data; 
9)  Date of preparation, scale in feet, and north arrow; 
10)  Topographic information, including contours at two-foot intervals, flow line elevation of streams, and wooded areas; 
11)  The location, approximate dimensions, description and name of all proposed streets, alleys, drainage structures, parks, or other public areas, easements, or other rights-of-way, blocks, lots, and other sites within the subdivision or development. Proposed channel cross sections, if any. Existing and/or proposed well site locations; 
12)  A number or letter to identify each lot and each block. Lots and blocks shown on a preliminary plan should be numbered sequentially; 
13)  Location of current City limits line, and current zoning district boundaries; 
14)  Vicinity map which shows general location of subject property to existing streets in College Station and to its City limits. No scale is required but a north arrow is to be included; 
15)  Show number of residential lots and average lot size when applicable; 
16)  Provide a note to identify a Cluster Subdivision when applicable; 
17)  Provide any oversize participation requests that will be sought; 
18)  Provide title report for property that is current within ninety (90) days and includes applicable information such as ownership, liens, encumbrances, etc.; 
19)  Written requests for waivers of subdivision standards, if any, shall be submitted in accordance with the applicable Sections of this UDO; 
20)  Provide a note on the Preliminary Plan to identify the Residential Parking Option chosen from the Single-Family Residential Parking Requirements for Platting when applicable; and 
21)  As applicable, applicants shall submit the information, documents, and materials set forth in the Traffic Impact Analysis Section in Article 7 of this UDO. 
b.  Final Plats and Other Plats to be Recorded . 
When submitting Final Plats, Replats, Minor Plats, Amending Plats, Vacating Plats, and Development Plats, the following shall be required: 
1)  The plat shall conform to the general requirements of this UDO and minimum standards of design and improvements as set forth in Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements unless expressly provided for otherwise; 
2)  Prior to filing a plat for record, provide current certified tax certificates from all taxing agencies showing payment of all ad valorem taxes on the land within the subdivision; 
3)  Provide title report for property that is current within ninety (90) days and includes applicable information such as ownership, liens, encumbrances, etc.; 
4)  Provide the plat on sheets twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches to a scale of one hundred (100) feet per inch or larger. Smaller scales may be allowed at the discretion of the Administrator. If more than one (1) sheet, provide an index sheet at a scale of five hundred (500) feet per inch or larger; 
5)  Vicinity map which shows general location of subject property to existing streets in College Station and to its City limits. No scale is required but a north arrow is to be included; 
6)  The proposed name of the subdivision or development, which shall not have the same spelling as or be pronounced similar to the name of any other subdivision located within the county it is located; 
7)  Date of preparation, scale in feet, and north arrow; 
8)  The name and address of all property owners, developers, subdividers, engineers, and surveyors responsible for the plat; 
9)  Subdivision boundary lines shall be indicated by heavy lines and the computed acreage of the subdivision or development shown; 
10)  For a replat where there are existing improvements, provide a survey of the subject property showing the improvements to ensure that no setback encroachments are created; 
11)  The name of contiguous subdivisions and names of owners of contiguous parcels, and an indication whether or not contiguous properties are platted; 
12)  The location of the one hundred-year floodplain and floodway according to the most recent best available data; 
13)  A number or letter to identify each lot and each block. Lots and blocks shown on a plat should be numbered sequentially; 
14)  Provide the number of lots and average lot size when applicable; 
15)  Provide a note to identify a Cluster Subdivision when applicable; 
16)  Written requests for waivers of subdivision standards, if any, shall be submitted in accordance with the applicable Sections of this UDO; 
17)  The Plat shall also include the following, based on field survey and marked by monuments and markers: 
(a)  The exact location, dimensions, name, and legal description of all existing or recorded streets, alleys, easements, or other rights-of-way within the subdivision or development, intersecting or contiguous with the boundary or forming such a boundary with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, area, center angle, degree of curvature, tangent distance, and length of all curves, where applicable; 
(b)  The exact location, dimensions, description, and name of all proposed streets, alleys, drainage structures, parks, and other public areas, easements, or other rights-of-way, blocks, lots, and other sites within the subdivision or development, with accurate dimensions, bearings, or deflection angles and radii, areas, center angle, degree of curvature, tangent distance, and length of curves, where applicable; 
(c)  Lot corner markers and survey monuments shall be shown clearly by symbol, and clearly tied to City of College Station horizontal control monuments; 
(d)  The following, when applicable, shall appear on the face of the plat: (See examples in, Article 8 Subdivision Design and Improvements.) 
i.  Certificate of Ownership and Dedication; 
ii.  Certificate of Surveyor and/or Engineer; 
iii.  Certificate of City Engineer; 
iv.  Certificate of Planning and Zoning Commission; 
v.  Certificate of the County Clerk; 
vi.  Certificate of City Planner; and 
vii.  Certificate of Approval. 
18)  The plat shall be accompanied by the construction documents and reports as prescribed below and bearing the seal and signature of a registered professional engineer. All shall be in accordance with the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines and the Bryan/College Station Unified Technical Specifications and shall include the following: 
(a)  Construction plans shall be provided on twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets; 
(b)  Street, alley, and sidewalk plans, profiles, and sections, with specifications and detail cost estimates; 
(c)  Sanitary sewer plan with contours, plan and profile lines, showing depth and grades, with sewer report and detailed cost estimates; 
(d)  Water line plan showing fire hydrants, valves, etc., with specifications and water report and a detailed cost estimate. This may be combined with related information supplied for preliminary plan submissions; 
(e)  Storm drainage system plan with contours, street lines, inlets, storm sewer and drainage channels with profiles and sections. Detail drainage structure design and channel lining design if used, with specifications, drainage report, and detailed cost estimate; 
(f)  Street lighting plan showing location of lights, design, and with specifications and detailed cost estimates; and 
(g)  Any associated necessary items, including but not limited to off-site public utility easements, permits or approval of governmental agencies. 
19)  Eleven-inch by seventeen-inch copies of the plat (not necessarily to scale) will be requested by the Administrator when the plat has been reviewed and has the potential to be scheduled for a Planning and Zoning Commission meeting for consideration; 
20)  Provide a note on the Final Plat to identify the Residential Parking Option chosen from the Single-Family Residential Parking Requirements for Platting when applicable. 
D.  Filing of Plat. 
For the purposes of this Section, the date of filing shall be determined as the date on which a complete application, as determined by the Administrator, and a plat meeting all of the technical terms and conditions of this UDO, or has filed a waiver request to those Sections for which the plat does not comply, is submitted. Once a complete application has been filed with the City, it will be scheduled for action by the Administrator and/or the Planning and Zoning Commission, as applicable. 
E.  Review Procedure . 
1.  Preliminary Plan Review . 
a.  Review and Approval by the Administrator . 
1)  If a waiver or discretionary item is not included or required with the Preliminary Plan application, the Administrator may review and approve the application. The Administrator shall review the Preliminary Plan application for compliance with the following elements: 
(a)  City's Comprehensive Plan including but not limited to the Land Use Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, Utility Master Plans, Parks and Recreation Master Plan, Bicycle, Pedestrian and Greenways Master Plan, Sidewalk Master Plan; 
(b)  Existing zoning of the property, if applicable; 
(c)  Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements; 
(d)  Form and content as required in the Application Requirements Section of this UDO; 
(e)  If phased, the Preliminary Plan must demonstrate sufficiency and viability of public infrastructure for each phase such that an undue burden is not placed on any particular phase. In addition, the proposed phasing is not to create phases or potential remainders of a size, shape or location so as not to be developable in compliance with this UDO; and 
(f)  Other provisions of this UDO as applicable. 
2)  The Administrator shall approve or disapprove of the same based on compliance with the elements listed above. 
b.  Review and Recommendation by Parks and Recreation Advisory Board . 
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall review the Preliminary Plan application for compliance with the parkland dedication requirements of Article 8, Subdivision Design and improvements and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the same. This recommendation must be considered by the Administrator or the Planning and Zoning Commission in its review. Once the Board has determined compliance, the Preliminary Plan and subsequent plats may proceed directly to the Administrator or the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
c.  Consideration by Planning and Zoning Commission . 
If a Preliminary Plan application includes one or more waiver requests or discretionary items, the Administrator shall forward the Preliminary Plan to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration when it meets all of the technical terms and conditions of this UDO. Proposed parkland dedication equal to or exceeding five (5) acres and dedications of floodplain or greenway not previously considered by the Planning & Zoning Commission shall be considered discretionary items. The Administrator shall provide a recommendation on the waiver request(s) or discretionary item(s) as appropriate. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall receive the recommendations of the Administrator and the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and shall approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the Preliminary Plan with modifications based on compliance with the same elements listed in the Review and Recommendation by Administrator. Conditions of approval must entail corrections, changes, or completion of items that are ministerial in nature and explicitly spelled out. 
d.  Effect of Approval . 
Approval of a Preliminary Plan shall mean the following: 
1)  Approval of a Preliminary Plan application by the Administrator or the Planning and Zoning Commission shall allow the applicant to continue the subdivision process by submitting a Development Permit application with construction plans and a Final Plat application. 
2)  Approval of a Preliminary Plan shall not constitute approval of a Final Plat. Application for approval of a Final Plat will be considered only after the requirements for Preliminary Plan approval as specified herein have been fulfilled and after all other specified conditions have been met. 
3)  If a Final Plat is not filed with the City within twenty-four (24) months of the date of approval or conditional approval of a Preliminary Plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission may, upon written application of the applicant, extend the approval for a one-time additional twelve-month period. The request for consideration of an extension shall be submitted to the Administrator at least thirty (30) days before the Preliminary Plan approval expires. 
4)  Each Final Plat which is a phase of an approved Preliminary Plan shall extend the expiration date of the Preliminary Plan an additional two (2) years from the date the Final Plat was approved by the Commission. 
5)  If a Preliminary Plan is phased, Final Plats shall only be permitted to proceed to the Planning and Zoning Commission in the numerical order set forth on the Preliminary Plan. 
2.  Amendments to an Approved Preliminary Plan . 
a.  Minor Amendments . 
Minor amendments of an approved Preliminary Plan may be in an application for approval of a Final Plat without the necessity of filing a new application for approval of a Preliminary Plan. Minor amendments may include adjustment in street or alley alignments and lengths, phasing, adjustment in lot lines that do not result in creation of additional developable lots, or adjustments to utility or access easements. Minor amendments shall comply with the standards of this UDO, shall not alter a subdivision standard that is discretionary to the Commission, or shall not increase the extent of an approved waiver to a subdivision standard. 
b.  Major Amendments . 
All other proposed amendments of an approved Preliminary Plan not constituting a minor amendment shall be considered a major amendment and require the approval of a new Preliminary Plan application by the Administrator or the Commission, as appropriate. Major amendments include but are not limited to an increase in the number of developable lots, rerouting of streets, addition or deletion of alleys, change to thoroughfare street layout, or modification to parkland. 
c.  Amendment Determination . 
The applicant shall provide a written description of proposed amendments to an approved Preliminary Plan. The Administrator shall make the determination of whether the proposed amendments are deemed minor or major amendments. At the discretion of the Administrator, a new Preliminary Plan application that proposes major amendments may be processed simultaneously with a Final Plat application. 
d.  Retaining Previous Approval . 
If the proposed major amendments are not approved or if the applicant is unwilling to accept the terms and conditions required by the Administrator or the Commission, the applicant may withdraw the proposed amendments by written request and retain the previously approved Preliminary Plan. 
3.  Final Plat, Replat, Vacating Plat, and Development Plat Review . 
a.  Review and Recommendation by Administrator . 
1)  The Administrator shall review the plat application for compliance with the elements: 
(a)  The approved Preliminary Plan, if applicable; 
(b)  City's Comprehensive Plan including but not limited to the Land Use Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, Utility Master Plans, Parks and Recreation Master Plan, Bicycle, Pedestrian and Greenways Master Plan, Sidewalk Master Plan; 
(c)  Existing zoning of the property, if applicable; 
(d)  Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements; 
(e)  Form and content as required in the Application Requirements Section of this UDO; and 
(f)  Other provisions of this UDO as applicable. 
2)  If public infrastructure is required for the plat, the following is required in order for the plat application to be complete to be scheduled for Planning and Zoning Commission consideration: 
(a)  The construction documents must be approved by the City Engineer; 
(b)  Any necessary off-site easements are reviewed and acceptable by the City in recordable form; and 
(c)  Either the public infrastructure is constructed by the applicant and accepted by the City, or a guarantee provided to the City Engineer in accordance with the Construction, Guarantee of Performance, and Acceptance of Public Infrastructure Section in Article 8 of this UDO. 
3)  The applicant will be advised of the date set for Planning and Zoning Commission consideration. 
4)  The Administrator shall recommend approval or disapproval of the same. 
b.  Review and Recommendation by Parks and Recreation Advisory Board . 
If not already determined through an approved Preliminary Plan, the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall review the plat application for compliance with the parkland dedication requirements of Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements, and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the same. This recommendation must be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission in its plat review. 
c.  Criteria for Approval by Planning and Zoning Commission . 
Within thirty (30) days after the plat is filed, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall receive the recommendation of the Administrator and the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and shall approve or disapprove such plat. The Commission's action shall be based on compliance with the review elements listed in Final Plat, Replat, Vacating Plat, and Development Plat Review and the City Engineer's approval of all required infrastructure as proposed in the construction documents and which has been constructed and accepted or guaranteed in accordance with the Construction, Guarantee of Performance, and Acceptance of Public Infrastructure Section in Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements, of this UDO. Conditions of approval must entail corrections, changes, or completion of items that are ministerial in nature and explicitly spelled out 
d.  Recordation . 
If the Planning and Zoning Commission has approved the plat, the plat shall be recorded in the Office of the County Clerk of the county in which the plat is located when all requirements and conditions have been met. 
4.  Minor Plat and Amending Plat Review . 
a.  Review and Action by Administrator . 
The plat shall be reviewed by the Administrator for compliance to all applicable requirements of this UDO including those elements identified in the Preliminary Plan Review and the following procedures: 
1)  Consideration of the approval, approval with conditions, or recommended denial of the plat by the Administrator usually within fifteen (15) days of filing a Minor Plat or Amending Plat; 
2)  The Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions, or recommend denial and forward the plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission at the next available meeting. The Administrator may also elect to forward the plat to the Commission for any reason. Conditions of approval must entail corrections, changes, or completion of items that are ministerial in nature and explicitly spelled out; 
3)  If forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Commission shall approve, disapprove, or conditionally approve the plat. Conditions of approval must entail corrections, changes, or completion of items that are ministerial in nature and explicitly spelled out; 
4)  Upon approval of the Commission meeting minutes, the Administrator shall make them available to the applicant; 
5)  A report shall be made to the Commission at each meeting notifying the Commission of any Amending Plats or Minor Plats that were approved by the Administrator since the last Commission meeting. 
b.  Recordation . 
If favorable final action has been taken by the Administrator or the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Minor Plat or Amending Plat shall be recorded in the Office of the County Clerk of the county in which the plat is located when all requirements and conditions have been met. 
F.  Waivers. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission, where authorized by this UDO, may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove waivers of the standards in Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements. 
G.  Platting in Planned Development Districts (PDD and P-MUD). 
If the subject property is zoned as a Planned Development District (PDD) or Planned Mixed-Use District (P-MUD), the City Council may approve a Concept Plan that provides for general modifications to the site development and subdivision standards. The general modifications shall be indicated on the approved Concept Plan or within the rezoning ordinance. 
H.  Platting in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. 
The City of College Station has entered into one (1) or more written agreements with counties in which it has extraterritorial jurisdiction. Such agreements identify the authority authorized to regulate plats within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City, and the provisions of this Section are subject to the terms and conditions of such valid agreements. In the event such an agreement creates a direct conflict between the regulations herein and those of the particular County, the stricter standard shall apply. 
I.  Failure to Obtain Plat Approval. 
1.  If plat approval is required for the subdivision of property or development of property and same is not properly secured: 
a.  Prohibition of Recordation. 
It shall be unlawful to offer and cause to be recorded any plat or replat of land within the City limits or ETJ of the City of College Station at the Office of the County Clerk unless the same bears the endorsement and approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Administrator, or bears a valid certificate of No Action Taken as provided for in this UDO. 
b.  Prohibition of Making Improvements. 
It shall be unlawful to make any improvements, alterations or changes of any kind to such property; 
c.  No Issuance of Permits. 
The City shall not issue any building, repair, plumbing, electrical or other permit relating to such property until such approval occurs; 
d.  No Provision or Maintenance of Infrastructure. 
The City shall not repair, maintain, install or provide any streets, public utilities or public infrastructure of any kind to such property; 
e.  No Provision of Public Utilities. 
The City shall not sell or supply water, gas, electricity, or sewerage to such property. 
2.  Council Action. 
a.  If any subdivision or development exists for which a plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full, the City Council may pass a resolution reciting the fact of such noncompliance or failure to secure plat approval, and reciting the fact that the provisions of this Section apply. 
b.  The City Secretary shall, when directed by the City Council, cause a certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the City to be recorded in the Deed Records of the County. 
c.  If such compliance and plat approval are secured after the recording of such resolution, the City Secretary shall forthwith record an instrument in the Deed Records of the County stating that the property is no longer in violation. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2013-3522 , Pt. 1(Exhs. A, B), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2013-3542 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2013; Ord. No. 2016-3796 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-11-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3967 , Pt. 1(Exhs. E, F), 12-14-2017) 
Sec. 3.5. - Concept Plan Review (PDD and P-MUD Districts). 
A.  Applicability. 

A Concept Plan shall be required for all proposed Planned Development District (PDD) or Planned Mixed-Use District (P-MUD) rezonings. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
A complete application for a Concept Plan shall be submitted to the Administrator with a PDD or P-MUD rezoning application as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO, unless otherwise specified in this Section. 
C.  Concept Plan Approval Process. 
1.  Preapplication Conference. 
Prior to submitting a Concept Plan, applicants are encouraged to schedule and attend an optional preapplication conference in accordance with and for the purposes as set forth elsewhere in this UDO for preapplication conferences. 
2.  Review and Report by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. 
If the proposed area involves any required or voluntary parkland dedication, the Concept Plan must be reviewed by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. Parks and Recreation Advisory Board recommendations shall be forwarded to the City Council. 
3.  Review and Report by the Greenways Program Manager. 
If the proposed area includes a greenway dedication as shown on the Greenways Master Plan, or if the applicant is proposing greenway dedication or voluntary sale, the Concept Plan must be reviewed by the Greenways Program Manager. The Greenways Program Manager's recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council. 
4.  Review and Recommendation by the Administrator. 
The Administrator shall review the Concept Plan and recommend approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the same. 
5.  Review and Recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the Concept Plan and recommend to the City Council approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the same. 
6.  City Council Final Action. 
The City Council shall review the Concept Plan and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove. 
D.  Concept Plan Requirements. 
A Concept Plan shall not be considered or reviewed as a complete site plan application. The Concept Plan for the proposed development shall include the following: 
1.  A general plan showing the location and relationship of the various land uses permitted in the development; 
2.  A range of proposed building heights; 
3.  A written statement addressing the drainage development of the site; 
4.  The general location of detention/retention ponds and other major drainage structures; 
5.  A list of general bulk or dimensional variations sought; 
6.  If general bulk or dimensional variations are sought, provide a list of community benefits and/or innovative design concepts to justify the request; 
7.  The general location of building and parking areas; 
8.  Open spaces, parkland, conservation areas, greenways, parks, trails and other special features of the development; and 
9.  Buffer areas or a statement indicating buffering proposed. 
E.  Review Criteria. 
The Administrator and Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend approval and the City Council may approve a Concept Plan if it finds that the Plan meets the following criteria: 
1.  The proposal will constitute an environment of sustained stability and will be in harmony with the character of the surrounding area; 
2.  The proposal is in conformity with the policies, goals, and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, and any subsequently adopted Plans, and will be consistent with the intent and purpose of this Section; 
3.  The proposal is compatible with existing or permitted uses on abutting sites and will not adversely affect adjacent development; 
4.  Every dwelling unit need not front on a public street but shall have access to a public street directly or via a court, walkway, public area, or area owned by a homeowners association; 
5.  The development includes provision of adequate public improvements, including, but not limited to, parks, schools, and other public facilities; 
6.  The development will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity; and 
7.  The development will not adversely affect the safety and convenience of vehicular, bicycle, or pedestrian circulation in the vicinity, including traffic reasonably expected to be generated by the proposed use and other uses reasonably anticipated in the area considering existing zoning and land uses in the area. 
F.  Minimum Requirements. 
Unless otherwise indicated in the approved Concept Plan, the minimum requirements for each development shall be those stated in this UDO for subdivisions and the requirements of the most restrictive standard zoning district in which designated uses are permitted. Modification of these standards may be considered during the approval process of the Concept Plan. If modification of these standards is granted with the Concept Plan, the Administrator will determine the specific minimum requirements. 
G.  Compliance with Other Regulations. 
The approval of a Concept Plan shall not relieve the developer from responsibility for complying with all other applicable sections of this UDO and other codes and ordinances of the City of College Station unless such relief is granted in the approved Concept Plan. 
H.  Owners Association Required. 
An owners' association will be required if other satisfactory arrangements have not been made for providing, operating, and maintaining common facilities including streets, drives, service and parking areas, common open spaces, buffer areas, and common recreational areas at the time the development plan is submitted. If an owners' association is required, documentation must be submitted to the City at the time of platting to assure compliance with the provisions of this UDO. 
I.  Modifications. 
Any deviations from the approved Concept Plan shall require City Council approval except as provided for below. 
J.  Minor Amendment to Concept Plan. 
Minor additions and modifications to the approved Concept Plan meeting the criteria below may be approved by the Administrator: 
1.  Minor additions to structures as determined by the Administrator; 
2.  Minor new accessory structures if the location does not interfere with existing site layout (e.g., circulation, parking, loading, storm water management facilities, open space, landscaping, buffering); 
3.  Minor additions to parking lots; 
4.  Clearing or grading of areas not depicted on the Concept Plan as a conservation area, greenway, or park; and 
5.  Final determination of the specific meritorious modifications such as setbacks, lot size, dimensional standards, etc., granted generally as part of the Concept Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 3.6. - Site Plan Review. 
A.  Applicability. 

1.  Prior to development of any use or structure other than single-family (excluding Manufactured Home Parks), duplex, or townhouse residential development, a site plan shall be approved by the City in accordance with this Section. 
2.  No development described in paragraph 1. above shall be lawful or permitted to proceed without final site plan approval. A site plan approved as part of a conditional use permit shall be considered a site plan approval. 
3.  If the subject property is zoned as a Planned Development District (PDD) or Planned Mixed-Use District (P-MUD), the City Council may approve a Concept Plan that provides for general modifications to the site development standards. The general modifications shall be indicated on the approved Concept Plan. The Administrator shall determine the specific standards that comply with the general modifications of the site development requirements at the time a site plan is approved. The applicant or the Administrator may have the City Council determine the specific standards that comply with the approved Concept Plan. 
B.  General Requirements. 
All improvements reflected on approved site plans must be constructed at the time of development. All terms and conditions of site plan approval must be met at the time of development. 
C.  Application Requirements. 
A complete application for site plan approval shall be submitted to the Administrator as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 in this UDO. The application shall include a landscape plan illustrating compliance with the requirements of the Landscaping and Tree Protection Section in Article 7 of this UDO. Where applicable, applicants shall submit information, documents, and materials required in the Non-Residential Architectural Standards Section and Traffic Impact Analyses Section in Article 7 of this UDO. 
D.  Site Plan Approval Process. 
Site plan review applications shall be processed in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Preapplication Conference. 
Prior to the submission of an application for site plan approval, applicants are encouraged to schedule and attend an optional preapplication conference in accordance with and for the purposes as set forth elsewhere in this UDO for preapplication conferences. 
2.  Final Action by the Administrator. 
If the proposed site plan is determined to be consistent with all applicable provisions of this UDO, the Administrator shall approve or conditionally approve the site plan. A determination that all such requirements and provisions have not been satisfied shall result in disapproval of the site plan and notice of such disapproval shall be given to the applicant in writing. Conditional approval must entail corrections or changes that are ministerial and explicitly spelled out. 
E.  Site Plan Review Criteria. 
The Administrator may request changes to the site plan to accomplish the following requirements. In order to be approved, a site plan must provide for: 
1.  Safe and convenient traffic control, handling, and vehicle queuing; 
2.  Assured pedestrian safety which may include the provision of sidewalks along the perimeter of the property; 
3.  Efficient and economic public utilities; 
4.  Public road or street access; 
5.  Safe and efficient internal access including public, private, or emergency; 
6.  Adequate parking and maneuvering areas; 
7.  Noise and emission control or dispersion that complies with Chapter 7, Health and Sanitation, of the City's Code of Ordinances; 
8.  Runoff, drainage, and flood control; 
9.  Visual screening of areas offensive to the public or adjacent developments such as detention areas, retaining walls, utilities and solid waste facilities; 
10.  Compliance with standards, guidelines, and policies of the City's adopted Streetscape Plan referenced in Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements; 
11.  Clear indication of what constitutes the building plot for purposes of signage; and 
12.  Location and density of buildings or dwellings where topography or characteristics of the site compel a lower density than would otherwise be allowed, or require location consistent with accepted engineering practices and principles. 
F.  Appeal. 
Appeals of site plans denied by the Administrator where the denial was based upon or condition imposed to assure compliance with the Site Plan Review Criteria described above, shall be submitted to the Design Review Board within thirty (30) days of the decision. If no appeal is filed within thirty (30) days, the decision shall be final. 
The Design Review Board shall have the same authority as the Administrator in reviewing the site plan and taking final action. The Board may impose reasonable site-related conditions to mitigate the impacts of the development; however, they shall not impose architectural changes unless otherwise provided for in this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 3.7. - Wolf Pen Creek Design District Site Plan Review. 
A.  Applicability. 

1.  Design District. 
Prior to any development in the Wolf Pen Creek district (WPC) excluding minor additions such as storage buildings, fencing and the like, an applicant must obtain design district site plan approval under this Section. 
In reviewing a project, the Administrator may require traffic and parking impact studies, a review of existing occupancy, and other reasonable data to determine the impact of the project. 
2.  Design District Site Plan Review Required. 
No private development shall be lawful or permitted to proceed without final design district site plan approval. Design district site plan approval shall be required for all site plans as part of a conditional use permit. 
3.  General Requirements. 
a.  All improvements reflected on approved site plans must be constructed at the time of development. 
b.  All associated rehabilitation, faade work, and other construction must be conducted subsequent to and in compliance with approved elevations, colors, and materials, and comply with all requirements in the Wolf Pen Creek Design District. Such review may take place concurrent with the site plan review, or may take place separately, as provided in Section 3.9, Development Permit. 
c.  All terms and conditions of site plan approval must be met at the time of development. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
A complete application for site plan approval shall be submitted to the Administrator as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section Article 3 of this UDO. The application shall include a landscaping plan illustrative compliance with the requirements of the Landscaping and Tree Protection Section Article 7 of this UDO. Where applicable, applicants shall submit information, documents, and materials required in the Non-Residential Architectural Standards Section and Traffic Impact Analyses Section Article 7 of this UDO. 
C.  Wolf Pen Creek Design District Site Plan Approval Process. 
Wolf Pen Creek district site plan review applications shall be processed in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Preapplication Conference. 
Prior to the submission of an application for design district site plan approval, applicants are encouraged to schedule and attend an optional preapplication conference in accordance with and for the purposes as set forth elsewhere in this UDO for preapplication conferences. 
2.  Decision by the Administrator. 
If the proposed site plan is determined to be consistent with all applicable provisions of this UDO, including the applicable district provisions of the Design Districts Section in Article 5 of this UDO, and the review criteria below, the Administrator shall approve the design district site plan. A determination that all such requirements and provisions have not been satisfied shall result in disapproval of the site plan. 
D.  Additional Review Criteria for the WPC District. 
All development within the Wolf Pen Creek District shall comply with the Site Plan Review Criteria as outlined in Section 3.6.E of this UDO. In addition, the following standards, which affect the appearance of a development, shall govern the evaluation of a design submission in the WPC district: 
1.  Conformance to the City's Comprehensive Plan; 
2.  Exterior space utilization; 
3.  Material selection; 
4.  Compatibility with existing development in the design district; 
5.  Vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation; 
6.  Building location and orientation; and 
7.  Specific standards listed in the Design Districts Section in Article 5 of this UDO. 
E.  Appeal. 
Appeals of site plans denied by the Administrator where the denial was based upon or condition imposed to assure compliance with the Additional Review Criteria for the WPC District described above, shall be submitted to the Design Review Board within thirty (30) days of the decision. If no appeal is filed within thirty (30) days, the decision shall be final. 
In the event of an appeal, the Design Review Board shall use the same review criteria as the Administrator in reviewing the site plan and taking final action. The Board may impose reasonable site-related conditions to mitigate the impacts of the development; however, they shall not impose architectural changes unless otherwise provided for in this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2018-3985 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 2-8-2018) 
Sec. 3.8. - Wolf Pen Creek Design District Building and Sign Review. 
A.  Applicability. 

1.  In the Wolf Pen Creek district (WPC), all substantial maintenance (including but not limited to rehabilitation, faade work, and, change or exterior materials or other construction, including the replacement or alteration of signs) shall be subject to the WPC district building and sign review process. 
2.  All Building and Sign review required in this Design District, including minor additions to a site (accessory buildings and structures, change of solid waste disposal location, painting, and landscaping) shall be reviewed by the Administrator. 
B.  Application. 
A complete application for building or sign review in a design district shall be submitted to the Administrator as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section of this UDO. 
C.  Decision by Administrator. 
1.  Design Review. 
The Administrator shall apply the standards for the applicable district as set forth in the Design Districts Section in Article 5 of this UDO. In considering such matters, the Administrator may rely on special area plans or studies adopted by the City Council. 
2.  Written Decision. 
If approval is granted, the decision shall be communicated in writing to the applicant. 
D.  Waivers. 
The Design Review Board shall hear and decide requests for waivers from the standards in the Wolf Pen Creek (WPC) subsection of the Design Districts Section of Article 5 of this UDO as limited to the possible waivers authorized by that subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2018-3985 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 2-8-2018) 
Sec. 3.9. - Development Permit. 
A.  Applicability. 

A development permit shall be required prior to any development, as defined in Article 11, Definitions, to ensure conformance to the provisions and requirements of this UDO. The following uses are exempt from the permitting requirements of this Section, but shall otherwise meet all of the requirements of this UDO and the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Technical Specifications and Standard Details and the Drainage and Stormwater Management Section in Article 7 of this UDO: 
1.  Customary and incidental grounds maintenance, landscaping, and gardening. 
2.  Drainage-related improvements or modifications by a homeowner on property used as their principal residence where that property lies outside of the designated Area of Special Flood Hazard. 
3.  Uses by a landowner of their property for bona fide agricultural purposes. 
B.  Approval Process. 
Prior to the issuance of a development permit, the following requirements shall be met: 
1.  Preapplication Conference. 
A preapplication conference may be held with the Development Engineer, or his designated representative, if the property contains areas of special flood hazard. 
2.  Application. 
A complete application for a development permit shall be submitted to the Development Engineer as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
3.  Review and Action by the Development Engineer. 
The Development Engineer shall review the required information and application form and shall take one (1) of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the development permit; 
b.  Disapprove the development permit; 
c.  Approve the development permit with conditions; or 
d.  Require additional information or an engineering conference with the applicant or his engineer. 
4.  Review Criteria. 
Approval or denial of a development permit by the Development Engineer shall be based on the following relevant factors: 
a.  The danger to life or property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
b.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
c.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
d.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
e.  The maintenance and operational costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; 
f.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters, and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
g.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
h.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
i.  The barricading of existing trees to remain on the property and count as protected trees under the Landscaping and Tree Protection Section in Article 7 of this UDO; and 
j.  Compliance with this UDO. 
5.  Notification of Decision. 
a.  The applicant shall be notified in writing of the action prescribed above. If the development permit has been disapproved, the specific reasons for disapproval shall be indicated in the notification. If additional information is required of the applicant, the specific requirements shall be indicated in the notification. A final determination of the approval or disapproval of the development permit, considering the additional information, shall be made and written notification to the applicant given within ten (10) working days after acceptance of the complete application. 
b.  Any proposal which includes areas of special flood hazard within the following special drainage areas shall receive written notice of approval or disapproval of the development permit from the Development Engineer within sixty (60) working days after receipt of the proposal: 
1)  The entirety of Carter's Creek; 
2)  The main channel of Lick Creek; 
3)  Wolf Pen Creek from the Earl Rudder Freeway to the confluence with Carter's Creek; and 
4)  The Brazos River. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 3.10. - Certificate of Appropriateness. 
A.  Applicability. 

1.  Prior to any construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, or rehabilitation of any structure or any property within a Historic Preservation Overlay District, or any material change in the light fixtures, signs, sidewalks, fences, steps, paving, or other exterior elements visible from a public right-of-way that affects the appearance and cohesiveness of any structure or any property within a Historic Preservation Overlay District, an applicant must obtain a Certificate of Appropriateness in accordance with this Section. 
2.  No building permit shall be issued for proposed work within a Historic Preservation Overlay District until a Certificate of Appropriateness has first been issued as required by the UDO. The Certificate of Appropriateness shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any building permit that may be required by any other ordinance of the City of College Station. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
A complete application for a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be submitted to the Administrator as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO. The application shall include, where applicable: 
1.  Detailed description of proposed work; 
2.  Proposed building plans (this will not constitute a building plan submittal for review for a building permit); 
3.  Landscaping plans showing landscaping features and vegetation species, sizes, and locations; 
4.  Landscape protection plans; 
5.  Location and photographs of the property and adjacent properties; 
6.  Elevation drawings of the proposed changes, if available; 
7.  Samples of materials to be used; 
8.  Specifications for architectural features and materials; and 
9.  Any other information that the Landmark Commission or Historic Preservation Officer may deem necessary in order to visualize proposed work. 
C.  Certificate of Appropriateness Approval Process. 
Certificate of Appropriateness applications shall be processed in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Preapplication Conference. 
Prior to the submission of an application for Certificate of Appropriateness, all potential applicants may request a preapplication conference with the Administrator. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to respond to any questions that the applicant may have regarding any application procedures, standards, or regulations required by this UDO; however, the preapplication conference does not fulfill the requirements for formal review or submittal as set forth in this UDO. 
2.  Review and Report by the Historic Preservation Officer. 
Upon receipt of an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Historic Preservation Officer shall determine whether the application is to be reviewed under the Standard Certificate of Appropriateness Review Procedure or the Routine Maintenance Work Procedure. If the application is to be reviewed under the Standard Certificate of Appropriateness Review Procedure, the following applies. If the application is to be reviewed under the Routine Maintenance Work Procedure, the procedure in subsection E. below will apply. 
Under the Standard Certificate of Appropriateness Review Procedure, the Historic Preservation Officer will review the application to determine if the proposed plan is consistent with all applicable provisions of this UDO and the City's Comprehensive Plan. The Historic Preservation Officer will forward his report on the application to the Landmark Commission with a recommendation for approval, denial or conditional approval. 
3.  Review by the Landmark Commission. 
The Landmark Commission shall review the application in a public meeting and may approve, approve with conditions or deny the application. If the Landmark Commission requires additional information than that presented at a meeting, a decision may be postponed until a specified date when the specified information may be provided. Notice shall be provided by publication of the agenda of the meeting. 
4.  Final Action by the Landmark Commission. 
If the application is determined to be consistent with all applicable provisions of this UDO, including the applicable district provisions of the Historic Preservation Overlay District Section in Article 5 of this UDO and the review criteria below, the Landmark Commission shall approve the plan. A determination that all requirements and provisions have not been satisfied shall result in disapproval of the plan. 
D.  Criteria for Approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
The Landmark Commission shall approve a Certificate of Appropriateness if it finds: 
1.  For Contributing Resources. 
a.  The proposed work is consistent with The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, The Secretary of the Interior's Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, Preservation Briefs, and all related interpretative documents published by the U.S. Department of Interior; 
b.  The proposed work will not have an adverse effect on the architectural features of the structure; 
c.  The proposed work will not have an adverse effect on the Historic Preservation Overlay District; and 
d.  The proposed work will not have an adverse effect on the future preservation, maintenance, and use of the structure or the Historic Preservation Overlay District. 
2.  For Non-Contributing Resources. 
The proposed work is compatible with the Historic Preservation Overlay District. 
E.  Certificate of Appropriateness Routine Maintenance Work Review Procedure. 
1.  If, upon review of an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Historic Preservation Officer determines that an applicant is seeking a Certificate of Appropriateness to authorize only routine maintenance work, the Historic Preservation Officer shall review the Certificate of Appropriateness application to determine whether the proposed work complies with the regulations contained in this Section and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The Historic Preservation Officer may also forward the application to the Landmark Commission for any reason. 
2.  Routine Maintenance Work on a property is considered to be: 
a.  The installation of a chimney located on an accessory building, or on the rear fifty (50) percent of a main building and not part of a corner side faade; 
b.  The installation of an awning located on an accessory building, or on the rear faade of a primary structure; 
c.  The installation of a wood or chain link fence that is not painted or stained; 
d.  The installation of gutters and downspouts of a color that matches or compliments the dominant trim or roof color; 
e.  The installation of skylights and solar panels; 
f.  The installation of storm windows and doors; 
g.  The restoration of original architectural elements; 
3.  The applicant may appeal the Historic Preservation Officer's decision by submitting to the Historic Preservation Officer a written request for appeal within ten (10) calendar days of the decision. Upon the written request for appeal, the Landmark Commission will review the application under the Standard Certificate of Appropriateness Review Procedure. 
F.  Expiration of Approval. 
For plans that do not require the issuance of a building permit, work to complete the plans shall commence and be completed within twenty-four (24) months from the date of approval of the application. The Historic Preservation Officer may authorize a single extension of a Certification of Appropriateness up to six (6) months upon demonstration of substantial progress and the lack of changed or changing conditions in the area. 
For plans that require the issuance of a building permit, if a building permit has not been issued for the proposed work within twenty-four (24) months from the date of approval of the application, the Historic Preservation Officer may authorize a single extension of a Certification of Appropriateness up to six (6) months upon demonstration of the lack of changed or changing conditions in the area. A Certification of Appropriateness shall be valid as long as there is a valid building permit. 
G.  Appeals. 
An applicant for a Certification of Appropriateness dissatisfied with the action of the Landmark Commission related to the issuance or denial of a Certification of Appropriateness shall have the right to appeal to the City Council within ten (10) calendar days after the date of such action. In considering an appeal, the City Council shall consider the same standards and evidence that the Landmark Commission was required to consider in making the decision. 
H.  Limitation on Reapplication. 
If a final decision is reached denying a Certificate of Appropriateness, no further applications may be considered for the subject matter of the denied Certificate of Appropriateness for one (1) year from the date of the final decision unless the Landmark Commission waives the time limitation because the Landmark Commission finds that there are changed circumstances sufficient to warrant a new hearing. 
I.  Revocation. 
The Historic Preservation Officer may, in writing, revoke a Certificate of Appropriateness if: 
1.  The Certificate of Appropriateness was issued on the basis of incorrect information supplied by the applicant, or 
2.  The work is not performed in accordance with the Certificate of Appropriateness. 
J.  Amendment to a Certificate of Appropriateness. 
A Certificate of Appropriateness may be amended by submitting a new Certificate of Appropriateness application to the Historic Preservation Officer. The application shall then be subject to either the Standard Certificate of Appropriateness Review Procedure or the Routine Maintenance Work Procedure. 
K.  Ordinary Maintenance. 
Other than the Routine Maintenance Work listed above, a Certificate of Appropriateness shall not be required for the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a property within a Historic Preservation Overlay District which does not involve a change in design, material, or outward appearance such as: 
1.  The replacement of a roof of the same or an original material that does not include a change in color; 
2.  The application of paint that is the same as the existing; 
3.  Minor repair using the same material and design as the original; 
4.  The repair of sidewalks and driveways using the same type and color of materials; 
5.  The process of cleaning (including but not limited to low-pressure water blasting and stripping, but excluding sandblasting and high-pressure water blasting); and 
6.  The painting, replacing, duplicating, or stabilizing deteriorated or damaged non-original architectural features (including but not limited to roofing, windows, columns, and siding) in order to maintain the structure and to slow deterioration. 
L.  Temporary Emergency Repairs. 
If the Building Official determines that a building or structure in a Historic Preservation Overlay District poses an immediate threat to persons or property, the Building Official may take any action authorized under the City of College Station Code of Ordinances to make the building or structure safe without the requirement of a Certification of Appropriateness. The Building Official shall send a written report of such actions to the Landmark Commission. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 3.11. - Certificate of Demolition. 
A.  Applicability. 

1.  Prior to any demolition or removal of any structure or portion thereof on any property within a Historic Preservation Overlay District, an applicant must obtain a Certificate of Demolition in accordance with this Section. 
2.  No building permit shall be issued for proposed work within a Historic Preservation Overlay District until a Certificate of Demolition required by the UDO has first been issued by the Landmark Commission. The Certificate of Demolition shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any building permit that may be required by any other ordinance of the City of College Station. 
3.  No permit for the demolition of a structure or property within a Historic Preservation Overlay District, including secondary buildings and landscape features, shall be granted by the Building Official without the review of a completed application for and approval of a Certificate of Demolition by the Landmark Commission. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
A property owner seeking demolition or removal of a structure, including secondary buildings and landscape features, on a property in a Historic Preservation Overlay District shall submit a complete application for a Certificate of Demolition to the Administrator as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO. The application shall include: 
1.  An affidavit in which the owner swears or affirms that all information submitted in the application is true and correct. 
2.  An indication that the demolition or removal is sought for one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
a.  To replace the structure with a new structure that is more appropriate and compatible with the Historic Preservation Overlay District; 
b.  No economically viable use of the property exists; 
c.  The structure poses an imminent threat to public health or safety; or 
d.  The structure is noncontributing to the Historic Preservation Overlay District because it is newer than the period of historic significance. 
3.  An application "To replace the structure with a new structure that is more appropriate and compatible with the Historic Preservation Overlay District" shall also include: 
a.  Records depicting the original construction of the structure, including drawings, pictures, or written descriptions where available; 
b.  Records depicting the current condition of the structure, including drawings, pictures, or written descriptions; 
c.  Any conditions proposed to be placed voluntarily on the new structure that would mitigate the loss of the structure; 
d.  Complete architectural drawings of the new structure; and 
e.  A guarantee agreement between the owner and the City that demonstrates the owner's intent and financial ability to construct the new structure. The guarantee must: 
1)  Contain a statement of intent to construct the proposed structure by a specific date in accordance with architectural drawings approved by the City through the Certificate of Appropriateness process; 
2)  Require the owner or construction contractor to post a performance and payment bond, letter of credit, escrow agreement, cash deposit, or other arrangement acceptable to the Administrator to ensure construction of the new structure; and 
3)  Be approved as to form by the City Attorney. 
4.  An application that "No economically viable use of the property exists" shall also include: 
a.  The past and current uses of the structure and property; 
b.  The name of the owner. 
1)  If the owner is a legal entity, the type of entity and states in which it is registered. 
2)  The date and price of purchase or other acquisition of the structure and property, and the party from whom acquired, and the owner's current basis in the property. 
3)  The relationship, if any, between the owner and the party from whom the structure and property were acquired. (If one (1) or both parties to the transaction were legal entities, any relationships between the officers and the board of directors of the entities must be specified.); 
4)  The assessed value of the structure and property according to the two (2) most recent tax assessments; 
5)  The amount of real estate taxes on the structure and property for the previous two (2) years; 
6)  The current fair market value of the structure and property as determined by an independent licensed appraiser; 
7)  All appraisals obtained by the owner and prospective purchasers within the previous two (2) years in connection with the potential or actual purchase, financing, or ownership of the structure and property; 
8)  All listings of the structure and property for sale or rent within the previous two (2) years, prices asked, and offers received; 
9)  A profit and loss statement for the property and structure containing the annual gross income for the previous two (2) years; itemized expenses (including operating and maintenance costs) for the previous two (2) years, including proof that adequate and competent management procedures were followed; the annual cash flow for the previous two (2) years; and proof that the owner has made reasonable efforts to obtain a reasonable rate of return on the owner's investment and labor; 
10)  A mortgage history of the property during the previous five (5) years, including the principal balances and interest rates on the mortgages and the annual debt services on the structure and property; 
11)  All capital expenditures during the current ownership; 
12)  Records depicting the current conditions of the structure and property, including drawings, pictures, or written descriptions; 
13)  A study of restoration of the structure or property, performed by a licensed architect, engineer or financial analyst, analyzing the physical feasibility (including architectural and engineering analyses) and financial feasibility (including pro forma profit and loss statements for a ten-year period, taking into consideration redevelopment options and all incentives available) of adaptive use of restoration of the structure and property; 
14)  Any consideration given by the owner to profitable adaptive uses for the structure and property; 
15)  Construction plans for any proposed development or adaptive reuse, including site plans, floor plans, and elevations; 
16)  Any conditions proposed to be placed voluntarily on new development that would mitigate the loss of the structure; and 
17)  Any other evidence that shows that the affirmative obligation to maintain the structure or property makes it impossible to realize a reasonable rate of return. 
5.  An application to demolish or remove a structure that "Poses an imminent threat to public health or safety" shall also include: 
a.  Records depicting the current condition of the structure, including drawings, pictures, or written descriptions; 
b.  A study regarding the nature, imminence, and severity of the threat, as performed by a licensed architect or engineer; and 
c.  A study regarding both the cost of restoration of the structure and the feasibility (including architectural and engineering analyses) of restoration of the structure, as performed by a licensed architect or engineer. 
6.  An application to demolish or remove a structure that is "Noncontributing to the Historic Preservation Overlay District because the structure is newer than the period of historic significance" shall also provide: 
a.  Documentation that the structure is noncontributing to the Historic Preservation Overlay District; 
b.  Documentation of the age of the structure; and 
c.  A statement of the purpose of the demolition. 
7.  Any other evidence the property owner wishes to submit in support of the application. 
8.  Any other evidence requested by the Landmark Commission or the Historic Preservation Officer. 
C.  Certificate of Demolition Approval Process. 
Certificate of Demolition applications shall be processed in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Preapplication Conference. 
Prior to the submission of an application for Certificate of Demolition, all potential applicants may request a preapplication conference with the Administrator. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to respond to any questions that the applicant may have regarding any application procedures, standards, or regulations required by this UDO; however, the preapplication conference does not fulfill the requirements for formal review or submittal as set forth in this UDO. 
2.  Application. 
When a complete application for a Certificate of Demolition has been submitted to the City, the application will begin a mandatory sixty-day stay of demolition. The Certificate of Demolition approval process will continue concurrently with the stay of demolition, but the Landmark Commission shall not take final action before the stay of demolition has expired. 
3.  Review and Report by the Historic Preservation Officer. 
If the application is determined to be consistent with all applicable provisions of this UDO and the City's Comprehensive Plan, or if the application is recommended for denial or conditional approval, the Historic Preservation Officer shall report such consistency, inconsistency, or proposed conditions to the Landmark Commission. 
4.  Review by an Economic Review Panel. 
For an application that "No economically viable use of the property exists", within thirty-five (35) days after appointment of the Economic Review Panel as provided in the Landmark Commission Section of Article 2 of this UDO shall review the submitted documentation; hold a public hearing; consider all options for renovation, adaptive reuse, and redevelopment; and forward a written recommendation to the Landmark Commission. The Historic Preservation Officer shall provide administrative support to the Economic Review Panel. The Economic Review Panel's recommendation shall be based on the same standard for approval to be used by the Landmark Commission. An application that no economically viable use of the property exists will not be considered complete until the Economic Review Panel has made its recommendation to the Landmark Commission. If the Economic Review Panel is unable to reach a consensus, the report will indicate the majority and minority recommendations. If the Economic Review Panel does not meet within thirty-five (35) days after appointment, a recommendation of no economically viable use of the property will be forwarded to the Landmark Commission. 
5.  Review by the Landmark Commission. 
The Landmark Commission shall review the application for Certificate of Demolition in a public meeting and may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. If the Landmark Commission requires additional information than that presented at a meeting, a decision may be postponed until a specified date when the specified information may be provided. Notice shall be provided by publication of the agenda of the meeting. 
6.  Final Action by the Landmark Commission. 
If the application is determined to be consistent with all applicable provisions of this UDO, including the applicable district provisions of the Historic Preservation Overlay District Section in Article 5 of this UDO, and the review criteria below, the Landmark Commission shall approve the plan. A determination that all such requirements and provision have not been satisfied shall result in disapproval of the plan. The property owner has the burden of proof to establish by clear and convincing evidence the necessary facts to warrant favorable action by the Landmark Commission. 
D.  Criteria for Approval of a Certificate of Demolition. 
In considering an application for a Certificate of Demolition, the Landmark Commission shall deny the application unless it makes the following findings: 
1.  The Landmark Commission shall deny an application for a Certificate of Demolition to replace a structure with a new structure unless it finds that: 
a.  The new structure is more appropriate and compatible with the Historic Preservation Overlay District than the structure to be demolished or removed; and 
b.  The owner has the financial ability and intent to build the new structure. The Landmark Commission must first approve the Certificate of Appropriateness for the proposed new structure and the guarantee agreement to construct the new structure before it may consider the application for a Certificate of Demolition. 
2.  The Landmark Commission shall deny an application for a Certificate of Demolition to remove a structure because of no economically viable use of the property unless it finds that: 
a.  The structure is incapable of earning a reasonable economic return unless the demolition or removal is allowed (a reasonable economic return does not have to be the most profitable return possible); 
b.  The structure cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable economic return; and 
c.  The owner has failed during the last two (2) years to find a developer, financier, purchaser, or tenant that would enable the owner to realize a reasonable economic return, despite having made substantial ongoing efforts to do so. 
3.  The Landmark Commission shall deny an application for a Certificate of Demolition to remove a structure that poses an imminent threat to public health or safety unless it finds that: 
a.  The structure constitutes a documented major and imminent threat to public health and safety; 
b.  The demolition or removal is required to alleviate the threat to public health and safety; and 
c.  There is no reasonable way, other than demolition or removal, to eliminate the threat in a timely manner. 
4.  The Landmark Commission shall deny an application for a Certificate of Demolition to remove a structure that is noncontributing to the Historic Preservation Overlay District because it is newer than the period of historic significance unless it finds that: 
a.  The structure is noncontributing to the Historic Preservation Overlay District; 
b.  The structure is newer than the period of historic significance for the Historic Preservation Overlay District; and 
c.  Demolition of the structure will not adversely affect the historic character of the property or the integrity of the Historic Preservation Overlay District. 
E.  Appeals. 
1.  Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Landmark Commission to the City Council by filing a written notice with the Administrator within ten (10) calendar days after the decision of the Landmark Commission. If no appeal is made of a decision to approve a Certificate of Demolition within the ten-day period, the Building Official shall issue the permit to allow demolition or removal. If an appeal is filed, the City Council shall hear and decide the appeal within sixty-five (65) calendars days of its filing. 
2.  In considering an appeal, the City Council shall consider the same standards and evidence that the Landmark Commission was required to consider in making the decision. 
F.  Limitation on Reapplication. 
If a final decision is reached denying a Certificate of Demolition, no further applications may be considered for the subject matter of the denied Certificate of Demolition for one (1) year from the date of the final decision unless the Landmark Commission waives the time limitation because the Landmark Commission finds that there are changed circumstances sufficient to warrant a new hearing. 
G.  Expiration of Approval. 
A Certificate of Demolition expires if the work authorized by the Certificate of Demolition is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of final approval. A final, one-time extension for the commencement of work of ninety (90) days may be granted by the Administrator upon written request by the applicant showing circumstances beyond the control of the applicant. If the Certificate of Demolition expires, a new Certificate of Demolition must first be obtained before the work can commence. 
H.  Demolition by Neglect. 
1.  Prohibition. 
No owner or person with an interest in real property included within a Historic Preservation Overlay District shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior architectural feature or structural compromise which would, in the judgment of the Landmark Commission, produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the Historic Preservation Overlay District as a whole or the life and character of the property itself. Examples of such deterioration include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Deterioration of the foundation. 
b.  Deterioration of floor supports or the addition of floor supports that are insufficient to carry the loads imposed. 
c.  Deterioration of walls, windows, doors, or other vertical supports, or the addition of such supports that are of insufficient size or strength to carry the loads imposed. 
d.  Deterioration of roof or other horizontal members. 
e.  Deterioration of exterior chimneys. 
f.  Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar. 
g.  Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof, or foundations, including broken windows or doors. 
h.  Defective weather protection or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings, including lack of paint or other protective coating. 
i.  Any fault, defect, or condition in the structure that renders it structurally unsafe or not properly watertight. 
j.  Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition which could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for the public safety. 
2.  Procedure. 
a.  Purpose. 
The purpose of the Demolition by Neglect procedure is to allow the Landmark Commission to work with the property owner to encourage maintenance and stabilization of the structure and identify resources available before any enforcement action is taken. 
b.  Request for Investigation. 
Any interested party may request that the Historic Preservation Officer investigate whether a property is being Demolished by Neglect. 
c.  First Meeting With the Property Owner. 
Upon receipt of a request, the Historic Preservation Officer and City Building Official shall meet with the property owner or the property owner's agent with control of the structure to inspect the structure and discuss the resources available for financing any necessary repairs. After the meeting, the Historic Preservation Officer shall prepare a report for the Landmark Commission on the condition of the structure, the repairs needed to maintain and stabilize the structure, any resources available for financing the repairs, and the amount of time needed to complete the repairs. 
d.  Certification and Notice. 
After review of the report in a public meeting, the Landmark Commission may vote to certify the property as a Demolition by Neglect case. If the Landmark Commission certifies the structure as a Demolition by Neglect case, the Landmark Commission shall notify the property owner or the property owner's agent with control over the structure of the repairs that must be made. The notice must require that repairs be started within thirty (30) days and set a deadline for completion of the repairs. The notice shall be sent by certified mail. 
e.  Second Meeting With the Property Owner. 
The Historic Preservation Officer and the City Building Official shall meet with the property owner or the property owner's agent with control over the structure at least within sixty (60) days after the notice was sent to inspect any repairs. 
f.  Referral for Enforcement. 
If the property owner or the property owner's agent with control over the structure fails to start repairs by the deadline set in the notice, fails to make continuous progress toward completion, or fails to complete repairs by the deadline set in the notice, the Landmark Commission may refer the Demolition by Neglect case to the City's Code Enforcement Division for appropriate enforcement action to prevent Demolition by Neglect. 
I.  Demolition by Condemnation. 
Reasonable attempts to engage a property owner in a Demolition by Neglect procedure shall be made when there is concern for the deterioration of a structure, but when a structure or equipment is found by the City Building Official to be a dangerous structure, the provisions of the City of College Station Code of Ordinances regulating dangerous structures will apply. 
J.  Historic Preservation Fund. 
1.  The City of College Station, in cooperation with community organizations, shall develop appropriate funding structures and shall administer the historic preservation fund. 
2.  The historic preservation fund is composed of the following funds: 
a.  Outside funding (other than City general funds or capital funds), such as grants and donations, made to the City for the purpose of historic preservation and funding partnerships with community organizations. 
b.  Damages recovered pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Section 315.006 from persons who illegally demolish or adversely affect historic structures. 
3.  The outside funding may be used for financing the following activities: 
a.  Necessary repairs in Demolition by Neglect cases; 
b.  Full or partial restoration of low-income residential and nonresidential structures; 
c.  Full or partial restoration of publicly owned historic structures; 
d.  Acquisition of historic structures, places, or areas through gift or purchase; 
e.  Public education of the benefits of historic preservation or the regulations governing Historic Preservation Overlay Districts; and 
f.  Identification and cataloging of structures, places, areas, and districts of historical, cultural, or architectural value along with factual verification of their significance. 
4.  Damages recovered pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Section 315.006 must be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  Construction, using as many of the original materials as possible, of a structure that is a reasonable facsimile of a demolished historic structure; 
b.  Restoration, using as many of the original materials as possible, of the historic structure; and 
c.  Restoration of another historic structure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 3.12. - Building Permit. 
A.  Building Permit Required. 

No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected, moved, added to, structurally altered, repaired, demolished, or occupancy changed without a permit issued by the Building Official except in conformity with the provisions of this Section and the International Building Code as adopted and amended by the City, unless otherwise provided for in the City of College Station Code of Ordinances. No Building Permit issued under the provisions of this Article for land use or construction in the City shall be considered valid unless signed by the Building Official. 
B.  Application for Building Permit. 
1.  Applications for Building Permits for single-family, duplex, or townhouse structures shall be accompanied by one (1) set of complete plans, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration, easements, and required setbacks. 
Applications for multi-family and commercial structures shall be accompanied by three (3) sets of complete plans, drawn to scale, including the approved site plan as required in the Site Plan Review Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
Additional sets of plans shall be supplied to the Building Official upon request. 
2.  The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the Building Official or the Administrator, including existing or proposed building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of, this UDO. 
3.  One (1) copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the Building Official after it is marked as either approved, approved with conditions, or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. The original copy of the plans, similarly marked, and the associated site plan shall be retained by the Building Official. 
4.  Where applicable, applicants shall submit information and materials required in the Landscaping and Tree Protection Section in Article 7 of this UDO. 
5.  Where applicable, applicants shall submit information and materials required in the Non-Residential Architectural Standards Section in Article 7 of this UDO. 
C.  Review and Recommendation. 
The Building Official shall review all building permit applications to determine if intended uses, buildings, or structures comply with all applicable regulations and standards, including this UDO, and approve or disapprove the same. 
D.  Review and Action by Building Official. 
1.  The Building Official shall make a final determination of whether the intended uses, buildings, or structures comply with all applicable regulations, standards, and the Building Code. The Building Official shall not issue a building permit unless the plans, specifications, and intended use of such building or structures or parts thereof conform in all respects to the provisions of this UDO and the Building Code. 
2.  If the subject property is zoned as a Planned Development District (PDD) or Planned Mixed-Use District (P-MUD), the City Council may approve a Concept Plan that provides for general modifications to the site development standards. The general modifications shall be indicated on the approved Concept Plan. The Administrator shall determine the specific standards that comply with the general modifications of the site development requirements at the time of building permit. The applicant or the Administrator may have the City Council determine the specific standards that comply with the approved Concept Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2018-4034 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-23-2018) 
Sec. 3.13. - Certificate of Occupancy. 
A.  Applicability. 
A Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
1.  Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or enlarged; 
2.  Change in use of an existing building to a different Use Category; 
3.  Any change in a nonconforming use or structure; or 
4.  As required by the International Building Code as adopted and amended, Section 110. 
B.  Application. 
Once all required building inspections have been reviewed by the Building Official and he finds no violation of the provisions of the Code, the Building Official shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy for the structure or use. 
C.  Review and Action by Building Official. 
Upon the request for a Certificate of Occupancy, the Building Official shall inspect the use or structure. If the Building Official determines that the use or structure complies with all applicable provisions of the International Building Code as adopted and amended and this UDO, a Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued. 
D.  Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. 
Pending the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued by the Building Official. The Temporary Certificate of Occupancy shall be valid for a period established by the Building Official, pending completion of an addition or during partial occupancy of a structure and as provided in Section 110 of the International Building Code as adopted and amended. 
E.  Unlawful to Occupy Without Valid Certificate of Occupancy. 
It is unlawful to occupy any building that does not have a validly issued Certificate of Occupancy or Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2018-4034 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-23-2018) 
Sec. 3.14. - Certificate of Completion. 
A.  Applicability. 
A certificate of completion shall be required for any of the following: 
1.  Use of a parking lot hereafter constructed or enlarged not in conjunction with a building or structure; 
2.  Site changes including but not limited to landscaping, parking lots, faade changes in a design district, or a change to an existing site that is not done in conjunction with a building or structure that requires a building permit; or 
3.  Site improvements associated with a telecommunications tower. 
B.  Application. 
Once all required building inspections have been reviewed by the Building Official and he finds no violation of the provisions of the Code, the Building Official shall issue a Certificate of Completion for the structure. 
C.  Review and Action by Building Official. 
Upon the request for a Certificate of Completion, the Building Official shall inspect the structure. If the Building Official determines that the structure complies with all applicable provisions of the International Building Code and this UDO, a Certificate of Completion shall be issued. 
D.  Temporary Certificate of Completion. 
Pending the issuance of a Certificate of Completion, a Temporary Certificate of Completion may be issued by the Building Official. The Temporary Certificate of Completion shall be valid for a period established by the Building Official, pending compliance with approved development plans. 
E.  Unlawful to Utilize Without Valid Certificate of Completion. 
It is unlawful to utilize any structure that does not have a validly issued Certificate of Completion or Temporary Certificate of Completion. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 3.15. - Sign Permit. 
A.  Sign Permits Required. 

1.  No sign shall hereafter be installed, erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit issued by the Administrator, except in conformity with the provisions of this Section, unless he is so directed by the Zoning Board of Adjustment as provided by this UDO. 
2.  A permit shall be required for the following: 
a.  Apartment/condominium/manufactured home park identification signs; 
b.  Attached signs; 
c.  Development signs; 
d.  Freestanding signs; 
e.  Low profile signs; 
f.  Roof signs; and 
g.  Subdivision and area identification signs. 
3.  No permit shall be required for the following signs: 
a.  Real estate, finance, and construction signs; 
b.  Directional traffic control signs; 
c.  Home occupation signs; and 
d.  Noncommercial signs. 
4.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the leasing agent to assign the available freestanding or building sign square footage to individual building tenants. In no case shall this be the responsibility of the Administrator. In no case may the cumulative total of individual signs for a multi-tenant building exceed the allowable area available or attached or freestanding signs. 
B.  Application. 
A complete application for a sign permit plan shall be submitted to the Building Official as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
C.  Review and Action by the Administrator. 
The Administrator must review each sign permit application in light of this UDO and act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the permit. The Administrator may grant approval with conditions only to the extent that such conditions specify the actions necessary to bring the application into compliance with this UDO. 
D.  Maintenance and Repair. 
1.  Cleaning, painting, repainting, and other normal maintenance and repair of a sign shall not require a permit unless a structural or size change is made. Maintenance includes replacement of a sign face. Repainting or replacement of materials in the Wolf Pen Creek district must receive approval of either the Administrator or the Design Review Board as provided in the Wolf Pen Creek District Building and Sign Review Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
2.  Repair of conforming signs, damaged as a result of accidents or acts of God, shall be exempt from permit fees when they are being restored to their original condition. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 3.16. - Conditional Use Permit. 
A.  Purpose. 

Conditional use permit review allows for City Council discretionary approval of uses with unique or widely-varying operating characteristics or unusual site development features, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this UDO. 
B.  Applicability. 
Conditional uses are generally compatible with those uses permitted by right in a zoning district, but require individual review of their location, design, configuration, density and intensity, and may require the imposition of additional conditions in order to ensure the appropriateness and compatibility of the use at a particular location. 
C.  Applications. 
A complete application for a conditional use permit shall be submitted to the Administrator as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO. A complete site plan must accompany all applications for a conditional use permit. 
D.  Approval Process. 
1.  Preapplication Conference. 
Prior to the submission of an application for a conditional use permit, applicants are encouraged to schedule and attend an optional preapplication conference in accordance with and for the purposes as set forth elsewhere in this UDO for preapplication conferences. 
2.  Review and Report by Administrator. 
Once the application is complete, the Administrator shall review the proposed development subject to the criteria enumerated in Section E below, and give a report to the Planning and Zoning Commission on the date of the scheduled Public Hearing. 
3.  Planning and Zoning Commission Recommendation. 
a.  Notice. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall publish, post, and mail notice in accordance with the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
b.  Public Hearing. 
After review of the conditional use application, subject to the criteria enumerated in Section E below, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a Public Hearing and recommend to the City Council such action as the Planning and Zoning Commission deems proper. 
4.  City Council Action. 
a.  Notice. 
The City Council shall publish, post, and mail notice in accordance with the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
b.  Public Hearing. 
The City Council shall hold a Public Hearing after review of the conditional use application, subject to the criteria enumerated in Section E below. With consideration of the recommendation provided by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council shall approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove the conditional use application. 
E.  Conditional Use Review Criteria. 
The City Council may approve an application for a conditional use where it reasonably determines that there will be no significant negative impact upon residents of surrounding property or upon the general public. The City Council shall consider the following criteria in its review: 
1.  Purpose and Intent of UDO. 
The proposed use shall meet the purpose and intent of this UDO and the use shall meet all the minimum standards established in this UDO for this type of use. 
2.  Consistency with Comprehensive Plan. 
The proposed use shall be consistent with the development policies and goals and objectives as embodied in the Comprehensive Plan for development of the City. 
3.  Compatibility with Surrounding Area. 
The proposed use shall not be detrimental to the health, welfare, or safety of the surrounding neighborhood or its occupants, nor be substantially or permanently injurious to neighboring property. 
4.  Harmonious with Character of Surrounding Area. 
The proposed site plan and circulation plan shall be harmonious with the character of the surrounding area. 
5.  Infrastructure Impacts Minimized. 
The proposed use shall not negatively impact existing uses in the area or in the City through impacts on public infrastructure such as roads, parking facilities, electrical, or water and sewer systems, or on public services such as police and fire protection, solid waste collection, or the ability of existing infrastructure and services to adequately provide services. 
6.  Effect on Environment. 
The proposed use shall not negatively impact existing uses in the area or in the City. 
F.  Additional Conditions. 
The City Council may impose additional reasonable restrictions or conditions to carry out the spirit and intent of this UDO and to mitigate adverse effects of the proposed use. These requirements may include, but are not limited to, increased open space, loading and parking requirements, additional landscaping, and additional improvements such as curbing, utilities, drainage facilities, sidewalks, and screening. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 3.17. - Written Interpretation. 
A.  Applicability. 

The Administrator shall have authority to make all written interpretations concerning the provisions of this UDO. 
B.  Request for Interpretation. 
A request for interpretation shall be submitted to the Administrator in a form established by the Administrator and made available to the public. Such request shall only be made during development review or when a code enforcement requirement is in question. 
C.  Interpretation by Administrator. 
1.  The Administrator shall: 
a.  Review and evaluate the request in light of the text of this UDO, the Official Zoning Map, the Comprehensive Plan, the Subdivision Regulations, and any other relevant information; 
b.  Consult with other staff, as necessary; and 
c.  Render an opinion. 
2.  The interpretation shall be provided to the applicant in writing. 
D.  Official Record. 
The Administrator shall maintain an official record of interpretations. The record of interpretations shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours. 
E.  Appeal. 
Appeals of written interpretations made by the Administrator shall be filed only by a party affected by the written interpretation with the Zoning Board of Adjustment or for appeals of written interpretations of the Subdivision Regulations, the Planning and Zoning Commission, within thirty (30) days of the decision in accordance with the procedures found in the Administrative Appeals Section in Article 3 of this UDO. If no appeal is filed within thirty (30) days, the written interpretation shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 3.18. - Administrative Adjustment. 
A.  Purpose. 

Administrative adjustments are specified deviations from otherwise applicable development standards where development is proposed that would be: 
1.  Compatible with surrounding land uses; 
2.  Harmonious with the public interest; and 
3.  Consistent with the purposes of this UDO. 
B.  Applicability. 
The Administrator shall have the authority to authorize adjustments of up to ten (10) percent from any dimensional standard or numerical requirement set forth in this UDO. Any adjustment request greater than ten (10) percent shall be treated as a variance handled by the Zoning Board of Adjustment subject to the requirements of the Variance Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
C.  Application. 
A complete application for an administrative adjustment shall be submitted to the Administrator as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
D.  Review and Action by Administrator. 
The Administrator shall review the application and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application based upon the criteria below. A written decision including affirmative findings on the criteria set forth below shall be sent to the applicant. 
E.  Administrative Adjustment Criteria. 
1.  To approve an application for an administrative adjustment, the Administrator shall make an affirmative finding that the following criteria are met: 
a.  That granting the adjustment will ensure the same general level of land use compatibility as the otherwise applicable standards; 
b.  That granting the adjustment will not materially or adversely affect adjacent land uses or the physical character of uses in the immediate vicinity of the proposed development; and 
c.  That granting the adjustment will be generally consistent with the purposes and intent of this UDO. 
2.  In the event that the Administrator finds that the applicant has not met the above criteria, the applicant may request that the application be forwarded to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as a variance request subject to the requirements of the Variances Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3542 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-12-2013) 
Sec. 3.19. - Variance. 
A.  Purpose. 

The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have jurisdiction to hear requests for a variance from the terms of this UDO. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be authorized to grant a variance from the terms hereof if, and only if, they find that the strict enforcement of this UDO would create a substantial hardship to the applicant by virtue of unique special conditions not generally found within the City, and that the granting of the variance would preserve the spirit and intent of the Ordinance, and would serve the general interests of the public and the applicant. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this UDO so that public health, safety, and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. 
B.  Applicability. 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the authority to grant variances from the standards in this UDO except for waivers of the standards in Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements, which may be made by the Planning and Zoning Commission during the subdivision process and requests for relief from a site plan requirement imposed by the Administrator when the requirement was necessary to gain compliance with the criteria for approval of a site plan in the Site Plan Review Section in Article 3 of this UDO, which may be made by the Design Review Board. Any variance request up to ten (10) percent may be treated as an Administrative Adjustment subject to the requirements of the Administrative Adjustment Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
C.  Application. 
A complete application for a variance shall be submitted to the Administrator as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
D.  Action by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
1.  Public Hearing. 
Following notice in accordance with the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing. 
2.  Variance Review. 
Upon completion of the public hearing and after review of the variance application subject to the criteria listed in Section E below, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make a written finding and give its approval, approval with limitations, or disapproval of the variance. 
E.  Criteria for Approval of Variance. 
1.  Required Findings. 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may authorize a variance from the requirements of this UDO when an unnecessary hardship would result from the strict enforcement of this UDO. In granting a variance, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall prescribe only limitations that it deems not prejudicial to the public interest. In making the required findings, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, the existing use of land in the vicinity, the possibility that a nuisance will be created, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon public health, convenience, and welfare of the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the Board makes affirmative findings in regard to all of the following criteria: 
a.  Extraordinary Conditions. 
That there are extraordinary or special conditions affecting the land involved such that strict application of the provisions of this UDO will deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. For example, the variance is justified because of topographic or other special conditions unique to the property and development involved, in contradistinction to the mere inconvenience or financial disadvantage. 
b.  Enjoyment of a Substantial Property Right. 
That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant. 
c.  Substantial Detriment. 
That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area, or to the City in administering this UDO. 
d.  Subdivision. 
That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this UDO. 
e.  Flood Hazard Protection. 
That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing flood hazard protection in accordance with Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements. 
f.  Other Property. 
That these conditions do not generally apply to other property in the vicinity. 
g.  Hardships. 
That the hardship is not the result of the applicant's own actions. 
h.  Comprehensive Plan. 
That the granting of the variance would not substantially conflict with the Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this UDO. 
i.  Utilization. 
That because of these conditions, the application of the UDO to the particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property. 
2.  Limitations. 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may not grant a variance where the effect would be any of the following: 
a.  To allow the establishment of a use not otherwise permitted in the applicable zoning district; 
b.  To increase the density of a use, above that permitted by the applicable district; 
c.  To extend physically a nonconforming use of land; or 
d.  To change the zoning district boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map. 
3.  Profitability Not to Be Considered. 
The fact that property may be utilized more profitably should a variance be granted may not be considered grounds for a variance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 3.20. - Administrative Appeal. 
A.  Applicability. 

1.  Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved by, or any officer or department affected by, specific points found in any of the following final decisions of the Administrator: 
a.  Written interpretations of the text of this UDO; or 
b.  Denial of Building Permit or site plan based on interpretation of Article 7, General Development Standards. 
2.  Appeals to the Planning and Zoning Commission may be taken by any person aggrieved by, or any officer or department affected by specific points found in the Administrator's written interpretations of the text of the Subdivision Regulations. 
B.  Effect of Appeal. 
An appeal to the ZBA stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Administrator from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Zoning Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a Court of record on application, on notices to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
C.  Deadline for Submission of Application. 
An appeal from any final decision of the Administrator or Director of Planning and Development Services shall be filed with the Administrator within thirty (30) days of receipt of the decision. If no appeal is filed within thirty (30) days, the decision shall be final. 
D.  Application. 
A complete application for an administrative appeal shall be submitted to the Administrator as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
E.  Record of Administrative Decision. 
The Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Planning and Zoning Commission, as appropriate, all the papers constituting the record of the action appealed. 
F.  Hearing. 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning and Zoning Commission, as appropriate, shall hear the appeal within sixty (60) days of the date of the appeal application or such extension as requested by the applicant or Administrator, give public notice as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. 
G.  Final Action by Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning and Zoning Commission, as appropriate, may only consider the specific interpretive language of the Administrator and may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the interpretation appealed from. In any case, the Board or Commission shall only present findings regarding specific errors made in the Administrator's interpretation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 3.21. - Text Amendment. 
A.  Purpose. 

For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable development within the territorial limits of the City, the text of this UDO may be altered from time-to-time. 
B.  Initiation of Amendments. 
An amendment to the text of this UDO may be initiated by: 
1.  City Council on its own motion; 
2.  The Planning and Zoning Commission; or 
3.  The Administrator. 
C.  Approval Process. 
1.  Review and Report by Administrator. 
The Administrator shall review the proposed text amendment in light of the Comprehensive Plan and give a report to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
2.  Referral to Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The Administrator shall refer the same to the Planning and Zoning Commission for study, hearing, and report. The Planning and Zoning Commission may direct staff to proceed with drafting the amendment and scheduling the necessary public hearings, forward the proposed text amendment to City Council for direction, or determine not to pursue the proposed amendment. The City Council may not enact the proposed text amendment until the Planning and Zoning Commission makes its report to the City Council. 
3.  Recommendation by Planning and Zoning Commission. 
a.  Notice. 
The Administrator shall publish and post public notice in accordance with the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO, and shall recommend to the City Council such action as the Commission deems proper. 
b.  Public Hearing. 
A public hearing shall be held by the Planning and Zoning Commission before making a recommendation to the City Council. 
4.  City Council Action. 
a.  Notice. 
The Administrator shall publish and post notices in accordance with the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO, before taking final action on the amendment. 
b.  Public Hearing. 
The City Council shall hold a public hearing and approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove the text amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 3.22. - Comprehensive Plan Amendment. 
A.  Purpose. 

For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable development within the territorial limits of the City, the Comprehensive Plan, including specifically, the Land Use Plan and the Thoroughfare Plan, shall be amended only based upon changed or changing conditions in a particular area or in the City. 
B.  Initiation of Amendment. 
An amendment may be initiated by: 
1.  City Council on its own motion; 
2.  The Planning and Zoning Commission; 
3.  The Administrator; or 
4.  The property owner(s). 
C.  Amendment Application. 
A complete application for a Comprehensive Plan amendment shall be submitted to the Administrator as set forth in the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
D.  Approval Process. 
1.  Review and Report by Administrator. 
Once the application is complete, the Administrator shall review the proposed amendment in light of the remainder of the Comprehensive Plan and conditions in the City, and give a report to the Commission and Council. 
2.  Recommendation by Planning and Zoning Commission. 
a.  Notice. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall publish and post public notice in accordance with the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO, and shall recommend to the City Council such action as the Commission deems proper. 
b.  Public Hearing. 
A public hearing shall be held by the Planning and Zoning Commission before making a report to the City Council. 
c.  Review and Action by Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the amendment and approve, approve with conditions, deny, or determine that the proposed development complies with the Comprehensive Plan and no amendment is required. If the Commission determines that no amendment is required, the applicant may proceed with the next step in the development process. No further action by the City Council is required. 
3.  City Council Action. 
a.  Notice. 
The City Council shall publish and post public notice in accordance with the General Approval Procedures Section in Article 3 of this UDO, before taking final action on a petition to amend the Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  Public Hearing. 
The City Council shall hold a public hearing and approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the application to amend the Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  Review and Final Action by City Council . 
In determining whether to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the application to amend the Comprehensive Plan, the City Council shall consider the following matters regarding the proposed amendment: 
1)  Changed or changing conditions in the subject area of the City; 
2)  Compatibility with the existing uses, development patterns, and character of the immediate area concerned, the general area, and the City as a whole; 
3)  Impact on environmentally sensitive and natural areas; 
4)  Impacts on infrastructure, including water, wastewater, drainage, and the transportation network; and 
5)  Consistency with the goals and strategies set forth in the Comprehensive Plan. 
E.  Limitation on Reapplication. 
If a petition for a plan amendment is denied by the City Council, another petition for reclassification of the same property or any portion thereof shall not be considered within a period of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of denial, unless the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that one (1) of the following factors are applicable: 
1.  There is a substantial change in circumstances relevant to the issues and/or facts considered during review of the application that might reasonably affect the decision-making body's application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed in the application; or 
2.  New or additional information is available that was not available at the time of the review that might reasonably affect the decision-making body's application of the relevant review standards to the development proposed; or 
3.  A new application is proposed to be submitted that is materially different from the prior application (e.g., proposes new uses or a substantial decrease in proposed densities or intensities); or 
4.  The final decision on the application was based on a material mistake of fact. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2018-3984 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 2-8-2018) 
Article 4. - Zoning Districts 

Sec. 4.1. - Establishment of Districts. 
Residential Zoning Districts R Rural WE Wellborn Estate E Estate WRS Wellborn Restricted Suburban RS Restricted Suburban GS General Suburban D Duplex T Townhouse MF Multi-Family MU Mixed-Use MHP Manufactured Home Park Non-Residential Zoning Districts NAP Natural Areas Protected O Office SC Suburban Commercial WC Wellborn Commercial GC General Commercial CI Commercial Industrial BP Business Park BPI Business Park Industrial CU College and University Planned Districts P-MUD Planned Mixed-Use District PDD Planned Development District Design Districts WPC Wolf Pen Creek Development Corridor Northgate NG-1 Core Northgate NG-2 Transitional Northgate NG-3 Residential Northgate Overlay Districts OV Corridor Overlay RDD Redevelopment District NPO Neighborhood Prevailing Overlay NCO Neighborhood Conservation Overlay HP Historic Preservation Overlay Retired Districts R-1B Single-Family Residential R-4 Multi-Family R-6 High Density Multi-Family C-3 Light Commercial R&D Research & Development M-1 Light Industrial M-2 Heavy Industrial  
For the purpose of this UDO, portions of the City, as specified on the Official Zoning Map of the City, are hereby divided into the zoning, design, and overlay districts enumerated below. The intensity regulations applicable for such zoning districts are designated in Article 5 and the use regulations are designated in Article 6 of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-4001 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 4-12-2018) 
Sec. 4.2. - Official Zoning Map. 
A.  The City is hereby divided into the above zoning districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, and adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDO. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Secretary, and bearing the Seal of the City of College Station under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section 4.2 of the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) of the City of College Station, Texas." 
B.  If, in accordance with the provisions of this UDO and  211.006 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, changes are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council and signed by the Mayor. 
C.  Approved zoning changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map by the Administrator and each change shall be identified on the Map with the date and number of the Ordinance making the change. 
D.  No change of any nature shall be made on the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with procedures set forth in this UDO. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this UDO and punishable as provided under Section 10.2, Penalties for Violation. 
E.  Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may from time-to-time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map, which shall be located in the office of the Development Services Department, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas in the City. The Official Zoning Map shall be available to the public at all hours when the City Hall is open to the public. 
F.  An electronic version of the Official Zoning Map, kept as a map layer in the City's Geographic Information System (GIS) in the Office of the Development Services Department, may be used and maintained as the Official Zoning Map. 
G.  A zoning atlas, or zoning book, may be prepared and maintained as necessary for the use of City employees and has no official status. 
Sec. 4.3. - Replacement of Official Zoning Map. 
A.  This UDO hereby incorporates the Official Zoning Map. 
B.  Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
Sec. 4.4. - Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
B.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
C.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits. 
D.  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the rails of the main line. 
E.  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
F.  Boundaries indicated above as parallel to, or extensions of features, shall be so construed. The scale of the map shall determine distances not specifically indicated in a classification amendment. 
G.  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered above, the Zoning Board of Adjustment (ZBA) shall interpret the district boundaries as provided in Section 2.3, Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
Sec. 4.5. - Application of District Regulations. 
A.  Uniformity. 
The zoning regulations as set forth by this UDO within each district shall be applied uniformly for each class or kind of building; however, the regulations vary from district to district in accordance with their respective purposes for the character of each district and its peculiar suitability for particular uses, with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land in the municipality. 
B.  Newly Annexed Territory. 
The administration of this UDO to newly annexed territory shall consider the following provisions: 
1.  Any territory hereafter annexed to the City of College Station, not otherwise classified at the time of annexation, shall be classified by applying the R Rural District. 
2.  Upon annexation, no person shall initiate any development or construction activity, including site preparation, foundation forming, sign erection, construction, improvement, repair or demolition within a newly annexed area without first applying for and obtaining the appropriate permits or other approvals required by this UDO. 
3.  No person relying on a claim of vested rights shall continue any development activity within a newly annexed area without first applying for and obtaining a building permit; however, persons are not precluded from the following activities: 
a.  Continuing to use land in the area in the manner in which the land was being used on the date the annexation proceedings were instituted if the land use was legal at that time; or 
b.  Beginning to use land in the area in the manner that was planned for the land before the ninetieth (90th) day before the effective date of the annexation if: 
1)  One (1) or more licenses, certificates, permits, approvals, or other forms of authorization by a governmental entity were required by law for the planned land use; and 
2)  A completed application for the initial authorization was filed with the governmental entity before the date the annexation proceedings were instituted. For purposes of this section, a completed application is filed if the application includes all documents and other information designated as required by the governmental entity in a written notice to the applicant. 
4.  In accordance with  43.002. Continuation of Land Use, of the Texas Local Government Code, the City may apply the following regulations within newly annexed territory: 
a.  A regulation relating to the location of sexually-oriented businesses; 
b.  A regulation relating to preventing imminent destruction of property or injury to persons; 
c.  A regulation relating to public nuisances; 
d.  A regulation relating to flood control; 
e.  A regulation relating to the storage and use of hazardous substances; 
f.  A regulation relating to the sale and use of fireworks; or 
g.  A regulation relating to the discharge of firearms. 
5.  Any person with an interest in property within a newly annexed area may apply to the Administrator for a determination of the vested rights such person has, if any, to continue development activities initiated prior to annexation. Such determinations shall be based upon all pertinent facts and upon the relevant decisions of State and Federal courts. The applicant may submit any written evidence to the Administrator for consideration. The Administrator's written determination shall be final unless duly appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-12-2013) 
Article 5. - District Purpose Statements and Supplemental Standards 

Sec. 5.1. - Residential Zoning Districts. 
Occupancy of any dwelling in the following districts shall be limited to "family" as defined by this UDO. 
A.  Rural (R). 
This district includes lands that, due to public service limitations, inadequate public infrastructure, or a prevailing rural or agricultural character, are planned for very limited development activities. This district is designed to provide land for a mix of large acreages and large-lot residential developments. Open space is a dominant feature of these areas. This district may also serve as a reserved area in which the future growth of the City can occur. 
B.  Wellborn Estate (WE) . 
This district includes land that, due to public service limitations or a prevailing rural character, should have limited development activities. These areas tend to consist of low-density single-family residential lots of two acres or more but may be one acre if clustered around undeveloped open space. This zoning district is only permitted in areas designated as Wellborn Estate or Wellborn Estate-Open on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use and Character Map. The cluster option may be used only in the area designated Wellborn Estate-Open on the Comprehensive Plan Land Use and Character Map. 
C.  Estate (E). 
This district is designed to provide land for low-density single-family lots. These areas shall consist of residential lots averaging twenty thousand (20,000) square feet when clustered around open space or large lots with a minimum of one (1) acre. Subdivisions within this district may contain rural infrastructure. 
D.  Wellborn Restricted Suburban (WRS) . 
This district is designed to provide land for detached medium-density, single-family residential development. These areas shall consist of residential lots minimum eight thousand (8,000) square feet when clustered around open space or larger lots with a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. This zoning district is only permitted in areas designated as Wellborn Restricted Suburban on the Comprehensive Plan Land Use and Character Map. 
E.  Restricted Suburban (RS). 
This district is designed to provide land for detached medium-density, single-family residential development. These areas shall consist of residential lots averaging eight thousand (8,000) square feet when clustered around open space or larger lots with a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
F.  General Suburban (GS). 
This district includes lands planned for single-family residential purposes and accessory uses. This district is designed to accommodate sufficient, suitable residential neighborhoods, protected and/or buffered from incompatible uses, and provided with necessary and adequate facilities and services. 
G.  Duplex (D). 
This district contains land that has been planned for duplex residential purposes and associated uses. Characterized by moderate density, it may be utilized as a transitional zone. 
The following supplemental standards shall apply to this district: 
1.  Single-family dwellings shall conform to GS General Suburban Standards. 
2.  Where parking is provided in the front yard of a duplex, an eight-foot setback shall be required between the property line and the nearest side of the parking pad. This eight-foot setback area must contain a three-foot screen consisting of a continuous berm, hedge, or wall. In addition, an eight-foot setback shall be required between the dwelling unit and the nearest side of the parking pad. 
H.  Townhouse (T). 
This district contains land, which is to be used for a unique type of dwelling, typically designed for individual ownership, or ownership in-groups of single-family attached residences constructed on individually-platted lots. 
The following supplemental standard shall apply to this district: 
Single-family dwellings shall conform to GS General Suburban standards. 
I.  Multi-Family (MF) . 
The MF district is designed for areas having intense development. MF is flexible and allows for attached and detached single-unit dwellings, two-unit dwellings, multi-family buildings and optional mixed-use development. 
1.  Supplemental Standards for MF : Non-residential uses are permitted up to a maximum of 50 percent of the total floor area if incorporated into the residential structure. 
J.  Mixed-Use (MU) . 
The MU is designed for areas having the most intense level of development. MU areas consist of residential, commercial and office uses in mixed-use structures. 
1.  Supplemental Standards for MU : 
a.  Non-residential uses with a minimum depth of 30-feet are required on the ground floor if adjacent to Texas Avenue, Harvey Road, University Drive or Earl Rudder Freeway. 
b.  A minimum of 30 percent of the total floor area of each development shall be devoted to residential uses. Hotels may be considered a residential use to meet this requirement. 
c.  The Floor Area Ratio (FAR) in this district shall be a minimum of 1:1. Structured parking, public plazas, outdoor dining areas, and covered areas attached to the structure may be included in the FAR calculation. Surface parking, even if covered, will not count toward the required FAR. 
d.  The ground floor of structures shall be a minimum of 25 percent of the lot area. 
K.  Manufactured Home Park (MHP). 
This district contains land that is located, designed and operated as a site for residential uses consisting of manufactured homes in accordance with the permitted uses. The following supplemental standards shall apply to this district: 
1.  The construction, reconstruction, alteration, or enlargement of a manufactured home park must be pursuant to an approved site plan. 
2.  Minimum manufactured home park area is two (2) contiguous acres. 
3.  Maximum gross density shall be ten (10) dwelling units per acre. 
4.  Minimum setback for a manufactured home from a public street shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
5.  Minimum setback for a manufactured home from a lot line shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
6.  Minimum setback for a manufactured home from a private street, parking, or other common area shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
7.  Minimum setback between two (2) manufactured homes shall be fifteen (15) feet; except that private accessory storage structures located on an individual manufactured home lot need not maintain a separation from the manufactured home that occupies the same lot. 
8.  Parking areas may be located within common parking areas or on individual manufactured home lots, provided that the parking required for each manufactured home is located within two hundred (200) feet of each lot. 
9.  Each manufactured home park lot shall have access to public utilities, and it shall have vehicular access to/from either a public right-of-way or private drive. 
(Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 5.2. - Residential Dimensional Standards. 
The following table establishes dimensional standards that shall be applied within the Residential Zoning Districts, unless otherwise identified in this UDO. 
    Click here to access a PDF version of the Residential Zoning Districts table. 
Residential Zoning Districts R WE E(N)(P) WRS RS(J) GS(J)(P) T D MHP MF MU Accessory
Structures Non-Clustered Residential Zoning Districts Min. Average Lot Area per Dwelling Unit (DU) 3 acres Average 2 acres 1 Acre 20,000 SF 10,000 SF Average 5,000 SF 2,000 SF 3,500 SF >(L) None None Refer to Section 6.5, Accessory Uses(L) Absolute Min. Lot Area per Dwelling Unit (DU) 2 Acres 2 acres 1 Acre 20,000SF 6,500 SF 5,000 SF 2,000 SF 3,500 SF None None Min. Lot Width None 100 (M) 100'(M) 70' 70' 50' None 35'/DU(E) None None Min. Lot Depth None None None None None 100' None 100' None None Min. Front Setback(H) 50' 30' 30' 25' 25' 25'(D) 25'(D) 25'(D) 15' None Max. Front Setback N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 15'(O) Min. Side Setback 20' 10' 10' 7.5' 7.5' 7.5' (A) 7.5'(C) (A)(B) None Min. Side Street Setback 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' None Max. Side Street Setback N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 15'(O) Min. Side Setback between Structures(B) N/A 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 7.5' 15' 7.5' None Min. Rear Setback(L) 50' 20' 20' 20' 20' 20' 20' 20'(F) 20' 20' Max. Height 35'(G)(K)(L) 35'(G)(K) 35'(G)(K)(L) 35'(G)(K) 35'(G)(K)(L) 2.5 Stories/35'(G)(K)(L) 35'(G)(K)(L) 2.5 Stories/35'(G)(K)(L) (G)(L) (G)(L) Minimum Number of Stories N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 2 Stories Max. Dwelling Units/Acre (Subdivision Gross) 0.33 0.5 1.0 2.0 4.00 8.0 14.0 12.0 10.0 30.0 N/A N/A Min. Dwelling Units/Acre N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 12 N/A Clustered Residential Zoning Districts Min. Average Lot Area per Dwelling Unit (DU) N/A 1 Acre 20,000 SF Average 8,000 SF 8,000 SF Average 3,750 SF (P) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Absolute Min. Lot Area per Dwelling Unit (DU) 1 Acre 10,000 SF 8,000 SF 6,500 SF 3,750 SF Min. Lot Width 100' (M) 100'(M) None None None Min. Lot Depth None None None None None Min. Front Setback(H) Refer to Section 8.3.H.4, 
Cluster Development, 
Specific District 
Standards Min. Side Setback Min. Street Side Setback Min. Side Setback between Structures(B) Min. Rear Setback(L) Max. Height 35'(G)(K) 35'(G)(K) 35'(G)(K) 35'(G)(K) 2.5 Stories/35'(G)(K)(L) Max. Dwelling Units/Acre (Subdivision Gross) 0.5 1.0 2.0 4.00 8.0  
Notes : 
(A)  A minimum side setback of seven and one-half (7.5) feet is required for each building or group of contiguous buildings. 
(B)  Lot line construction on interior lots with no side yard or setback is allowed only where the building is covered by fire protection on the site or by dedicated right-of-way or easement. 
(C)  Zero lot line construction of a residence is allowed where property on both sides of a lot line is owned and/or developed simultaneously by single party. Development under lot line construction requires prior approval by the Zoning Official. In no case shall a single-family residence or duplex be built within fifteen (15) feet of another primary structure. See Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements, for more information. 
(D)  Minimum front setback may be reduced to fifteen (15) feet when approved rear access is provided, or when side yard or rear yard parking is provided. 
(E)  The minimum lot width for a duplex dwelling may be reduced to thirty (30) feet per dwelling unit when all required off-street parking is provided in the rear or side yard. 
(F)  Minimum rear setback may be reduced to fifteen (15) feet when parking is provided in the front yard or side yard. 
(G)  Shall abide by Section 7.2.H, Height. 
(H)  Reference Section 7.2.D.1.e for lots created by plat prior to July 15, 1970 and designated as Neighborhood Conservation in the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use and Character Map. 
(I)  Reference Section 7.2.D.1.b for lots with approved rear access. 
(J)  For areas within a Single-Family Overlay District, reference the Neighborhood Prevailing Standards Overlay Districts Section in Article 5 or the Ordinance authorizing the rezoning for Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Districts. 
(K)  Public, civic, and institutional structures shall have a maximum building height of fifty (50) feet in these districts. 
(L)  Reference Easterwood Field Airport Zoning Ordinance regarding height limitations. 
(M)  In subdivisions built to rural street standards, lots shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet in width. There is no minimum lot width in cluster subdivisions built to urban street standards. 
(N)  Estate lots that are part of a subdivision existing on or before September 12, 2013 are not permitted to use Cluster Development Standards without rezoning approval, which incorporates the entire subdivision. 
(O)  For MU zoned properties, maximum side street and front setbacks may be measured from the edge of a public easement when it is in excess of the maximum setback. Maximum setbacks may be increased to up to eighty-five (85) feet to accommodate a parking lot between the structure and the street. Maximum setback requirements may be fulfilled through the use of plazas, outdoor dining, and bicycle parking. 
(P)  Reference Section 8.3.H.4.e when using the cluster option in the Wellborn Community Plan area. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. M), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3458 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-8-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 1-10-2013; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-4034 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-23-2018) 
Sec. 5.3. - Non-Residential Zoning Districts. 
A.  Natural Areas Protected (NAP). 
This district is designed for publicly-owned property or private property intended for the conservation of natural areas. Properties with this designation are relatively undeveloped and are often used for recreational or open space purposes or for the conveyance of floodwaters. Properties with this designation are not projected for conversion to more intense land use in the future by the Comprehensive Plan. 
B.  Office (O). 
This district will accommodate selected commercial businesses that provide a service rather than sell products, either retail or wholesale. The uses allowed have relatively low traffic generation and require limited location identification. 
C.  Suburban Commercial (SC). 
This district is intended to provide for limited commercial uses that are compatible with nearby neighborhoods. The district allows for a range of uses, with the impacts mitigated through minimum distance and buffering requirements from adjacent single-family use. The gross floor area of a single structure in this district shall not exceed 15,000 square feet in area. 
D.  Wellborn Commercial (WC) . 
This district is intended to provide for low-density commercial uses that provide services to nearby neighborhoods. Such uses shall be limited in size and not accommodate for drive-thru services. Specific design elements should be incorporated into such developments to limit the visual impact on the community and enhance the defined character. This zoning district is only permitted in areas designated as Wellborn Commercial on the Comprehensive Plan Land Use and Character Map. 
E.  General Commercial (GC). 
This district is designed to provide locations for general commercial purposes, that is, retail sales and service uses that function to serve the entire community and its visitors. 
F.  Commercial Industrial (CI). 
This district is designed to provide a location for outlets offering goods and services to a limited segment of the general public. The uses included primarily serve other commercial and industrial enterprises. 
G.  Business Park (BP). 
This district is designed for uses that primarily serve other commercial and industrial enterprises, and include administrative and professional offices, commercial industrial, research and development oriented light industrial, light manufacturing, and non-polluting industries. Uses in this district need good access to arterial level thoroughfares, but have relatively low traffic generation and require limited location identification. 
The development of business parks should be in a campus like setting with structures grouped and clustered, and should be heavily landscaped to minimize the impacts of business park uses and associated parking areas on adjacent properties and public roadways. Impacts of the uses will be limited through buffering and architecture of the buildings. 
The following supplemental standards shall apply to this district: 
1.  All processes and business activities shall be conducted inside buildings with the exception of Commercial Gardens; and 
2.  All BP zoning districts will be a minimum of five (5) acres in area. 
H.  Business Park Industrial (BPI). 
This district is designed to provide land for manufacturing and industrial activities that have nuisance characteristics greater than activities permitted in the BP Business Park district. Permitted uses within this district are generally not compatible with residential uses of any density or lower intensity commercial uses. Generally, these uses need good access to arterial roadways, but should be offset from public roadways and adjacent properties by using the BP Business Park district and its associated development to screen and buffer the uses. The uses allowed have relatively low traffic generation and require limited location identification. 
I.  College and University (CU). 
This district is applied to land which is located within the boundaries of the Texas A&M University campus or is owned by the University. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 1-10-2013; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-3999 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-12-2018) 
Sec. 5.4. - Non-Residential Dimensional Standards. 
The following table establishes dimensional standards that shall be applied within the Non-Residential Zoning Districts, unless otherwise identified in this UDO: 
  Non-Residential Zoning Districts   O SC WC GC CI BP BPI NAP Min. Lot Area None None None None None None None N/A Min. Lot Width 24' 50' 50' 24' 24' 100' 100' N/A Min. Lot Depth 100' 100' 100' 100' 100' 200' 200' N/A Min. Front Setback 25' 25' 25' 25' 25' 25'(E) 25'(E) N/A Min. Side Setback (A)(B) (A)(B) (A)(B) (A)(B) (A)(B) (A)(B) (A)(B) N/A Min. St. Side Setback 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15'(E) 15'(E) N/A Min. Rear Setback 15' 15' 20' 15' 15' 15'(E) 15'(E) N/A Max. Height (C)(F) 2 
Stories/ 
35'(D)(F) 2 
Stories/ 
35'(D)(F) (C)(F) (C)(F) (C)(F) (C)(F) (F)  
Notes : 
(A)  A minimum side setback of seven and one-half (7.5) feet shall be required for each building or group of contiguous buildings. 
(B)  Lot line construction on interior lots with no side yard or setback is allowed only where the building is covered by fire protection on the site or separated by a dedicated public right-of-way or easement of at least fifteen (15) feet in width. 
(C)  See Section 7.2.H, Height. 
(D)  Maximum building height is two (2) stories and thirty-five (35) feet, measured at the highest point of the roof or roof peak. Section 7.2.H, Height applies to buildings over one-story. 
(E)  Buildings shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from all public streets adjacent the perimeter of the business park development, as shown on the approved Preliminary Plan document. 
(F)  Reference Easterwood Field Airport Zoning Ordinance regarding height limitations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), (Exh. C), 1-10-2013; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-3999 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 4-12-2018) 
Sec. 5.5. - Retired Districts. 
Retired Districts include districts existing prior to the amendment of this UDO. Existing districts will continue to remain in effect but these districts are not available for any new Zoning Map Amendment proposals. 
A.  Single-Family Residential (R-1B). 
This district is designed to provide land for detached single-family residential suburban development. This district contains lots that are larger than the minimum GS lot, but smaller than the minimum E. 
B.  Multi-Family (R-4) . 
This district provides land for development of apartment and condominium units at low to medium densities. This district may serve as a transitional zone between lower density residential areas and other residential or non-residential areas. 
The following supplemental standards shall apply to this district: 
1.  Duplex dwelling units shall conform to D Duplex standards. 
2.  Townhouse dwelling units shall conform to T Townhouse standards. 
C.  High Density Multi-Family (R-6) . 
This district contains land used for a variety of housing types, but primarily multiple family dwellings. This district is designed to provide the highest density in the community for developments in close proximity to the University. 
The following supplemental standards shall apply to this district: 
1.  Duplex dwelling units shall conform to D Duplex standards. 
2.  Townhouse dwelling units shall conform to T Townhouse standards. 
D.  Light Commercial (C-3). 
This district is designed to provide locations for commercial sites that are too small for many permitted uses in the GC, General Commercial District. These are moderately low traffic generators that have little impact on adjacent areas or on adjacent thoroughfares. 
The following supplemental standard shall apply to this district: 
No C-3 zoning district, including adjacent C-3 zoning districts, shall exceed a combined total of five (5) acres in area. 
E.  Research & Development (R&D). 
This district is designed for administrative and professional offices, and research and development oriented light industrial uses meeting the standards and performance criteria established in this section. These uses could be compatible with low intensity uses and all residential uses, thereby maintaining the character and integrity of neighborhoods. This district should be carefully located in areas where there is sufficient access to arterial level thoroughfares. The following supplemental standards shall apply to this district: 
1.  Performance Criteria for All Uses. 
a.  Impervious Surface: Impervious surface is limited to seventy (70) percent. 
b.  Floor Area Ratio (FAR): The maximum FAR in this district shall not exceed fifty (50) percent. 
c.  Building Materials: All main buildings shall have not less than ninety (90) percent of the total exterior walls, excluding doors, windows and window walls, constructed or faced with brick, stone, masonry, stucco or precast concrete panels. 
d.  Signs: Any detached or freestanding signage shall meet the criteria for low-profile signs established in Section 7.5, Signs. Materials shall match building faade materials. 
e.  Other District Regulations: Uses should be designed to provide adequate access and internal circulation such that travel through residentially-zoned or developed areas is precluded. All processes are to be conducted inside buildings and there shall be no outside storage or business activity. Any business operations occurring during the hours between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. must meet all the performance criteria established in this section, as well as limit vehicular access into the site through a designated access point that mitigates any adverse impacts of the traffic on surrounding residential areas. 
2.  Additional Standards. 
a.  This section may be applied to any conditional use proposed in this district when either the Administrator or Development Engineer believes that the existing performance standards contained in this UDO are insufficient to address the proposed use because of its technology or processes and thus, will not effectively protect adjacent existing or future land uses. One (1) or both shall so advise the Planning and Zoning Commission in writing. 
b.  In such cases, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a hearing to determine whether a professional investigation or analysis should be performed to identify and establish additional reasonable standards. If so determined, based on the information presented at the hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission will identify the areas to be investigated and analyzed and will direct the staff to conduct the appropriate research necessary to develop standards for successful management of the new project. Any and all costs incurred by the City to develop additional standards shall be charged to the applicant and included as an addition to the cost of either the building permit fee or zoning application fee. 
F.  Light Industrial (M-1). 
This district is provided for offices, research and development activities and high technological, light manufacturing, non-polluting industries that are self-contained. It is further intended that the Light Industrial District may be compatible with adjacent uses in any other district, depending upon the character of the operation and the conditions imposed. 
G.  Heavy Industrial (M-2). 
This district is designed to provide land for manufacturing and industrial activities with generation of nuisance characteristics greater than activities permitted in the CI and M-1 zoning districts. Permitted uses within this district are generally not compatible with residential uses of any density or lower intensity commercial uses. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 1-10-2013; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. F), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 12-18-2014) 
Sec. 5.6. - Retired Dimensional Standards. 
A.  Retired Residential Zoning Districts. 
The following table establishes dimensional standards that shall be applied within the Retired Residential Zoning Districts, unless otherwise identified in this UDO: 
Retired Residential Zoning Districts R-1B R-4 R-6 Min. Lot Area per Dwelling Unit (DU) 8,000 SF None None Min. Lot Width None None None Min Lot Depth None None None Min. Front Setback (H) 25'(D) 25'(D) 25'(D) Min. Side Setback 7.5' (C) (A)(B) (A)(B) Min. Side Street Setback 15' 15' 15' Min. Side Setback between Structures (B) 15' 7.5' 7.5' Min. Rear Setback (I) 20' 20' 20' Max. Height 2.5 Stories/35'(G)(K)(L) (G)(L) (G)(L) Max. Dwelling Units/Acre 6.0 20.0 30.0  
Notes: 
(A)  A minimum side setback of seven and one-half (7.5) feet is required for each building or group of contiguous buildings. 
(B)  Lot line construction on interior lots with no side yard or setback is allowed only where the building is covered by fire protection on the site or by dedicated right-of-way or easement. 
(C)  Zero lot line construction of a residence is allowed where property on both sides of a lot line is owned and/or developed simultaneously by single party. Development under lot line construction requires prior approval by the Zoning Official. In no case shall a single-family residence or duplex be built within fifteen (15) feet of another primary structure. See Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements, for more information. 
(D)  Minimum front setback may be reduced to fifteen (15) feet when approved rear access is provided, or when side yard or rear yard parking is provided. 
(E)  The minimum lot width for a duplex dwelling may be reduced to thirty (30) feet per dwelling unit when all required off-street parking is provided in the rear or side yard. 
(F)  Minimum rear setback may be reduced to fifteen (15) feet when parking is provided in the front yard or side yard. 
(G)  Shall abide by Section 7.2.H, Height. 
(H)  Reference Section 7.1.D.1.e for lots created by plat prior to July 15, 1970 and designated as Neighborhood Conservation in the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use and Character Map. 
(I)  Reference Section 7.2.D.1.b for lots with approved rear access. 
(J)  Reference Section 5.12 for areas in Neighborhood Prevailing Standards Overlay Districts and reference Ordinance authorizing the rezoning for Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Districts. 
(K)  Public, civic, and institutional structures shall have a maximum building height of fifty (50) feet in these districts. 
(L)  Reference Easterwood Field Airport Zoning Ordinance regarding height limitations. 
B.  Retired Non-Residential Zoning Districts. 
The following table establishes dimensional standards that shall be applied within the Retired Non-Residential Zoning Districts, unless otherwise identified in this UDO: 
Retired Non-Residential Zoning Districts   C-3 R&D M-1 M-2 Min Lot Area None 20,000 SF None None Min. Lot Width 24' 100' 100' None Min. Lot Depth 100' 200' 200' None Min. Front Setback 25' 30' 25' 25' Min. Side Setback (A)(B) 30'(B) (A)(B) (A)(B) Min. St. Side Setback 15' 30' 15' 25' Min. Rear Setback 15' 30'(D) 15' 15' Max. Height (C) (C) (C) (C)  
Notes: 
(A)  A minimum side setback of seven and one-half (7.5) feet shall be required for each building or group of contiguous buildings. 
(B)  Lot line construction on interior lots with no side yard or setback is allowed only where the building is covered by fire protection on the site or separated by a dedicated public right-of-way or easement of at least fifteen (15) feet in width. 
(C)  See Section 7.2.H, Height. 
(D)  When abutting non-residentially zoned or used land, the rear setback may be reduced to twenty (20) feet. 
(E)  Reference Easterwood Field Airport Zoning Ordinance regarding height limitations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. M), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3458 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-8-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), (Exh. C), 1-10-2013; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. G), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. F), 12-18-2014) 
Sec. 5.7. - Planned Districts (P-MUD and PDD). 
A.  The Planned Mixed-Use District (P-MUD) and the Planned Development District (PDD) are intended to provide such flexibility and performance criteria which produce: 
1.  A maximum choice in the type of environment for working and living available to the public; 
2.  Open space and recreation areas; 
3.  A pattern of development which preserves trees, outstanding natural topography and geologic features, and prevents soil erosion; 
4.  A creative approach to the use of land and related physical development; 
5.  An efficient use of land resulting in smaller networks of utilities and streets, thereby lowering development costs; 
6.  An environment of stable character in harmony with surrounding development; and 
7.  A more desirable environment than would be possible through strict application of other sections or districts in this UDO. 
B.  Planned Mixed-Use District (P-MUD). 
The purpose of this district is to permit areas which encourage mixing of land uses such as retail/commercial, office, parks, multi-family, and attached single-family. These uses are developed together in a manner that allows interaction between the uses and that allows each use to support the other uses. Within any P-MUD, residential and non-residential land uses shall each constitute at least twenty (20) percent of the overall land uses within the mixed-use development. The remaining sixty (60) percent may be any combination of residential or non-residential land uses. The residential uses provide the patrons for the office and commercial uses. The success of these mixed-use areas is directly related to the sensitive master planning of the site layout. 
The P-MUD is appropriate in areas where the land use plan reflects Planned Development or Redevelopment as a land use category. A P-MUD may be used to permit new or innovative concepts in land utilization not permitted by other zoning districts. While greater flexibility is given to allow special conditions or restrictions that would not otherwise allow the development to occur, procedures are established to insure against misuse of increased flexibility. 
C.  Planned Development District (PDD). 
The purpose of the Planned Development District is to promote and encourage innovative development that is sensitive to surrounding land uses and to the natural environment. If this necessitates varying from certain standards, the proposed development should demonstrate community benefits. 
The PDD is appropriate in areas where the land use plan reflects the specific commercial, residential, or mix of uses proposed in the PDD. A PDD may be used to permit new or innovative concepts in land utilization not permitted by other zoning districts. While greater flexibility is given to allow special conditions or restrictions that would not otherwise allow the development to occur, procedures are established to insure against misuse of increased flexibility. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 1-10-2013) 
Sec. 5.8. - Design Districts. 
A.  Wolf Pen Creek (WPC). 
This district is designed to promote development that is appropriate along Wolf Pen Creek, which, upon creation was a predominantly open and undeveloped area challenged by drainage, erosion, and flooding issues. Development proposals are designed to encourage the public and private use of Wolf Pen Creek and the development corridor as an active and passive recreational area while maintaining an appearance consistent with the Wolf Pen Creek Master Plan. 
All development within the Wolf Pen Creek District shall be subject to the following supplemental standards: 
1.  Development Criteria. 
a.  This Section is intended to ensure that development occurs in compliance with the Master Plan for the Wolf Pen Creek Corridor. Pertinent to appearance is the design of the site, building and structures, plantings, signs, street hardware, and miscellaneous other objects that are observed by the public. 
b.  These criteria are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation, or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles, which can result in creative solutions that will develop a satisfactory visual appearance within the City, preserve taxable values, and promote the public health, safety, and welfare. 
c.  In order to create and then preserve a distinctive atmosphere and character in the Wolf Pen Creek development corridor, elements listed in Additional Review Criteria of the Wolf Pen Creek Design District Site Plan Review section of this UDO, shall be considered in the review of all projects and proposals for development. 
2.  Dedication/Development of Drainage and Pedestrian Accessways. 
Except for minimum reservation areas dedicated or developed in accordance with the Wolf Pen Creek Master Plan, the flood fringe area may be reclaimed upon approval of reclamation plans by the City Engineer. 
a.  The Upstream Phase of the development corridor along Wolf Pen Creek means the area between Texas Avenue and Dartmouth Drive. The area to be dedicated or developed consists of the properties described in Ordinance #2640 and the floodway and the minimum reservation line as defined in the Wolf Pen Creek Master Plan for all other properties within the Upstream Phase of the Development Corridor. 
b.  The Downstream Phase of the development corridor along Wolf Pen Creek means the area between Dartmouth Drive and the Earl Rudder Freeway. The area to be dedicated or developed consists of property described in Ordinance #2534 and shall be referred to as the minimum reservation area. 
c.  Where applicable, the floodway and the minimum reservation line for the Upstream Phase of the development corridor, and/or the minimum reservation area for the Downstream Development Phase, shall be indicated on the site plan. 
d.  Upon development of the property within the Wolf Pen Creek development corridor, the minimum reservation area may be: 
1)  Dedicated in fee simple or as a drainage and access easement, or 
2)  Improved by the developer to conform with the standards of the development corridor. 
e.  Property within the minimum reservation area will: 
1)  Provide drainage capacity necessary to convey the floodwaters of Wolf Pen Creek while accommodating the increased runoff from development of properties along the creek; 
2)  Provide an area to accommodate pedestrian access from, to, and between developments along the banks of Wolf Pen Creek in order to lessen congestion along adjacent roadways for patrons of businesses along the corridor; 
3)  Provide an area as necessary to address and prevent erosion of creek banks resulting from development both along the Creek in the development corridor and from floodwaters received from upstream of the development corridor; 
4)  Provide an area necessary for public improvements to the development corridor including, but not limited to, trails, lighting, irrigation, benches, kiosks, foot bridges with hand rails, trash receptacles, culverts, signage, landscaping, emergency call boxes, public art, and bicycle racks; and 
5)  Provide access for drainage and facilities maintenance as necessary to support private development within the development corridor. 
f.  All development shall be in accordance with the Wolf Pen Creek Corridor Study and Master Plan (1988), the Revised Wolf Pen Creek Master Plan (1998) and the "Conceptual Plan, Trail System" prepared by Robert B. Ruth, dated February 25, 2001. 
g.  Permitted private development within the minimum reservation area where dedication is not made may include, but is not limited to: 
1)  Cleaning and removal of brush and bank stabilization; 
2)  Erosion control; 
3)  Pedestrian walkways, lighting, and access easements; and 
4)  Preservation of the natural setting of the creek. 
h.  Cross sections as shown in the original Wolf Pen Creek Master Plan shall be used in designing improvements unless otherwise approved by the Administrator. 
i.  The developer or property owner may submit any improvements to the City for dedication. Upon acceptance, the City will maintain those facilities to the same standards as other public development along the creek. 
3.  Fill Materials. 
Fill materials must be placed or stored in accordance with a site plan approved by the Development Engineer. 
a.  Fill must not be placed over existing utility lines without permission of the City of College Station. 
b.  Fill must not be stored or placed under the driplines of any tree three (3) inches or greater in caliper. 
c.  Stored fill materials must be maintained in an aesthetically pleasing manner. 
d.  Materials may be hauled in or excavated for lake construction. 
4.  Lighting. 
Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards, and all exposed accessories shall be harmonious with building design. Light fixtures shall be compatible with fixtures used elsewhere in the district. 
5.  Solid Waste. 
a.  Owners shall be encouraged in the joint use of solid waste collection agreements. Collection points may also act as vehicular access points for park maintenance vehicles. 
b.  Building service areas and solid waste collection points shall be screened from the creek corridor, trail system, parking and vehicular use areas, and dedicated streets and shall not be within twenty (20) feet of the minimum reservation line. Screening shall consist of living plant materials, fences and/or walls. 
6.  Relationship of Buildings to Site. 
a.  The height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and existing (or anticipated) adjoining buildings. 
b.  The location and placement of buildings on individual sites shall reflect consideration for roadway access, the preservation of major existing natural vegetation adjacent to the creek, visual impact, and the relationship to surrounding developments. 
c.  All developments adjacent to the creek shall orient a focal point (i.e. primary entrance, patio, seating area, etc.) to the floodplain of the creek and have pedestrian access to the trail system. Service areas and loading docks should not directly face the creek. 
7.  Relationship of Buildings and Site to Adjoining Area. 
Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made compatible by such means as screens, sight breaks, and materials. 
a.  Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be provided. 
b.  Harmony in texture, lines, and masses is required. Monotony shall be avoided. 
c.  Joint vehicular access agreements from dedicated streets are encouraged and may be required by the Administrator. 
d.  Park access easements for vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall be indicated on the site plan. 
8.  Building Design. 
All buildings shall comply with Non-Residential Architectural Standards, except as follows: 
a.  Materials shall be selected for harmony of the building with adjoining buildings. 
b.  Any faade visible from the creek must provide a minimum of ten (10) percent of fired brick, natural stone, marble, granite, or any concrete product so long as it has an integrated color and is textured or patterned (not aggregate material) to simulate brick, stone, marble or granite. 
c.  Building colors shall be neutral and harmonious with the existing man-made or natural environment, and only compatible accent colors shall be used. All colors shall be approved by the Administrator. 
d.  Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or buildings shall be screened from public view with materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be so located as not to be visible from any public ways. 
e.  Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail, form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable siting or individual buildings may be used to prevent a monotonous appearance. 
9.  Miscellaneous Structures and Street Hardware. 
a.  Miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall be designed to be part of the architectural concept of design and landscape. Materials shall be compatible with buildings, scale shall be good, colors shall be in harmony with buildings and surroundings, and proportions shall be attractive. 
b.  Lighting in connection with miscellaneous structures and street hardware shall meet the criteria applicable to site, landscape, buildings, and signs. 
10.  Landscaping. 
Landscape elements included in these criteria consist of all forms of plantings and vegetation, ground forms, rock groupings, water patterns, and all visible construction except buildings and utilitarian structures. In addition to the requirements of the Landscaping and Tree Protection section of this UDO, all landscaping shall meet the following: 
a.  Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to beauty and utility of a development adjacent to the creek, they should be preserved and incorporated into the design of the development. Modification to topography will be permitted where it contributes to good appearance. 
b.  Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking, and, if seating is provided, for sitting. 
c.  Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural features, strengthen vistas and important axes, and provide shade. 
d.  Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and other materials and by correlation with adjacent developments. 
e.  Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, and color, and for its ultimate growth. Plants that are indigenous to the area and others that will be hardy, harmonious to the design, and of good appearance shall be used. 
f.  In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices. 
g.  Parking areas and traffic ways shall be enhanced with landscaped spaces containing trees or tree groupings. 
h.  Where building sites limit planting, the placement of trees in parkways or paved areas is encouraged. 
i.  Screening of service yards and other places that tend to be unsightly shall be accomplished by use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of these. Screening shall be equally effective in winter and summer. 
j.  In areas where general planting will not prosper, other materials such as fences, walls, and pavings of wood, brick, stone, gravel, and cobbles shall be used. Carefully selected plants shall be combined with such materials where possible. 
11.  Signs. 
a.  Sign Standards. 
1)  Multi-family projects shall follow the requirements of allowed signage for the zoning district appropriate for the specific use in addition to meeting the standards listed below in this Section. 
2)  Non-residential projects shall follow the requirements of allowed signage for the zoning district appropriate for the specific use in additional to meeting the standards listed below in this Section. 
3)  Mixed-use projects shall follow the requirements of allowed signage for C-1 General Commercial in addition to meeting the standards listed below in this Section. 
b.  Projection Signs. 

Projection signs will be allowed in the Wolf Pen Creek District with the following restrictions: 
1)  One (1) projection sign per frontage along a public right-of-way will be allowed except where otherwise stated in this Section. 
2)  The total square footage of all projection signs used will be applied toward the total allowable area for attached signage. 
3)  The division and placement of allowable building signage amongst building tenants shall be the sole responsibility of the owner or property manager, and not the City of College Station. 
4)  Projection signs shall be mounted perpendicular to buildings. 
5)  Internally lit plastic signs will not be permitted. 
6)  Projection signs may utilize fabric or other flexible material provided that they remain in good condition at all times. 
7)  Projection signs shall have a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance from the walkway grade and four (4) inches of clearance from the building face. Excluding the four-inch minimum clearance requirement, no part of a projection sign shall project more than three (3) feet from the building face. 
8)  Projection signs shall not extend above the faade of the building to which it is attached. 
9)  Buildings with one (1) story may have a sign that shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in size. For each additional building story, an additional eight (8) square feet of signage is allowed, up to a maximum of fifty (50) square feet per sign. 
10)  Signs may be attached to site lighting located on private property with the following restrictions: 
a.  Developments will be allowed one (1) light pole sign for every one hundred fifty (150) feet of building plot frontage in lieu of a permitted freestanding sign. 

b.  No part of any sign attached to a light pole will be allowed to overhang or encroach into any portion of the public right-of-way. 
c.  Light pole signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size and shall have a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance from the walkway grade. 
d.  Light pole signs shall have a minimum clearance of four (4) inches from the edge of the light pole, and excluding the four-inch clearance, shall not project more than three (3) feet from the edge of the light pole. 
c.  Design Criteria. 
In addition to the City's Sign Standards, the Administrator shall evaluate all proposed signage according to the following criteria: 
1)  Every sign shall be designed as an integral architectural element of the building and site to which it principally relates. 
2)  The colors, materials, and lighting of every sign shall be harmonious with the building and site to which it principally relates. 
3)  Identification signs of a prototype design and corporation logos shall conform to the criteria for all other signs. 
12.  Maintenance. 
a.  Continued good appearance depends upon the extent and quality of maintenance. The choice of materials and their use, together with the types of finishes and other protective measures, must be conducive to easy maintenance and upkeep. 
b.  Materials and finishes shall be selected for their durability and wear as well as for their beauty. Proper measures and devices shall be incorporated for protection against the elements, neglect, damage, and abuse. 
c.  Provision for washing and cleaning of buildings and structures, and control of dirt and refuse, shall be included in the design. Configurations that tend to catch and accumulate debris, leaves, trash, dirt, and rubbish shall be avoided. 
d.  Major maintenance activities that occur after a project is complete shall be reviewed by Administrator. These activities include any replacement of light fixtures or standards, and major fence or landscape work or replacement. The intent is to insure that the development standards of this UDO are maintained throughout the life of a project. 
13.  Waivers. 
The Design Review Board shall hear and decide requests for waivers to the standards of the Wolf Pen Creek Design District section of this UDO as listed below. The DRB shall approve waivers found to meet the intent of the standards of the Wolf Pen Creek Design District section of this UDO and the Wolf Pen Creek Master Plan. Financial hardship may not be considered in the review or determination of a waiver proposal. DRB review and waiver approval shall be limited to the following items: 
a.  Relief from specific requirements related to building orientation and access for the improvement of existing buildings if it can be proven by the applicant that existing site characteristics constrain the proposed project from meeting the requirement(s) herein. Relief shall not be considered for building expansions or additions. 
b.  Alternatives to the requirements related to building orientation and access when physical characteristics limit the site or provide for unique orientation and access opportunities. 
B.  Northgate Districts (NG). 
Adjacent to Texas A&M University's north side, the Northgate area encompasses one (1) of the oldest urban areas in College Station and, therefore, Northgate plays a prominent role in development and service of both the City of College Station and Texas A&M University. It is characterized as a unique "campus neighborhood" containing local businesses, churches, and off-campus housing in close proximity to the University. 
Concepts related to Traditional Neighborhood Development (TND), which promotes a mixture of non-residential and residential uses in a pedestrian-oriented setting, have been incorporated within the standards for the Northgate District. Other TND concepts incorporated into the Northgate District include increased density, compatible high quality building design, and specialized signage. The end result is intended to be a unique, pedestrian-friendly, dense urban environment that allows citizens of College Station and students of Texas A&M to eat, work, live, and recreate in an area within close proximity to the University. 
1.  Districts. 
The Northgate area consists of three (3) districts: (1) NG-1 Core Northgate, (2) NG-2 Transitional Northgate, and (3) NG-3 Residential Northgate. Any reference and/or requirement made in this Section shall apply to all Northgate districts unless otherwise specified. These zoning districts incorporate regulations in accordance with the Northgate Redevelopment Implementation Plan. 
a.  NG-1 Core Northgate. 
This mixed-use district applies to areas containing a diversity of pedestrian-oriented retail, dining/restaurant, housing, and entertainment businesses that are in close proximity to on- and off-campus dormitories. Regulations are designed to aid structural rehabilitation and redevelopment while promoting new high density, mixed use, pedestrian-oriented infill development with an urban character. 
b.  NG-2 Transitional Northgate. 
This district is intended for areas in Northgate containing larger retail commercial uses and undeveloped land. This district also serves to transition from suburban-style commercial development to high density, mixed-use redevelopment. This zoning district shall incorporate regulations designed to aid mixed-use development, pedestrian circulation, and redevelopment with an urban character. Any development in NG-2 may develop under the standards herein of NG-1. 
c.  NG-3 Residential Northgate. 
This district is intended for areas in Northgate containing a variety of residential uses and structures. This district applies to areas determined to be suitable for higher density residential developments due to its close proximity to Texas A&M University. NG-3 incorporates regulations designed to aid pedestrian-oriented redevelopment for high density residential and limited commercial uses. 
2.  Additional Use Standards. 
The permitted and conditional uses outlined in the Types of Uses section of this UDO shall meet the following additional requirements related to the district in which the proposed project is located. 
a.  NG-1 Core Northgate. 
1)  Buildings with frontage on Church Avenue, University Drive, College Main, Boyett Street from University Drive to Church Avenue, and Nagle Street from University Drive to Church Avenue shall not have parking, fraternal lodge, or residential uses on the ground floor. These uses shall be allowed on the ground floor if they are completely located behind a commercial use that meets all other requirements of this ordinance. 
2)  Parking lots that are an ancillary use must be abutting the primary use. 
3)  Residential uses are only allowed in buildings that also contain commercial uses. 
4)  The maximum allowable gross floor area on the ground floor per single retail establishment is ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
5)  Freestanding, single-tenant buildings are prohibited except: 
a)  For structures existing on or before April 2, 2006; or 
b)  For the following uses: casual and fine dining restaurants (not "fast food"), hotels, and theaters. 
b.  NG-2 Transitional Northgate. 
1)  Buildings with frontage on Church Avenue, University Drive, South College Avenue, and Nagle Street from University Drive to Church Avenue shall not have parking, fraternal lodge, or residential uses on the ground floor. These uses shall be allowed on the ground floor if they are completely located behind a commercial use that meets all other requirements of this ordinance. 
2)  The maximum allowable gross floor area on the ground floor per single retail establishment is forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
3)  Freestanding, single-tenant buildings are prohibited except: 
a)  For structures existing on or before April 2, 2006; or 
b)  For the following uses: casual and fine dining restaurants (not "fast food"), hotels, and theaters. 
c.  NG-3 Residential Northgate. 
Non-residential uses permitted within NG-3 shall meet each of the following requirements: 
1)  Places of Worship Exemption: Any Expansion, addition, or renovation to existing Places of Worship or construction of new Places of Worship are exempt from these requirements. 
2)  Non-residential uses may occupy no more than fifty (50) percent of the total square footage of any building(s) or group of buildings developed in a building plot. 
3)  Any building containing a non-residential use shall have a minimum of one (1) floor wherein one hundred (100) percent of the floor area is occupied by a residential use. Offices and studios maintained within a residence for home occupations may be included within the residential use calculation. 
4)  The maximum allowable gross floor area per single retail establishment is five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
3.  Building Design Considerations for Historic Properties. 
a.  Applicability. 
The following structures are reflected as medium or high priority in the Northgate Historic Resources Survey. Possible address discrepancies may be resolved by referencing the Northgate Historic Resources Survey. 
NG-1 101 Church 417 University 106 College Main 113 College Main 501 University 108 College Main 217 University 505 University 109 College Main 303 University 303 Boyett 110 College Main 335 University 400 Boyett 111 College Main 401-405 University 105-107 College Main 318 First Street NG-3 416-418 College Main 500 College Main 415 Tauber  
b.  Standards. 
Rehabilitation of these structures shall follow the following standards: 
1)  The historic character of a property will be retained and preserved. Distinctive materials or features and spatial relationships that characterize a property shall not be removed or altered. 
2)  Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property will be preserved. 
3)  Deteriorated historic features will be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature will match the old in design, color, texture, and, where possible, materials. 
c.  Process. 
All proposals affecting the materials, construction, or colors of a historic structure must be approved by the Administrator. The Administrator shall first consider the proposal in light of the standards listed above, then according to the standards set forth below in Section 5.B.4 Building Design Standards. 
4.  Building Design Standards. 
The following standards shall apply to all structures in the Northgate districts, including residential. 
a.  Building Orientation and Access. 
1)  All buildings that have right-of-way frontage on Church Avenue shall orient their primary entrance faades toward Church Avenue. 
2)  All buildings that have right-of-way frontage on University Drive shall orient their primary entrance faades toward University Drive. 
3)  The primary entrance faades of all buildings not on Church Avenue or University Drive shall front a public right-of-way. 
4)  If a building has frontage on University Drive and South College Avenue, the primary entrance faade shall be oriented to one (1) of the rights-of-way at the developer's discretion. A public entrance faade shall be oriented toward the other right-of-way(s). 
5)  In the event a building has frontage on more than one (1) right-of-way (not including Church Avenue, University Drive, or South College Avenue), the Administrator shall determine to which right-of-way the primary entrance faade shall be oriented. A public entrance faade shall be oriented toward the other right-of-way(s). 
6)  In the event that more than two (2) faades require a public entrance, the Administrator may determine which two (2) faades require entrances. The Administrator may also forward the question to the Design Review Board for any reason. 
7)  All residential dwelling units in a building with less than twelve (12) residential dwelling units shall have access from the primary entrance faade. This access may not be through an area with a fence or wall taller than four (4) feet, garage, or parking area. 
b.  Building Transparency. 
Exemption: Sanctuaries in places of worship are exempted from this requirement. 
1)  For maximum pedestrian visibility of the non-residential use(s), non-residential structures and the commercial portions of mixed-use structures shall be at least fifty (50) percent transparent between zero (0) feet and eight (8) feet above ground level of the primary entrance faade and at least thirty (30) percent transparent between zero (0) feet and eight (8) feet on the faade fronting other rights-of-way. In the event that more than two (2) faades require transparency, the Administrator may determine which two (2) faades require minimum transparency. The Administrator may also forward the question to the Design Review Board for any reason. 
2)  Glass shall be clear or tinted, not reflective. Glass block and other materials that are semi-transparent shall not be used to meet this requirement. 
3)  Roll-up doors must be at least seventy-five (75) percent transparent between zero (0) feet and eight (8) feet above ground level for all faades facing a right-of-way. 
c.  Architectural Relief. 
1)  For all faades facing a right-of-way, the first two (2) stories or first twenty-eight (28) feet above ground level shall use architectural detail to provide visual interest by incorporating a minimum of two (2) design elements every twenty-five (25) feet from the following options: canopies, permanent decorative awnings, hood/drip molding over windows, cornices, corbelling, quoining, stringcourses, pilasters, columns, pillars, arcades, bay/oriel windows, balconies that extend from the building, recessed entries, stoops, and porches. 
2)  Along all other faades not facing a right-of-way and not screened by another building located within fifteen (15) feet of the faade, there shall be at least two (2) design elements as listed above for every forty (40) feet. These faades shall be similar and complementary to the primary entrance faade. 
3)  In lieu of the above requirements, buildings with fewer than twelve (12) residential units shall provide individual architectural relief such as a front porch, balcony, or bay window for each unit on each faade. Architectural relief is not required on faades that are within fifteen (15) feet of another building that screens the faade. 
4)  Alternative architectural features may be considered for approval by the Design Review Board. 
d.  Roof Type. 
1)  Shed, mansard, and gambrel roofs are prohibited. 
2)  Hip and gable roofs may only be used when the vertical plane(s) of any roof facing a right-of-way is interrupted by an architectural detail. 
e.  Exterior Building Materials. 
All structures within a building plot shall have materials that are similar and complement each other. When determining area herein, windows and doors are included. 
1)  The following applies only to the first two (2) stories or first twenty-eight (28) feet above ground level of all structures, excluding parking garages. 
All faades, except those within fifteen (15) feet of another building that screens the faade, shall consist of a minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of one (1) or more of the following building materials. Parking garages are excluded from this requirement. All other materials except as authorized herein or by the Design Review Board, are prohibited. 
a)  Fired brick; 
b)  Natural stone; 
c)  Marble; 
d)  Granite; 
e)  Tile; and/or 
f)  Any concrete product so long as it has an integrated color and is textured or patterned (not aggregate material or split-face CMU) to look like brick, stone, marble, granite or tile; or is covered with brick, stone, marble, granite, or tile or a material fabricated to simulate brick, stone, marble, granite, or tile. 
2)  In addition, all faades may utilize the following materials subject to the stated limitations. Parking garages are excluded from these limitations. All other materials are prohibited. 
a)  Stucco, hard board, split-face CMU with integrated color, or any material equivalent in appearance and quality as determined by the Design Review Board shall not cover more than seventy-five (75) percent of each faade. 
b)  Wood or cedar siding, stainless steel, chrome, standing seam metal, and premium grade architectural metal may be used as architectural accents and shall not cover greater than twenty (20) percent of any faade. 
c)  Glass block and other materials that are semi-transparent shall not cover more than fifteen (15) percent of any faade. Places of worship are exempted from this limitation. 
d)  Continuous ribbon window systems and glazed curtain walls are prohibited. 
e)  Smooth face, tinted concrete blocks shall only be used as an accent and shall not cover more than five (5) percent of any faade. 
f)  Galvanized steel and painted steel are allowed on doors, including roll-up doors. 
g)  Steel, standing seam metal, and/or architectural metal, may be used as a roof and/or canopy/awning with no limitation of percentage. 
3)  The faades of parking garages may utilize any material, but may only use steel, standing seam metal, and/or architectural metal as an architectural accent (limited to twenty (20) percent of any faade) and as a roof and/or canopy/awning (with no limitation). 
f.  Exterior Building Colors . 
1)  Building colors shall be neutral and harmonious with the existing man-made or natural environment, and only compatible accent colors shall be used. All colors shall be approved by the Administrator. 
2)  Metallic (except copper and silver metallic-colored roofs) and fluorescent colors are prohibited on any faade or roof. 
3)  When applying brick, colors normally found in manufactured fired brick are permitted. All colors of natural stone are permitted. 
4)  Colors samples shall be submitted for approval to the Office of the Administrator. 
g.  Canopies/Awnings . 
1)  Canopies/awnings shall not completely obstruct any window. Transom windows may be located under canopies/awnings. 
2)  Canopies/awnings are considered part of the building faade. A maximum of one (1) color shall be used for all canopies/awnings on a single building faade (excluding business logo). 

3)  Canopies/awnings shall consist of cloth, canvas, steel, standing seam metal, architectural metal, and/or perforated metal (not corrugated) and shall be maintained in good repair. Canopies/awnings that are used to meet the required building setback shall not be cloth or canvas, but shall be a permanent structure integrated into the building's architecture, consisting of materials similar to that of the rest of the building. 
4)  Canopies/awnings located over the public right-of-way shall require a Private Improvement in the Public Right-of-Way agreement (PIP) in addition to the necessary Building Permit. 
5.  On-Street Parking Standards. 
a.  Existing head-in parking that requires backing maneuvers into a right-of-way shall be removed with all proposed development, redevelopment, rehabilitation, and faade projects within any Northgate district. 
b.  All proposed development, redevelopment, rehabilitation, and faade projects with frontage on a right-of-way(s) designated for on-street parking in the Northgate On-Street Parking Plan, shall install such parking in accordance with the plan. For residential uses, non-metered, parallel spaces may be counted toward off-street parking space requirements. 
6.  Off-Street Parking Standards. 
All off-street parking shall meet the requirements specified in the Off-Street Parking Standards section found elsewhere in this UDO, except as specifically provided herein: 
a.  Lots with frontage on Church Avenue or University Drive shall not have surface parking that is closer than two hundred (200) feet to the right(s)-of-way or is not completely located behind a habitable structure. Lots with frontage on University Drive and Church shall not have surface parking that is closer than two hundred (200) feet to Church Avenue or is not completely located behind a habitable structure. 
b.  There shall be no minimum number of parking spaces required for non-residential uses. 
c.  Off-street parking facilities for residential uses shall meet seventy-five (75) percent of the number of specified parking space requirements of the Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required section. 
d.  No interior islands are required. 
e.  Where off-street surface parking is to be installed adjacent to a right-of-way, there shall be a six-foot setback from the required sidewalk to the parking pavement. The parking area shall be screened along one hundred (100) percent of the street frontage (minus driveways and visibility triangles) with shrubs or a brick, stone, tinted CMU, or concrete product textured or patterned to look like brick or stone wall a minimum of three (3) feet in height, and within three (3) feet of the sidewalk. Walls shall be complementary to the primary building and shall be constructed as sitwalls. 
f.  No off-street surface parking or circulation aisle shall be located between the primary entrance faade of a building and a right-of-way. Parking shall be located to the rear or side of a building. Two (2) exceptions are: 
1)  Sites on the South College Avenue right-of-way may have up to one (1) circulation aisle against the right-of-way with parking on each side of the aisle. 
2)  Hotel and residential uses may have porte cocheres and temporary, loading/unloading parking, not to exceed ten (10) spaces, against the right-of-way. 
g.  Ramps shall not be built on the exterior of parking garages. 
h.  Steel guard cables on garage faades are prohibited. 
i.  In order to break up the parking lot area, minimize the visual impact on pedestrians, and encourage pedestrian movement through the districts, one (1) or a combination of the following parking concepts is required for parking that provides more than sixty (60) parking spaces with more than one (1) parking row: 
1)  Parking is located in a garage. 
2)  The parking structure is located on the interior of the block, screened from public view by habitable structures, and is not located adjacent to a right-of-way. 
3)  For every sixty (60) parking spaces, there shall be a separate and distinct parking area connected by driving lanes but separated by a landscaping strip a minimum of ten (10) feet wide the full length of the parking row. At a minimum, landscaping shall be one (1) canopy tree (one and one-half-inch caliper or greater) for every twenty-five (25) linear feet of the landscaping strip. 
In addition, at least seventy-five (75) percent of all end islands in the parking lot must be irrigated and landscaped with a minimum one and one-half-inch caliper canopy tree, one and one-quarter-inch caliper noncanopy tree, or enough shrubs three (3) feet in height at time of planting to cover seventy-five (75) percent of the island. Islands not landscaped shall be treated with brick pavers, groundcover, and/or perennial grass. 
7.  Bicycle Parking Standards. 
Specific bicycle racks utilized shall be as identified in the City of College Station Design Standards: Northgate. 
a.  For non-residential uses, a minimum of four (4) bicycle parking spaces plus one (1) additional space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area above two thousand (2,000) square feet shall be required. 
b.  For residential uses, a minimum of one (1) bicycle space per dwelling unit shall be required. 
c.  In no case shall more than twenty (20) bicycle parking spaces per business or residential building be required. 
d.  Facilities shall be separated from motor vehicle parking to protect both bicycles and vehicles from accidental damage and shall be separated at least three (3) feet from building or other walls, landscaping, or other features to allow for ease and encouragement of use. Bicycle parking facilities may be permitted on sidewalks or other paved surfaces with a PIP (when necessary) and provided that the bicycles do not block or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
e.  Required bicycle parking may be consolidated with the bicycle parking of adjacent properties and provided off-site if the bicycle rack location is within one hundred (100) feet of the main entry faade of the building and with written agreement from the property owners. 
8.  Sidewalk Standards. 
Sidewalks shall be incorporated into all proposed development and redevelopment projects within any Northgate district. In the event that a sidewalk exists on a site prior to development or redevelopment and does not meet all sidewalk and streetscape standards outlined herein, the sidewalk must be upgraded to meet current standards (including American National Standards and Texas Accessibility Standards). 
a.  Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of all rights-of-way. 
b.  Sidewalks widths shall be as follows: 
1)  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width on University Drive and South College Avenue. 
2)  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width on Church Street and College Main. 
3)  Sidewalks shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width on all other streets in Northgate. 
c.  Sidewalks shall be located directly adjacent to the back of curb. The Administrator may approve alternate locations to eliminate encroachments of streetscaping materials that would reduce the clear space of the sidewalk to less than six (6) feet. The Administrator may also approve alternate locations for sidewalks along South College Avenue and Wellborn Road to address public safety concerns. 
d.  Sidewalks or parts of sidewalks that lie outside, but are located next to, the right-of-way shall be covered by a dedicated public access easement initiated by the property owner so that they will be dedicated for public use and maintenance. 
e.  Sidewalks shall be constructed of colored brick pavers on the exterior (visible) layer as specified in the City of College Station Design Standards: Northgate. 

Graphic represents sidewalks and street tree requirements for University Drive or South College 
9.  Landscape and Streetscape Standards. 
For NG-1 and NG-3, the standards set forth herein are in lieu of Landscaping Requirements and Streetscape Requirements of the General Development Standards article, of this UDO. 
For NG-2, the standards set forth herein are in addition to Landscaping Requirements and Streetscape Requirements of the General Development Standards article, of this UDO. 
Any landscape/streetscape improvements may be located within the public right-of-way pursuant to a Private Improvement in the Public Right-of-Way agreement (PIP). 
Specific landscaping elements and streetscape hardware (benches, street lights, etc.) utilized shall be as identified in the City of College Station Site Design Standards. 
a.  Street Trees. 
1)  On University Drive, Church Avenue, Wellborn Road, South College Avenue, First Street, Boyett Street, College Main Avenue, and Nagle Street, installation of minimum four-inch caliper street trees shall be located in at-grade tree wells with tree grates (or raised tree wells or planters on University Drive and College Main Avenue only) and shall be spaced at a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet on center and located adjacent to the back of curb. Back of curb placement is not required along Wellborn Road and South College Avenue when an alternative location for the sidewalk is approved as provided for in Section 5.8.B.8.c above. On all other streets not listed above, installation of minimum three-inch caliper street trees shall be located in at-grade tree wells with tree grates [raised tree wells or planters may be used when eight (8) feet of clear space can be maintained on the sidewalk] and spaced at a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet on center and located adjacent to the back of curb. 
Alignment of such street trees shall commence twenty (20) feet from street intersections. Spacing and location of street trees may be varied upon approval by the Administrator for the purpose of minimizing conflicts with other streetscape elements and utilities, minimizing conflicts with the required sight distance at street intersections, ensuring unobstructed views of traffic control devices, and ensuring adequate Fire Department access. In areas of concentrated retail activity, street trees may be placed at different intervals upon approval by the Administrator for the purpose of minimizing the obstruction of views of non-residential uses. 
2)  In locations where a healthy and mature canopy tree equal to four (4) inches in caliper or greater currently exists, the requirements for a new tree may be waived or modified by the Administrator. Such trees must be maintained, barricaded, and otherwise fully protected during the project's construction phase and shall be replaced with trees meeting the specifications herein if they are damaged or die. 
3)  All in-ground vegetated areas, trees, and above ground planters shall include an automated irrigation system. Irrigation will not be required for existing trees that are properly barricaded (see the Landscaping and Tree Protection section of this UDO) during construction. 
b.  Landscaping. 
Any area between the inside or interior of the sidewalk edge and the building faade and/or parking area not utilized as outdoor caf seating is required to be one hundred (100) percent landscaped/streetscaped and irrigated. Eligible landscape/streetscape improvements shall include raised masonry planter boxes or planter pots, at-grade planting beds, seating benches, light features, decorative railings, masonry walls not exceeding three (3) feet in height, decorative wrought iron fencing, additional pedestrian areas finished with brick pavers, or other elements featured in the College Station Streetscape Plan. Live plant material must be included where feasible in each proposal. 
c.  Sidewalk Benches. 
A minimum of one (1) sidewalk bench shall be provided for every fifty (50) linear feet of building frontage along a right-of-way. In no case shall more than four (4) sidewalk benches per building faade be required. 
d.  Building and Site Lighting. 
1)  Building illumination and architectural lighting shall be indirect (no light source visible). Exposed neon tube may be used. 
2)  Light standards for parking lots shall reflect the style of the building plot's architecture or be complementary to that style. Standards shall not be greater than twenty (20) feet in height. 
e.  Street Lights. 
1)  Street light location and type shall be as determined by College Station Utilities Electric and the Administrator. 
2)  The installation and cost of lighting shall be performed by the developer or his authorized construction representative subject to compliance with the utility street light installation standards of the College Station Utilities Department. 
3)  Once satisfactorily installed, approved, and accepted by College Station Utilities, the maintenance of the street lights and the furnishing of electric energy to the street lights shall be provided by the City. 
f.  Trash Receptacles. 
If installed, trash receptacle locations shall be shown on the landscape plan. One (1) trash receptacle may be located within an intersection's sight distance triangle described in the Visibility at Intersections in All Districts section of this UDO. 
g.  Newspaper Racks. 
If installed, newspaper racks shall be placed so that a four-foot minimum clear space is maintained on the sidewalk. 
10.  Dumpster and Mechanical Equipment Standards. 
The following standards are in addition to the requirements of the Solid Waste section of the General Development Standards article of this UDO. 
a.  Any dumpster and other waste storage area or container other than streetscape trash receptacles shall be located to the rear of the building served by the dumpster, area, and/or container. The Administrator may adjust this standard where a required entrance faade is located at the rear of the building or when parking is provided on the side of a building. 
b.  Where feasible, consolidation of dumpsters may be required by the City. 
c.  Solid waste storage areas, mechanical equipment, air conditioning, electrical meter and service components, and similar utility devices, whether ground level, wall mounted, or roof mounted, shall be screened from view from rights-of-way. Exterior screening materials shall be opaque and the same as predominantly used on the exterior of the principal building. Such screening shall be coordinated with the building architecture, colors, and scale to maintain a unified appearance. Acceptable methods of screening various equipment include encasements, parapet walls, partition screens, or brick walls. Screening may be omitted or modified upon approval of the Administrator for the purpose of complying with safe working clearances around electrical meters, electrical panels, transformers, and related electrical service equipment. 
d.  Mechanical equipment shall be located to minimize noise intrusion off site. 
11.  Detention Pond Screening Standard. 
Detention ponds shall be screened from view along one hundred (100) percent of rights-of-way using berms, shrubs, walls, or a combination of these to achieve a three-foot high screen measured from the ground level. Walls shall be coordinated with the building architecture, colors, and scale to maintain a unified appearance. 
12.  Sign Standards. 
a.  Signage shall not obscure other building elements such as windows, cornices, or architectural details. 
b.  Illuminated plastic signs are prohibited. 
c.  The following types of signage may be used. All others are prohibited. 
1)  Attached Signs. 
a)  Refer to the Signs section of the General Development Standards article of this UDO. 
b)  Exposed neon may be used in attached signage. 
2)  Window Signs. 
a)  Window signs shall allow for the majority of the display area to be open for pedestrian window shopping and shall not cover more than thirty-three (33) percent of the window area. 
b)  Exposed neon may be used in window signage. 
3)  Hanging Signs. 
a)  Hanging signs shall be suspended from canopies/awnings and located in front of building entrances, perpendicular to the faade. 
b)  A maximum of one (1) sign per building entrance is allowed. 
c)  The sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size and shall have a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance from the walkway grade, four (4) inches of clearance from the building face, and eight (8) inches of clearance from the edge of the canopy/awning. 
d)  Hanging signs located in/over the public right-of-way shall require a Private Improvement in the Public Right-of-Way agreement (PIP) in addition to the necessary Building Permit. 
4)  Projection Signs. 
a)  Projection signs are allowed in NG-1 and NG-2 only. 
b)  Projection signs shall be mounted perpendicular to buildings. They shall have a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance from the walkway grade and four (4) inches of clearance from the building face (barber poles are exempted from these clearance requirements). All extremities of projection signs, including supports, frames, and the like, shall not project more than three (3) feet from the building face. 
c)  A maximum of one (1) sign per building is allowed. 
d)  Buildings with one (1) story may have a sign that shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size. For each additional building story, an additional four (4) square feet of signage is allowed, up to a maximum of eighteen (18) square feet. 
e)  Projection signs located in/over the public right-of-way shall require a Private Improvement in the Public Right-of-Way agreement (PIP) in addition to the necessary Building Permit. 
f)  Exposed neon may be used in projection signage. 
5)  Low Profile Signs. 
a)  In NG-2 only, one (1) low profile sign per one hundred fifty (150) linear feet of a building plot along South College Avenue may be permitted. 
b)  Refer to the Sign Standards section of the General Development Standards article of this UDO. 
c)  Exposed neon may be used in low profile signage. 
d.  If more than twenty-five (25) percent of the square footage of a building is demolished, any nonconforming signage associated with the building must also be demolished. The signage will not be considered "grandfathered", and no other permits will be issued for the site by the City of College Station until the signage has been removed. 
13.  Outside Storage and Display Standards. 
The following standards are in lieu of the Outdoor Storage and Display section of the General Development Standards article of this UDO. 
a.  Outdoor storage of materials or commodities is prohibited. 
b.  Temporary or portable buildings of any kind are prohibited except during construction of site-planned facilities. 
c.  Outside sales/outside display areas shall be located within five (5) feet of a required entrance faade and shall only be located in front of the property/business that is selling item(s). A four-foot minimum clear space on sidewalks shall be maintained. 
1)  Exception. Subsection c. will not apply if a business is has a valid permit issued under Code of Ordinance Chapter 4 "Business Regulations" Section 4-21 "Northgate Outdoor Dining and Entertainment. 
d.  All merchandise and/or seasonal items used for outside sales or display shall be moved indoors at the end of business each day. 
14.  Waivers . 
The Design Review Board (DRB) shall review requests for deviations from the standards of the Northgate Districts section of this UDO as listed below. The DRB shall approve waivers found to meet the intent of the standards of the Northgate Districts section of this UDO and the Northgate Redevelopment Implementation Plan. Financial hardship may not be considered in the review or determination of a waiver proposal. 
DRB review and waiver approval shall be limited to the following items: 
a.  Relief from the building design standards for historic properties if the proposed building improvements or additions generally conform to the section of this Ordinance addressing Building Design Considerations for Historic Properties-Standards for the Northgate zoning districts, and if the property building improvements or additions generally preserve the historical appearance and architectural character of the building. 
b.  Relief from specific requirements related to building orientation and access for the improvement of existing buildings if it can be proven by the applicant shows that inherent site characteristics constrain the proposed project from meeting the requirement(s) herein. Relief shall not be considered for building expansions or additions. 
c.  Alternatives to the requirements related to building orientation and access when physical characteristics limit the site or provide for unique orientation and access opportunities. 
d.  A reduction in the percentage of required building transparency for the rehabilitation of existing buildings if it can be proven by the applicant that inherent site characteristics constrain the proposed project from meeting the requirements herein. 
e.  Alternatives to the requirements related to building transparency for new construction if the alternatives substantially provide the same visual interest for the pedestrian. 
f.  Alternate architectural features to meet the requirements related to architectural relief when the proposed architectural details substantially provide a level of uniqueness to the building at the pedestrian scale. 
g.  Along non-primary entrance faades that do not abut a right-of-way and that require design elements, murals may be considered by the Design Review Board to meet the two-design element requirement. Mural topics may include architecture and/or Texas A&M University. Murals may not contain copy or logo advertising any business. 
h.  Substitutions of building materials for buildings if the applicant shows that: 
1)  The building material is a new or innovative material manufactured that has not been previously available to the market or the material is not listed as an allowed or prohibited material herein and the material is similar and comparable in quality and appearance to the materials allowed in the Exterior Building Materials section of this Ordinance for the Northgate zoning districts; or 
2)  The material is an integral part of a themed building (example 50's diner in chrome). 
3)  No variance shall be granted to minimum building material requirements specified for buildings ten thousand (10,000) square feet or greater in area or for building plots with a cumulative structure square footage of ten thousand (10,000) square feet or greater. 
i.  Alternative materials on faade work that does not involve an expansion of an existing building as defined in the Nonconformities section of the UDO or constitute redevelopment if the applicant shows that: 
1)  The materials allowed in the Exterior Building Materials section of this Ordinance for the Northgate zoning districts cannot be utilized without a structural alteration(s) to the existing building; and 
2)  A licensed professional engineer or architect verifies in writing that a structural alteration is required to apply the permitted faade materials to the building. 
j.  Alternatives to the requirements related to surface area parking lots. Alternatives must separate the parking areas so that no more than sixty (60) parking spaces are located in the same vicinity without substantial visual separation from additional parking spaces. 
k.  A decrease in parking requirements for residential uses provided that the applicant submits a parking study that supports the decrease based on reasonable assumptions of parking availability. Unless shared or off-site parking is provided as allowed in the Alternative Parking Plans section of the General Development Standards article of this UDO, in no case shall the DRB permit a reduction in the number of required spaces: 
1)  To less than the number recommended within the parking study, or 
2)  To more than a fifty (50) percent reduction in the amount of parking required for residential uses by the Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required section of this UDO. 
l.  An increase in the distance requirement for shared and/or off-site parking when the shared or off-site parking is provided in a parking garage. 
m.  Relief from the sidewalk width standard when bringing an existing sidewalk up to current standard where existing physical conditions prohibit the sidewalk expansion. 
n.  Alternatives to the Landscape and Streetscape Standards for projects utilizing an existing structure(s) if it can be proven by the applicant that inherent site characteristics constrain the proposed project from meeting the requirements herein. 
o.  Relief from the two-story requirement for casual and fine dining restaurants (not "fast food") and theaters in NG-2 if all faades are a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in height and all faades give the appearance of a two-story structure as determined by the Design Review Board. 
p.  Relief from the minimum height requirement in NG-1 and NG-2 for an existing structure undergoing only faade rehabilitation if the applicant shows that inherent site characteristics constrain the proposed project from meeting the requirement(s) herein. Relief shall not be considered for building expansions or additions. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3411 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-26-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3429 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-12-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. M), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 1-10-2013; Ord. No. 2015-3720 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-23-2015; Ord. No. 2018-3985 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 2-8-2018; Ord. No. 2018-3991 , Pt. 1(Exhs. C-E), 2-22-2018) 
Sec. 5.9. - Design District Dimensional Standards. 
The following table establishes dimensional standards that shall be applied within the Design Districts, unless otherwise identified in this UDO: 
NG-1 NG-2 NG-3 WPC Minimum Lot Area None None None 2,400 SF Minimum Lot Width None None None 24' Minimum Lot Depth None None None 100' Minimum Front Setback None None None 25' (H) Minimum Side Setback None None None None (A) Minimum Side Street Setback None None None 15' Minimum Rear Setback None None None 15' Minimum Setback from Back of Curb (B) 10' 10' 10' None Maximum Setback from Back of Curb (B) 20' (C) (D) (E) 25' (C) (D) (E) 20' (C) (D) (E) None Maximum Height (J) (J) (J) (J) Minimum Number of Stories 2 Stories (G) 2 Stories (G) 2 Stories (G) None Minimum Floor to Area Ratio (FAR) 1:1(F)(I) 0.75:1 (F)(I) 1:1(F)(I) None  
Notes: 
(A)  Lot line construction on interior lots is allowed where access to the rear of the building is provided on the site or by dedicated right-of-way or easement. 
(B)  Minimum/maximum setback from the back of any curb, including lots with single frontage, lots with double frontage, and corner lots with multiple frontages. 
(C)  If the width of any public easement or right-of-way is in excess of the maximum setback, the maximum setback will be measured from the edge of the public easement or right-of-way. 
(D)  Maximum setback from back of curb for University Drive is twenty-five (25) feet, Wellborn is thirty-five (35) feet and one hundred (100) feet for South College. 
(E)  When caf seating is between the caf's building and a right-of-way, the building may be setback a maximum of thirty-five (35) feet. 
(F)  This area calculation shall not include any lot area encumbered by required easements, setbacks, sidewalks, detention, or area dedicated to civic features. The area of a porch or arcade fronting a public street is included in the calculation of lot coverage. 
(G)  The two-story requirement shall not apply to structures existing on or before April 2, 2006. 
(H)  Minimum front setback may be reduced to fifteen (15) feet when approved rear access is provided or when side yard or rear yard parking is provided. 
(I)  Places of Worship are exempt from the Floor to Area Ratio (FAR) requirement in all NG Districts. 
(J)  Reference Easterwood Field Airport Zoning Ordinance regarding height limitations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3429 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-12-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), (Exh. C), 1-10-2013) 
Sec. 5.10. - Overlay Districts. 
In the event that an area is rezoned to apply overlay district provisions, this district shall apply to all multi-family, commercial and industrial property, and where applicable, to single-family, duplex or townhouse development. The underlying district establishes the permitted uses and shall remain in full force, and the requirements of the overlay district are to be applied in addition to the underlying use and site restrictions. 
A.  Corridor Overlay (OV) District. 
This district is established to enhance the image of gateways and key entry points, major corridors, and other areas of concern, as determined by the City Council, by maintaining a sense of openness and continuity. The following supplemental standards shall apply to this district: 
1.  Setbacks. 
All buildings will be set back forty (40) feet from the right-of-way. Where parking is located in the front of the building, there shall be a front setback of twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way to the parking area and all drive aisles. 
2.  Signs . 
Freestanding signs shall be limited to the restrictions of the signs section of the General Development Standards article of this UDO, but shall not exceed the height of the building. 
3.  Building Colors. 
Building colors shall be neutral and harmonious with the existing man-made or natural environment, and only compatible accent colors shall be used. All colors shall be approved by the Administrator. The applicant must provide elevation drawings and color samples. 
4.  Special Restrictions for Retail Fuel Sales. 
In cases where the underlying zoning district permits gasoline service stations and a station is proposed, the following restrictions shall apply: 
a.  Activities Restricted. 
1)  No major emergency auto repair; and 
2)  No body, fender, or paint work. 
b.  Signs. 
1)  Sign height shall be restricted by the provisions of the signs section of the General Development Standards article of this UDO, but shall not exceed the height of the building. 
2)  No freestanding fuel price signage shall be permitted. 
3)  Signs for air, water, and other similar services or products must meet the criteria for exempt signs as provided in the signs section of the General Development Standards article of this UDO. 
B.  Redevelopment District (RDD). 
The purpose of this district is to facilitate the redevelopment of existing nonconforming commercial centers through flexible or relaxed standards, which can accommodate existing physical limitations and take extraordinary circumstances into account. The Redevelopment District (RDD) is an overlay district. The permissible uses on any site shall be governed by the underlying zoning. 
The following supplemental standards shall apply to this district: 
1.  Location. 
A Redevelopment District (RDD) may be established upon any commercially-zoned property where the initial development was established a minimum of twenty (20) years prior to the rezoning request and the proposed redevelopment meets the intent of this section. Special consideration should be given to those areas considered "gateways" and/or historic, and those with close proximity to Texas A&M University. 
2.  Standards. 
Although every effort should be made to meet all requirements of this UDO, designated Redevelopment Districts may be allowed to waive up to fifty (50) percent of required parking standards and landscaping where physical limitations and the site's location and relationship to the goals of the Comprehensive Plan warrant consideration. A lesser percentage may be established as part of the approval process. 
3.  Criteria for Evaluation. 
Evaluation of all sites and site plans for rezoning to RDD shall consider the following: 
a.  Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan; 
b.  Aesthetic contribution of the proposed redevelopment; 
c.  Economic viability of the existing site; 
d.  Physical limitations and the demonstrated inability to meet current requirements; 
e.  Public health and safety standards; and 
f.  Effort made to meet all standards of this UDO. 
g.  Full engineering of sites may not be required for the establishment of a Redevelopment District; however, a preliminary engineering study will be required which assesses parking, vehicular access and circulation, drainage and utility requirements. 
4.  Procedure for Establishment. 
The procedure for rezoning to RDD shall be the same as any other rezoning application except that a site plan of the proposed redevelopment of the site shall be carefully evaluated to ascertain the site plan's benefit to achieving the goals of the Comprehensive Plan. Elevations of proposed structures may be required as part of the review process, or to determine eligibility for rezoning. 
Full engineering may not be required for evaluating a property for rezoning. Varying levels of information may be required by the Administrator depending upon the peculiarities of any given site. 
The site plan components shall govern the redevelopment of the site following the approval of an RDD. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. M), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 1-10-2013; Ord. No. 2018-3991 , Pt. 1(Exh. F), 2-22-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4001 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 4-12-2018) 
Sec. 5.11. - Single-Family Overlay Districts. 
A.  Purpose. 
Single-Family Overlay Districts are intended to provide additional standards for new construction and redevelopment in established neighborhoods. College Station's older, established neighborhoods provide a unique living environment that contributes to the stability and livability of the City as a whole. These standards are intended to promote development that is compatible with the existing character of the neighborhood and preserve the unique characteristics of College Station's older neighborhoods while balancing the need for the redevelopment of vacant or underutilized property. 
The underlying zoning district establishes the permitted uses and shall remain in full force, and the requirements of the overlay district are to be applied in addition to the underlying use and site restrictions. 
B.  Applicability. 
The Single-Family Overlay Districts may only be applied to neighborhoods zoned and developed for single-family residences. 
C.  General Provisions. 
1.  The yard, lot, and open space regulations of the Single-Family Overlay Districts must be read in accordance with the yard, lot, and open space regulations in the Residential Dimensional Standards and Required Yards sections of this UDO. In the event of a conflict between the Single-Family Overlay Districts and these sections, the Single-Family Overlay District controls. 
2.  The City Council may approve a Single-Family Overlay District for an area that contains fewer than thirty (30) single-family structures if the Council determines that: 
a.  The boundary lines are drawn to include blockfaces on both sides of a street, and to the logical edges of the area, as indicated by a creek, street, subdivision line, utility easement, zoning boundary line, or other boundary. Boundary lines that split blockfaces in two (2) should be avoided approving the Single-Family Overlay District will not negatively affect adjacent neighborhoods; 
b.  Approving the Single-Family Overlay District will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare of other property in the area; and 
c.  The creation of a Single-Family Overlay District will meet the purpose of this section. 
3.  Petition for a Single-Family Overlay District must be signed by at least fifty (50) percent plus one (1) of the total number of property owners in the proposed district area. 
4.  Single-Family Overlay Districts may not apply to neighborhoods originally platted in the last ten (10) years. 
D.  Districts. 
1.  Neighborhood Prevailing Overlay District (NPO). 
a.  Purpose. 
This district is intended to provide standards that preserve single-family neighborhoods by imposing neighborhood-specific yard, lot, and open space regulations that reflect the existing character of the neighborhood. The Neighborhood Prevailing Overlay does not prevent construction of new single-family structures or the renovation, remodeling, repair or expansion of existing single-family structures, but, rather, ensures that new single-family structures are compatible with existing single-family structures. 
b.  Applicability. 
The regulations of the Neighborhood Prevailing Overlay apply to all single-family and accessory structures within the district. 
c.  Standards. 
Development shall be subject to the existing median pattern of development on the subject and opposing blockfaces for the following standards: 
1)  Minimum Front Setback. 
Front setback is calculated as the median existing front setback of all residential structures on the subject and opposing blockface. 

2)  Maximum Front Setback. 
The maximum front setback, or build-to line, is no more than ten (10) feet back from the minimum front setback. 
3)  Minimum Side Street Setback. 
Minimum side street setback is calculated as the median side street setback of all existing residential structures in the district. 
4)  Minimum Lot Size. 
Minimum lot size is calculated as the median building plot size of all existing building plots on the subject and opposing blockface. 
5)  Building Height. 
Building height is calculated as the median building height of all existing residential structures on the subject and opposing blockface. 
Building height refers to the vertical distance measured from the finished grade, or the base flood elevation where applicable, and the following points: 
a)  The average height level between the eaves and ridge line of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof; 
b)  The highest point of a mansard roof; or 
c)  The highest point of the coping of a flat roof. 
6)  Maximum Lot Coverage. 
Lot coverage is calculated as the median existing lot coverage on all building plots on the subject and opposing blockface. 
Lot coverage includes all structures and impervious cover on a site, including but not limited to, patios, driveways - gravel or paved, accessory structures, and sidewalks 
7)  Garage Location and Orientation. 

New garages must be placed in relation to the primary residential structure on the lot consistent with the most frequent pattern of placement on the subject and opposing blockface. New garages must also be oriented consistent with the most frequent direction of orientation on the subject and opposing blockface. See graphics in 5.12.D.2 for Garage Location and Orientation. 
8)  Tree Preservation. 
Any existing tree of eight-inch caliper or greater in good form and condition and reasonably free of damage by insects and/or disease located outside of the buildable area are required to be barricaded and preserved. A barricade detail must be provided on the site plan. Trees must be barricaded one (1) foot per caliper inch. Barricades must be in place prior to any development activity on the property including, but not limited to, grading. 
9)  Landscape Maintenance. 
Any existing canopy and non-canopy trees in good form and condition and reasonably free of damage by insects and/or disease located within the buildable area removed during construction must be replaced on site caliper for caliper, or as determined by the Administrator. 
2.  Neighborhood Conservation Overlay Districts (NCO). 
a.  Purpose. 
The Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District (NCO) is intended to protect and preserve single-family neighborhoods through a district that is focused on the specific needs of the neighborhood. NCO districts are based on in-depth study of the existing neighborhood conditions, and should be used to protect unique assets and qualities of the neighborhood. Conservation districts may be used for neighborhoods that offer a distinct character that its residents and the City wish to preserve and protect. It differs from the Neighborhood Prevailing Overlay in that it allows neighborhoods to choose from a variety of standards to address neighborhood specific issues. 
b.  Applicability. 
The regulations of the Neighborhood Conservation Overlay apply to all single-family and accessory structures within the district. 
A neighborhood may not have both a Neighborhood Prevailing Overlay and a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay. 
c.  General Provisions. 
The standards set forward in a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay must be based on findings of a Conservation Study conducted by the City of College Station in conjunction with a neighborhood stakeholder committee. The committee must be made up of at least six (6) property owners in the neighborhood and the Administrator. The Conservation Study must include a survey of existing conditions and unique characteristics of the neighborhood and outline the issues that threaten the preservation of those characteristics. The Conservation Study will also set forth the items that may be included in the rezoning ordinance. 
d.  Options for Inclusion. 
In applying for a Neighborhood Conservation District Overlay, the following items may be included for study in the Conservation Study and included as standards in the overlay. All development within the district shall be subject to the standards set forth in the rezoning ordinance. 
1)  Minimum Front Setback. 
If minimum front setback is selected for inclusion, the neighborhood stakeholder committee may select one (1) of the following methods of determining minimum front setback based on the findings of the Conservation Study of the subject neighborhood: 
a)  Contextual front setbacks as provided for in Required Yards (Setbacks) section of this UDO; or 
b)  Contextual front setbacks as provided for in the General Provisions of this Single-Family Overlay Districts section of the UDO; or 
c)  Fixed front setback. A fixed front setback may be established, however, it may not be less than the setback of underlying zoning or more than the existing median front yard setback of structures in the district. 
2)  Minimum Side Street Setback. 
If minimum side street setback is selected for inclusion, the neighborhood stakeholder committee may select one (1) of the following methods of determining minimum side street setback based on the findings of the Conservation Study of the subject neighborhood: 
a)  Contextual side street setbacks as provided for in Section 5.12.C.2; or 
b)  Fixed side street setback. A fixed side street setback may be established, however, it may not be less than the side setback of underlying zoning or more than the existing median side street setback of structures in the district. 
3)  Minimum Lot Size. 
If minimum lot size is selected for inclusion, the neighborhood stakeholder committee may select one (1) of the following methods of determining minimum lot size based on the findings of the Conservation Study of the subject neighborhood: 
a)  Lot size as provided for in the Platting and Replatting in Older Residential Neighborhoods subsection in Article 8, Subdivision Design and Improvements; or 
b)  Contextual lot size as provided for in Section 5.12.C.3; or 
c)  Fixed lot size. A fixed lot size may be established, however, it may not be less than the lot size required of underlying zoning or more than the existing median size of building plots in the district. 
4)  Maximum Building Height. 
If maximum building height is selected for inclusion, the neighborhood stakeholder committee may select one (1) of the following methods of determining maximum building height based on the findings of the Conservation Study of the subject neighborhood: 
a)  Contextual building height as provided for in Section 5.12.C.4; or 
b)  Fixed building height. A fixed building height may be established, however, it may not be more than the maximum height allowed in the underlying zoning district or less than the median height of all residential structures in the district. 
5)  Tree Preservation. 
If tree preservation is selected for inclusion, any existing tree of eight-inch caliper or greater in good form and condition and reasonably free of damage by insects and/or disease located outside the buildable area are required to be barricaded and preserved. A barricade detail must be provided on the site plan. Trees must be barricaded one (1) foot per caliper inch. Barricades must be in place prior to any development activity on the property including, but not limited to, grading. 
6)  Landscape Maintenance. 
If landscape maintenance is selected for inclusion, any existing canopy and non-canopy trees in good form and condition and reasonably free of damage by insects and/or disease located within the buildable area removed during construction must be replaced on site caliper for caliper, or as determined by the Administrator. 
7)  Maximum Lot Coverage. 
If maximum lot coverage is selected for inclusion, maximum lot coverage is calculated as the median existing lot coverage on all building plots on the subject and opposing blockface. 
Lot coverage includes all structures and impervious cover on a site, including but not limited to, patios, driveways, accessory structures, and sidewalks 
8)  Garage Access. 

If garage access is selected for inclusion, the neighborhood stakeholder committee may chose one (1) of the following methods of garage access based on the most frequent method of garage access within the subject neighborhood: 
a)  Front entry; or 
b)  Side entry; or 
c)  Rear entry. 
9)  Garage Connection. 
If garage connection is selected for inclusion, the neighborhood stakeholder committee may select one (1) of the following garage connection types based on the most frequent method of garage connection within the subject neighborhood: 

a)  Attached to the single-family structure; or 
b)  Detached from the single-family structure. 
10)  Garage Location. 

If garage location is selected for inclusion, the neighborhood stakeholder committee may select one (1) of the following garage locations based on the most frequent location of garages in relation to the primary single-family structure within the subject neighborhood: 
a)  In front of the single-family structure; or 
b)  To the side of the single-family structure; or 
c)  To the rear of the single-family structure. 
11)  Off-Street Parking. 
If off-street parking is selected for inclusion, the neighborhood stakeholder committee may set a minimum off-street parking standard of three (3) spaces per residential unit, however, it may not be included without also including maximum lot coverage, garage access, connection, and location in the Conservation Study. 
12)  Building Materials. 
If Building Materials is selected for inclusion, the neighborhood stakeholder committee may select required building materials and set a minimum percentage for the use of those materials for faades facing a right-of-way. Required materials may only include types of building materials used in the subject neighborhood. The Conservation Study should include a listing of all types of materials used in the district as well as the median percentage on building faades facing a right-of-way. The percentage of use of a required material may only be placed on faades facing a right-of-way and may not exceed the median existing percentage of the materials on building faades facing a right-of-way. 
13)  Fencing. 
If Fencing is selected for inclusion, the neighborhood stakeholder committee may select required materials and maximum height. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. M), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 1-10-2013) 
Sec. 5.12. - Historic Preservation Overlay District. 
A.  Purpose. 
The Historic Preservation Overlay District is intended to provide for the protection and preservation of places and areas of historical, cultural, and architectural importance and significance. Such action is necessary to promote the economic, cultural, educational, and general welfare of the public. Specifically, this district has the following expressed purposes: 
1.  To protect and enhance the landmarks and districts which represent distinctive elements of College Station's historic, architectural, and cultural heritage; 
2.  To foster civic pride in the accomplishments of the past; 
3.  To protect and enhance College Station's attractiveness to visitors and the support and stimulus to the economy thereby provided; 
4.  To insure the harmonious, orderly, and efficient growth and development of the City; 
5.  To promote economic prosperity and welfare of the community by encouraging the most appropriate use of such property within the City; and 
6.  To encourage stabilization, restoration, and improvements of such properties and their values. 
B.  Applicability. 
The Historic Preservation Overlay District may be applied to districts, areas, or individual property, regardless of the base zoning district or current use of the property(ies), that: 
1.  Are at least forty (40) years old; 
2.  Meet at least two (2) of the criteria listed below; and 
3.  Possess integrity that is evident through historic qualities including Location, Design, Setting, Materials, Workmanship, Feeling, and Association. 
C.  Criteria for Designation of Historic Preservation Overlay Districts. 
A property or district may be designated if it: 
1.  Possesses significance in history, architecture, archeology, and culture; 
2.  Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of local, regional, state, or national history; 
3.  Is associated with events that have made a significant impact in our past; 
4.  Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction; 
5.  Represents the work of a master designer, builder, or craftsman; 
6.  Represents an established and familiar visual feature of the neighborhood or City; or 
7.  Is eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places, Recorded Texas Historic Landmark, or a State Archaeological Landmark, as determined by the Texas Historical Commission. 
D.  Removal of a Historic Preservation Overlay District. 
Upon recommendation of the Landmark Commission to the Planning and Zoning Commission based upon new and compelling evidence and negative evaluation according to the same criteria and following the same procedures set forth in this UDO for designation, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend to the City Council and the City Council may remove an Historic Preservation Overlay District made under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3471 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 1-10-2013) 
Article 6. - Use Regulations 

Sec. 6.1. - Purpose. 
The intent of this Article is to provide for patterns of land use consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, and to encourage the arrangement of land uses so as to minimize conflicts among various types of land use activities while recognizing the City's need for such activities. 
Sec. 6.2. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to property zoned BioCorridor Planned Development District. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. H), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 6.3. - Types of Use. 
A.  Uses of land or structures which are not expressly listed in the Use Table as permitted uses (P), permitted uses subject to specific use standards (P*), or conditional uses (C) in a zoning district or planned development are prohibited uses and shall not be established in that district or planned development. 
B.  The Administrator shall determine whether or not an unlisted use, that is otherwise prohibited, as stated above should be processed. In doing so, the Administrator shall utilize purpose statements adopted herein in conjunction with the applicable zoning district, and consideration of the following criteria: 
1.  The actual or anticipated characteristics of the activity in relationship to known characteristics of similar projects in standard planning practice; 
2.  The relative amount of site area, floor space, and equipment; 
3.  Relative volumes of sales from each activity; 
4.  The customer type for each activity; 
5.  The relative number of employees in each activity; 
6.  Hours of operation; 
7.  Building and site arrangement; 
8.  Vehicles used with the activity and the relative number of vehicle trips generated by the use; and 
9.  How the use advertises itself. 
C.  Use Table. 
Except where otherwise specifically provided herein, regulations governing the use of land and structures with the various zoning districts and classifications of planned developments are hereby established as shown in the following Use Table. 
1.  Permitted Uses. 
A "P" indicates that a use is allowed by right in the respective district. Such uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this UDO. 
2.  Permitted Uses Subject to Specific Standards. 
A "P*" indicates a use that will be permitted, provided that the use meets the provisions in Section 6.4, Specific Use Standards. Such uses are also subject to all other applicable regulations of this UDO. 
3.  Conditional Uses. 
A "C" indicates a use that is allowed only where a conditional use permit is approved by the City Council. The Council may require that the use meet the additional standards enumerated in Section 6.4, Specific Use Standards. Conditional uses are subject to all other applicable regulations of this UDO. 
    Click here to access a PDF version of the Use Table. 
USE TABLE Residential Districts Non-Residential
Districts Retired
Districts Design
Districts Specific Uses R WE E WRS RS GS T** D** MF** MU** MHP** P-MUD** O SC WC GC CI BP BPI CU NAP R-1B R-4** R-6** C-3** M-1 M-2 R&D** WPC** NG-1** NG-2** NG-3** KEY: P = Permitted by Right; P* = Permitted Subject to Specific Use Standards 
C = Conditional Use; ** = District with Supplemental Standards (refer to Article 5) RESIDENTIAL Assisted Living/Residential Care Facility P P P Boarding and Rooming House P P P P P Extended Care Facility/Convalescent/Nursing Home P P P P P P P P Dormitory P P P P P P P P Duplex P P P P Fraternity/Sorority P P P P P P Manufactured Home P * P * P * Mixed-Use Structure P P P P P P P Multi-Family P P P P P C 1 P P P Multi-Family built prior to January 2002 P P P P P P P P Northgate High-Density Dwelling Unit P P P Single-Family Detached P P P P P P P P P P Single-Unit Dwelling P Townhouse P P P P P P Two-Unit Dwelling P Live-Work Unit P * P * PUBLIC, CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL Educational Facility, College and University P Educational Facility, Indoor Instruction P P P P P P P P P P P P P Educational Facility, Outdoor Instruction P C C P P P P Educational Facility, Primary and Secondary P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Educational Facility, Tutoring P P P P P P P P P P P P Educational Facility, Vocational/Trade P P P P P P P P Governmental Facilities P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P P P * P * P P P P P P * P * P * P P P P P P P P * Health Care, Hospitals P P Health Care, Medical Clinics P P P P P P P P P P Parks P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Places of Worship P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P P P P * P P P P P P * P * P * P P P P P P P P COMMERCIAL, OFFICE AND RETAIL Agricultural Use, Barn or Stable for Private Stock P P P Agricultural Use, Farm or Pasturage P P P Agricultural Use, Farm Product Processing P Animal Care Facility, Indoor P P P P P P P P P P P P Animal Care Facility, Outdoor P * P Art Studio/Gallery P P P P P P P P P P P P Car Wash P * Commercial Garden/Greenhouse/Landscape Maint. P * P * P * P * P * P * Commercial Amusements P P P C C P * P * C P P P Conference/Convention Center P P P P P P P P Country Club P P P P P P P P P P Day Care, Commercial P P C P P P P P C C P P P P Drive-in/thru window P * P C P * Dry Cleaners and Laundry P P P * P * P P * P P P * P * P * P * P * Fraternal Lodge P P P P P P Fuel Sales P * P * P * P Funeral Homes P P P P Golf Course or Driving Range P * P * P * P * Health Club/Sports Facility, Indoor P P P P P P P P P P P P Health Club/Sports Facility, Outdoor P P * P P P P P * P Hotels C 2 P P P P P P P P Mobile Food Court C 4 C 4 C 4 C 4 C 4 C 4 C 4 Night Club, Bar or Tavern C C C C C P P Offices P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Parking as a Primary Use P P C P P P P * Personal Service Shop P P P P P P P P P P P P Printing/Copy Shop P P P P P P P P P P P P P P Radio/TV Station/Studios P P P P P P P P P P P P * Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park C 3 C 3 Restaurants P P P P * P * P P * P P P P * Retail Sales - Single Tenant over 50,000 SF P P P Retail Sales and Service P P P P * P * P * P * P P P P P Retail Sales and Service - Alcohol C P P * P * P C P P Sexually Oriented Business (SOB) P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * Shooting Range, Indoor P P P P P Theater P P P P P P P P Retail Sales, Manufactured Homes P P * Storage, Self Service P * P * P P P P * P Vehicular Sales, Rental, Repair and Service P * P * P P * Wholesales/Services P * P * P P P P INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING Bulk Storage Tanks/Cold Storage Plant P P P Micro-Industrial P * P * P P * P * Industrial, Light P P P P P P Industrial, Heavy P P Recycling Facility - Large P * P P Salvage Yard P * P * Scientific Testing/Research Laboratory P P P P P Storage, Outdoor - Equipment or Materials P P * P P P Truck Stop/Freight or Trucking Terminal P P Utility P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * Warehousing/Distribution P C P P P Waste Services P P Wireless Telecommunication Facilities - Intermediate P * P * P * P * P * P * P P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * P * Wireless Telecommunication Facilities-Major C P * C C C C P C C C P * C Wireless Telecommunication Facilities-Unregulated P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P  
** District with Supplemental Standards (Refer to Article 5). 
1  Multi-family residential uses located in stories or floors above retail commercial uses are permitted by right. 
2  Hotels only allowed when accessory to a Country Club development and are limited to a maximum of fifteen (15) rooms. 
3  Refer to Section 6.4.Z "Recreational Vehicles Park Standards (RV Parks)" for Specific Use Standards. 
4  Refer to Section 6.4. AC "Mobile Food Courts" for Specific Use Standards. 
Per Ordinance No. 3243 (April 22, 2010) 
Per Ordinance No. 3271 (August 26, 2010) 
Per Ordinance No. 3280 (September 9, 2010) 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3312 (January 27, 2011) 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. G), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3510 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-25-2013; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. H), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. G), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-3655 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 4-23-2015; Ord. No. 2015-3708 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 10-8-2015; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3931 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-3999 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 4-12-2018) 
Sec. 6.4. - Specific Use Standards. 
The following specific use standards shall apply to those uses listed below and identified in the Use Table in Section 6.3, Types of Use, with a "P * ." A site plan review, as required by Section 3.6, Site Plan Review, is required for all specific uses identified herein. For the purposes of this section, buffers shall comply with Section 7.7, Buffer Requirements unless specified herein. For the purposes of this section, residential areas or uses shall mean existing developed or developing (platted) residential uses including single-family and multi-family housing, townhomes, and duplexes. 
A.  Animal Care Facilities . 
Any animal care facilities with defined outdoor uses and/or facilities shall be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from existing or developing residential areas; and facilities with outdoor facilities for large animals shall be permitted in R Rural, only. 
B.  Car Wash . 
Vacuums shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any adjacent residential use. 
C.  Commercial Amusements . 
All outdoor activity must be located a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from an existing residential use. 
D.  Commercial Garden/Greenhouse/Landscape Maintenance . 
1.  Outdoor storage and display of unpackaged or bulk materials, including but not limited to topsoil, manure, and aggregate materials, shall be screened and located at least fifty (50) feet from all property lines and not closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from an existing residential use. 
2.  No processes and business activities associated with Commercial Gardens may be conducted outside of buildings except in BP Business Park. 
E.  Drive-in/Thru Window . 
1.  In all Northgate Zoning Districts, all site designs and elevations for drive-in/thru windows shall be reviewed by the Design Review Board as part of the site plan review process. All outside activities and appurtenances related to drive-in/thru service shall be located wholly underneath a habitable structure, screened from view from the University Drive right-of-way, and designed to be sensitive to the pedestrian environment. 
2.  In SC Suburban Commercial, drive-in/thru windows and message boards may not be located on the side of the building adjacent to single-family land use and zoning. 
3.  In SC Suburban Commercial, restaurants with a drive-in/thru window must be located a minimum of 150 feet from any single-family use or zoning district. Additionally, associated drive-in and drive-thru facilities (speaker box, message board, and pick-up window) may not be located between the restaurant and any single-family use or zoning district; except when the single-family use or zoning district is located across a public street. 
F.  Dry Cleaners/Laundry . 
All activity must be wholly contained within a building not to exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet in size. 
G.  Fuel Sales. 
1.  Any vehicle repair uses must comply with Section 6.4.P, Vehicular Sales, Rental, Repair and Service. 
2.  All activities except those associated with fuel pumping must be conducted within an enclosed building. 
3.  Ice and vending machines must be enclosed in a building. 
4.  No signage, in addition to the signage allowed in Section 7.5, Signs, may be allowed within view of the right-of-way. 
5.  No outside storage or display of vehicles for any purpose. 
6.  A Drive-Thru car wash designed to accommodate one (1) vehicle shall be permitted as an accessory use. 
7.  In C-3, Light Commercial fuels sales shall be limited to facilities designed to accommodate a maximum of four (4) vehicles obtaining fuel simultaneously. 
8.  Minimum setback requirements shall be as follows: 
  Front Side Rear Side Street Fuel pumps 50 feet 25 feet 25 feet 25 feet Canopies 40 feet 15 feet 15 feet 15 feet  
9.  Storage tanks must be located below grade. 
10.  In WC Wellborn Commercial, Fuel Sales will be considered a permitted land use on properties with existing Fuel Sales as of April 14, 2011. 
H.  Golf Course or Driving Range . 
1.  All driving ranges shall be a minimum of ten (10) acres and have a minimum field size of two hundred seventy-five (275) yards. 
2.  Driving ranges are classified as commercial enterprises and must comply with Section 7.7, Buffer Requirements. 
3.  For driving ranges, all balls must remain on the property through proper orientation of the tee boxes, adequate buffering or screening, and barrier nets. 
4.  No building, structure, or outdoor activity of a driving range shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of residentially-zoned property. 
5.  All ground-level lighting of a driving range's landing area shall be directed away from adjacent properties and screening shall be provided with plantings, berms, or other means to limit nuisances associated with lighting and resulting glare. 
I.  Government Facilities and Utilities . 
Activities not wholly contained within a building shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of a single-family residential use unless buffered by a twenty-five-foot buffer yard and a six-foot privacy fence, in accordance with Section 7.7, Buffer Requirements. 
J.  Health Club/Sports Facility (Outdoor) . 
In Mixed-Use and all Northgate Zoning Districts, outdoor health clubs/sports facilities shall only be allowed on roof tops. 
K.  Manufactured Homes . 
1.  The placement of an individual manufactured home where permitted or the replacement of an existing manufactured home shall be subject to obtaining a Location Permit issued by the Building Official and Administrator. The application for such a permit shall be accompanied by a location plan including the following information: 
a.  Location plan showing the dimension of the site, required setback lines, the placement of the manufactured home, the designated parking, and any existing structures on the same or adjoining lots; 
b.  A signed and dated application, requesting permission to locate the structure on the lot; and 
c.  A legal description of the location of the property within the City. 
2.  All manufactured homes shall be skirted with brick, vinyl, or other solid skirting materials within four (4) months of occupancy of the lot. 
3.  All trailer hitches and other devices designed to aid in the transport of the manufactured homes must be removed within four (4) months of occupancy of the lot. 
L.  Mobile Home . 
A mobile home, after the effective date of this UDO, may not be located within the corporate limits of College Station for residential dwelling. A mobile home legally located within the corporate limits of College Station may continue to be used as a residential dwelling, but shall not be relocated or enlarged. A mobile home may be replaced by a manufactured home. 
M.  Parking as a Primary Use . 
In all Northgate Zoning Districts, parking as a primary use shall be permitted when all of the parking is located within a multi-level garage. 
N.  Radio/TV Station/Studios . 
In all Northgate Zoning Districts, outdoor transmission facilities shall be completely screened from view from any right-of-way. 
O.  Recycling Facilities . 
1.  Any facility located within five hundred (500) feet of property zoned or developed for residential use shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
2.  Light processing, including compacting, baling, and shredding, must be directly related to efficient temporary storage and shipment of materials. No facility as described in this subsection shall abut property zoned or developed for single-family residential use. 
3.  A minimum of six (6) parking spaces shall be provided, plus one (1) space per employee and for each vehicle of the facility. 
4.  Each container shall be clearly marked to specify materials that are accepted. The name and telephone number of the operator and the hours of operations shall be conspicuously displayed. All sign regulations of the district in which the facility is located shall apply. 
5.  Each facility shall be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building with no outside storage or by operating within an area enclosed by an opaque fence at least eight (8) feet in height. 
P.  Retail Sales/Manufactured Homes . 
Manufactured homes undergoing repair and remaining on site in excess of forty-eight (48) hours shall be screened from public view in an enclosed area. 
Q.  Restaurant . 
1.  In C-3 Light Commercial, and Wellborn Commercial, drive-ins and drive-thrus are prohibited. 
2.  In SC Suburban Commercial restaurants with a drive-ins/thru must be located a minimum of 150 feet from any single-family use or zoning district. Drive-in and drive-thru facilities (speaker box, message board, and pick-up window) may not be located between the building and any single-family use or zoning district, except when the single-family use or zoning district is located across a public street. 
3.  In C-3 Light Commercial, the maximum size shall be two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
4.  In WC Wellborn Commercial, restaurants (including waiting and outdoor dining areas) may not exceed eight thousand (8,000) square feet and are permitted at the following maximum sizes based on adjacent thoroughfare and access: 
a.  Freeway/Expressway and Four- or Six-Lane Major Arterial: Eight thousand (8,000) square feet; 
b.  Four-Lane Minor Arterial and Four-Lane Major Collector: Seven thousand (7,000) square feet; or 
c.  Two-Lane Major Collector and smaller: Five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
5.  In SC Suburban Commercial and WC Wellborn Commercial, restaurants shall not locate outdoor seating or playgrounds between the structure and a single-family land use and zoning. 
R.  Sales and Service (Retail and Wholesale) . 
The following Sales Matrix shall be used to determine the most appropriate zoning district for sales and service uses. 

1.  Storage is allowed in GC General Commercial, if the square feet of storage is less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross building area, exclusive of office areas. 
2.  Storage is allowed in WC Wellborn Commercial, if the square feet of storage is less than fifty (50) percent of total gross building area. 
3.  Sales are allowed in CI Commercial Industrial if the square feet of sales is less than fifty (50) percent of the total gross building area, exclusive of office area. 
4.  Each sales use in a shopping center must meet the storage square-foot criteria above to be permitted in that zoning district. 
5.  In SC Suburban Commercial, Gross Floor Area of a single structure shall not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. 
6.  In WC Wellborn Commercial, Gross Floor Area of a single structure shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
S.  Salvage Yard . 
1.  Salvage or junkyards shall be visually screened on front, rear, and all sides by means of a solid eight-foot high wooden privacy fence. 
2.  Material that is not salvageable shall not be permitted to accumulate. In no case shall material that is not salvageable be buried or used as fill. 
3.  In any open storage area, it shall be prohibited to keep any ice box, refrigerator, deep-freeze locker, clothes washer, clothes dryer, or similar air-tight unit having an interior storage capacity of one and one-half (11/2) cubic feet or more, from which the door has not been removed. 
T.  Sexually-Oriented Business . 
1.  General . 
These requirements apply to all sexually-oriented businesses as defined in this UDO. 
A business is not exempt from regulation under this UDO because it holds a license or permit under the Alcoholic Beverage Code authorizing the sale or service of alcoholic beverages or because it contains one (1) or more coin-operated machines that are subject to regulation or taxation, or both under State law. 
Regulations contained within this UDO pertaining to sexually-oriented businesses are based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the communities presented in findings incorporated in City of Renton v. Playtime Theaters, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986) and in studies set out below: 
a.  Detroit, Michigan; 
b.  Amarillo, Texas 
c.  Los Angeles, California; 
d.  Indianapolis, Indiana; 
e.  Phoenix, Arizona; 
f.  St. Paul, Minnesota; 
g.  Beaumont, Texas 
h.  Seattle, Washington; 
i.  Austin, Texas. 
2.  Permitted Locations . 
A sexually-oriented business is a permitted use at the following location only and is subject to the specific standards located in this Section and is subject to other applicable regulations of this UDO. 
Area 3: State Highway 6 Commercial Tract 
All that certain tract or parcel of land lying and being situated in the R. Stevenson Survey, Abstract No. 54, Tract 61, being all of that 2.116 acre tract conveyed to the Blue Dolphin Club, Inc. by deed recorded in volume 2079, page 133 in the Official Records of Brazos County, Texas. 
Map of the Potential Location:

3.  Single Adult Use Per Location . 
There shall only be one (1) sexually-oriented business permitted per area. 
4.  Measurement . 
a.  Stock in Trade . 
Stock in trade shall be the number of items in stock in the sales and display area at the time of a site inspection. The number of sexually-oriented items shall be calculated as a percentage of total items. 
b.  Sales and Display Area. 
1.  The sales and display area shall be the entire interior floor space of a business establishment devoted to sales and display, including aisles, measured in square feet at the time of a site inspection. The floor space devoted to sales and display of sexually-oriented materials shall be calculated as a percentage of total sales and display area. 
2.  Where sexually-oriented materials are physically separated from other materials by an eight-foot wall, the separate sales and display area (including any aisles) shall be compared to the total sales and display floor area. 
3.  Where floor area includes a mixture of sexually-oriented material with any other material, it shall be counted as sexually oriented. Any such area shall include one-half (1/2) of the area of any aisles adjacent to the display or sales of sexually-oriented materials. 
5.  Specific Standards. 
a.  Adult Cabaret or Adult Retail Store . 
Any performance area shall be elevated at least twenty-four (24) inches above the level of the patron seating areas and shall be separated by a distance of at least six (6) feet from all areas of the premises to which patrons have access. A continuous railing at least three (3) feet in height, securely attached to the floor, and located at least six (6) feet from all points of the live performance area shall separate performance areas and patron areas. 
b.  Adult Arcade, Adult Movie Theater . 
1.  All aisles shall have theater runway and aisle lighting which illuminates the entire floor surface of the aisle at a level of not less than 0.2 foot-candles. 
2.  All theater viewing areas, projection rooms, and viewing booths or rooms shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination so that any patron may be observed from a manager's or employee's station. 
3.  The interior of an adult arcade, and/or adult viewing booth or room, shall be configured in such a way that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's or employee's station of every interior area of the adult arcade and/or viewing booth or room. 
4.  All ventilation devices in or between adult viewing booths, viewing stations and rooms must be covered by a permanently affixed ventilation cover or grill. Ventilation holes, portals or airways may only be located one (1) foot from the top of the station, room or booth walls or one (1) foot from the bottom of the station, room or booth walls. There may not be any other holes or openings in the station, room or booth walls or between stations, rooms or booths. 
c.  Limited Adult Retail Store . 
The store shall separate all sexually-oriented material from other sales and display areas using an opaque wall at least eight (8) feet in height. Such an area shall incorporate a management-controlled system of access to ensure that only persons over the age of eighteen (18) years are allowed to enter. 
6.  Lighting . 
Any sexually-oriented business shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access so that any patron may be observed from a manager's or employee's station. 
7.  Amortization . 
A sexually-oriented business in operation prior to the effective date of this UDO which does not conform to the regulations listed above shall be considered to be nonconforming. The nonconforming sexually-oriented business shall be permitted to continue for one (1) year after the effective date of this ordinance unless voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. One (1) year after the effective date of this UDO the nonconforming sexually-oriented business shall be illegal and shall terminate, except as provided herein. 
a.  Additional Time for Amortization . 
In the event an owner of a nonconforming sexually-oriented business is unable to recoup his investment in his sexually-oriented business by the date for the termination of such uses, the owner may request additional time by making application with the Administrator no later than the date for termination of the use. 
b.  Application for Additional Time . 
The owner shall file, with his request for additional time, all data he wishes considered in support of the request. The owner shall also supply all materials requested by the Administrator, City Attorney, or City Council to determine if the investment has been recouped. 
c.  Determination by the City Council. 
Upon application by the owner, the City Council may, at its discretion, allow additional time to amortize the investment in a sexually-oriented business if it makes the following findings: 
1.  The owner has made every effort to recoup his investment in the sexually-oriented business; 
2.  The owner will be unable to recoup his investment in a sexually-oriented business by the end of the amortization period; and 
3.  That all applicable provisions of this UDO will be observed. 
If the City Council grants additional time, the grant shall be for a period not to exceed one (1) year. 
d.  Exemption from Amortization Requirements . 
Any owner of a sexually-oriented business wishing to claim an exemption from the amortization requirements of this UDO may apply for an exemption. The City must receive such application no less than sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the amortization period. 
The City Council may grant an exemption if it makes the following findings: 
1.  That the location of the sexually-oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare; 
2.  That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this UDO; 
3.  That the location of the sexually-oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
4.  That the location of the sexually-oriented business will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
5.  That all other applicable provisions of this UDO will be observed. 
If an exemption is granted, such exemption shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of the City Council action. Upon expiration of an exemption, a sexually-oriented business shall be in violation of this UDO, shall be illegal, and shall terminate, unless the owner receives another exemption. Additional applications for exemptions shall be submitted at least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the exemption period. 
The granting of an exemption does not alleviate the owner of a sexually-oriented business from adhering to all other applicable provisions of this UDO. 
U.  Storage (Self-Service) . 
1.  Accessory uses are prohibited. 
2.  In SC Suburban Commercial, Self-Service Storage and outdoor storage must be located a minimum of 150 feet from any single-family uses or zoning district; except when the single-family use or district is located across a public street. Additionally, the 150-foot separation is not applicable when only interior access (climate-controlled storage) is provided, subject to other provisions of this UDO. 
3.  In WC Wellborn Commercial, Self-Service Storage will be considered a permitted land use on properties with existing Self-Service Storage as of April 14, 2011. 
V.  Utilities . 
Activities not wholly contained within a building that abuts single-family residential uses shall construct a twenty-foot buffer yard with a six-foot privacy fence, in accordance with Section 7.7, Buffer Requirements. 
W.  Vehicular Sales, Rental, Repair and Service . 
1.  Vehicles undergoing repair, painting, or body work which will remain on site in excess of forty-eight (48) hours shall be screened from public view or stored indoors. 
2.  Inoperable vehicles shall not be allowed to remain on site for more than thirty (30) days. 
3.  All parts, including automobile body parts, shall be stored within an area which is completely screened from public view. 
X.  Wireless Telecommunication Facility (WTF) . 
1.  Purpose . 
The purpose of this section is to establish regulations pertaining to wireless telecommunications facilities (WTF) that are consistent with federal and state law. The City Council of the City of College Station finds that: 
a.  It is in the public interest to promote competition in high quality telecommunications services and the availability of broadband transmission services to all residences and businesses; 
b.  It is in the public interest for the City to protect the public safety and welfare, safeguard community land values, promote orderly planning and development and preserve historic sites, structures and areas. Wireless telecommunications facilities should not be allowed to detract aesthetically from the visual quality of surrounding properties or the City; and 
c.  The proliferation of wireless telecommunications facilities negatively impacts the appearance, character, and property values of the community. Therefore the City should endeavor to minimize the size, number and obtrusiveness of antennas and towers. Collocation and stealth technologies are strongly encouraged to mitigate negative visual impacts and reduce the total number of towers within the City. 
2.  WTF Categories . 
In order to expedite the siting and review process, WTFs have been divided into use categories. The review process is more thorough as the intensity of the use increases. 
a.  Unregulated Facilities . 
The WTFs listed below are not regulated by this ordinance and do not require review or approval. This does not exempt these facilities from other applicable city codes, ordinances, and permits. 
1.  Over-the-air reception devices exempted from local ordinances by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
2.  Parabolic antenna less than two (2) meters in diameter. 
3.  Omni-directional antenna (whip antenna) six (6) inches or less in diameter and not extending more than twelve (12) feet above support structure. 
4.  Directional antenna one (1) meter or less measured across the longest dimension and not extending over twelve (12) feet above support structure. 
5.  Public safety tower or antenna. 
b.  Intermediate Facilities . 
1.  New transmission tower less than thirty-five (35) feet (ten and one-half (10.5) meters) in height. 
2.  New transmission tower that does not extend more than thirty-five (35) feet (ten and one-half (10.5) meters) in height above a support structure and that meets the definition of a stealth facility. 
3.  Parabolic antenna over two (2) meters in diameter. 
4.  Omni-directional antenna (whip antenna greater than six (6) inches in diameter and/or extending twelve (12) feet above the support structure. 
5.  Directional antenna more than one (1) meter measured across the longest dimension and extending over twelve (12) feet above support structure. 
6.  Attached WTFs. 
7.  Antenna collocating on an existing tower. 
c.  Major Facilities . 
New transmission tower greater than thirty-five (35) feet (ten and one-half (10.5) meters) in height. 
3.  Permitted Locations. 
a.  All Intermediate WTFs are permitted by right in the following zoning districts: 
R Rural 
M-1 Light Industrial 
M-2 Heavy Industrial 
GC General Commercial 
CI Commercial Industrial 
C-3 Light Commercial 
NG Northgate 
City-owned premises 
O Office 
R&D Research & Development 
WPC Wolf Pen Creek 
PDD Planned Development District (except PDD-H) 
BP Business Park 
BPI Business Park Industrial. 
b.  Major WTFs are allowed in the following zoning districts with a Conditional Use Permit: 
R Rural 
M-1 Light Industrial 
M-2 Heavy Industrial 
BP Business Park 
BPI Business Park Industrial 
GC General Commercial 
CI Commercial Industrial 
C-3 Light Commercial 
O Office 
R&D Research & Development 
City-owned premises. 
c.  WTFs may locate on City-owned premises without a conditional use permit with approval of the City Council and subject to the requirements of this UDO. 
4.  Requirements for Attached WTFs . 
a.  WTFs may attach to the exterior of any non-residential building within any zoning district provided the antenna and antenna support structure or equipment are mounted flush with the vertical exterior of the building or project no more than twenty-four (24) inches from the surface of the building to which it is attached and does not raise the height of the building more than ten (10) feet and does not violate the maximum height restriction of that zoning district. 
b.  Any antenna meeting the stealth antenna definition of this ordinance and locating on an alternative mounting structure may attach to the exterior of any non-residential building within any zoning district with approval of the Administrator. 
c.  If an antenna is installed on a support structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
d.  Application Procedures . 
1.  An inventory of the applicant's existing and future towers that are either within the City, the City's ETJ, or within at least one (1) mile of the City's boundary where the ETJ does not extend that far. The inventory shall include specific information about the location, design, and height of each tower. The owner must have on file with the Planning and Development Services Department a master list of all existing tower structures owned or controlled by the owner. Such list must specify the name, address and telephone number of the owner of record, the tower locations by address and legal description, tower height, the number of antenna arrays on the tower, and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all other users of the tower structures. The Administrator may share such information with other applicants or organizations seeking to locate antennas within the City. 
2.  A site plan drawn to scale clearly indicating the location, height, and design of the proposed facility, equipment cabinets, transmission buildings and other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, and landscaped areas. 
3.  A visual impact analysis, presented as color photo simulations, showing the proposed site of the WTF. At least four (4) views shall be submitted looking toward the site (typically north, south, east, and west) including views from the closest residential property and from adjacent roadways. The photo-realistic representation shall depict a "skyline" view showing the entire height of the proposed tower or WTF to scale, and the structures, trees, and any other objects contributing to the skyline profile. 
4.  Plans for the antenna and the antenna tower shall be prepared and signed by a licensed professional engineer and designed to withstand sustained winds of at least ninety (90) miles per hour. 
5.  All telecommunication facilities must meet or exceed the current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the Federal Government with the authority to regulate telecommunication facilities. An applicant for a permit shall submit an affidavit confirming compliance with applicable regulations. 
5.  Requirements for Collocation . 
a.  Intermediate facilities shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet. 
b.  If the existing tower has been determined to be stealth, the antenna must be integrated into the tower design as to retain the stealth designation. The Administrator will determine if the antenna is stealth. 
c.  If an antenna is installed on a support structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive as possible. 
d.  Application Procedures . 
1.  If not completely locating within an existing, fenced mechanical area, a site plan drawn to scale is required, clearly indicating the location, height, and design of the existing facility, equipment cabinets, transmission buildings and other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, and landscape areas. 
2.  Plans for the antenna shall be prepared and signed by a licensed professional engineer and designed to withstand sustained winds of at least ninety (90) miles per hour. 
3.  All telecommunication facilities must meet or exceed the current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the Federal Government with the authority to regulate telecommunication facilities. An applicant for a permit shall submit an affidavit confirming compliance with applicable regulations. 
6.  Requirements for New Transmission Towers . 
a.  Setbacks . 
The standard setbacks for each zoning district will apply to WTFs with additional setbacks or separation being required in the sections below. To protect citizens in their homes, transmission towers shall be placed a distance equal to the height of the tower away from any residential structure. And, non-stealth towers shall be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower away from any GS, R-1B, or D zone boundary. 
b.  Proximity to Major Thoroughfares. 
To preserve and protect the appearance of the City's major thoroughfares and entrances to the City, additional setbacks are placed on WTFs proposed to be placed near these areas. The setback for these areas is determined by measuring from the centerline of the right-of-way of the thoroughfare. Applicable thoroughfares include freeways and expressways, major arterials and minor arterials, as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan. 
1.  Intermediate WTFs must be one hundred fifty (150) feet from applicable thoroughfares. 
2.  Major WTFs must setback from applicable thoroughfares by the height of the tower x three (3). 
c.  Separation Between Towers . 
In order to prevent tower proliferation and protect the City's natural beauty and skyline, the number of transmission towers per square mile has been limited. New transmission towers must be placed a minimum distance from existing towers as described here: 
1.  New transmission towers thirty-five (35) feet or less in height shall be separated from existing towers by a minimum distance of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet. 
2.  New transmission towers more than thirty-five (35) feet and less than seventy-five (75) feet in height shall be separated from existing towers by a minimum distance of two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet. 
3.  New transmission towers seventy-five (75) feet or more in height shall be separated from existing towers by a minimum distance of three thousand five hundred (3,500) feet. 
d.  Height Limitations . 
1.  Intermediate WTFs are subject to the normal height restrictions for each zoning district where permitted by right. In any zoning district where a tower is a conditional use, the requested height may be reduced through the review of the visual impact analysis. 
2.  In no case shall a proposed transmission tower exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet within the city limits, except where a height variance is granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustments to allow a tower or antenna that demonstrates a hardship that can only be remedied by locating a tower or antenna exceeding such height on a proposed site within the city limits. 
e.  Stealth Towers . 
Any tower determined to meet the Stealth Tower definition of this ordinance by the approving authority may be located in any zoning district with a Conditional Use Permit. Approved Stealth Towers do not have to meet the tower separation or thoroughfare setback requirements of this section. 
f.  Landscaping, Screening, and Aesthetic Standards . 
The following requirements shall govern any transmission tower or any parabolic antenna larger than two (2) meters. 
1.  Landscaping: Refer to Section 7.6, Landscaping and Tree Protection. Plant materials and/or fencing that effectively screen the WTF site from view of the public right-of-way will be required. 
2.  New transmission towers shall maintain a flat (not shiny, reflective, or glossy) finish or be painted in accordance with any applicable standards of the FAA (unfinished galvanized steel is not acceptable). 
3.  WTFs shall not be artificially lighted with the exception of motion detectors as security lighting, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the City may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding properties. 
4.  Towers may not be used to exhibit any signage or other advertising. 
g.  Application Procedures . 
An application for administrative approval or a Conditional Use Permit for a WTF shall include the following items (in addition to the site plan and other information required for a standard CUP application): 
1.  An inventory of the applicant's existing and future towers that are either within the City, the City's ETJ, or within at least one (1) mile of the City's boundary where the ETJ does not extend that far. The inventory shall include specific information about the location, design, and height of each tower. The owner must have on file with the Planning and Development Services Department a master list of all existing tower structures owned or controlled by the owner. Such list must specify the name, address and telephone number of the owner of record, the tower locations by address and legal description, tower height, the number of antenna arrays on the tower, and the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all other users of the tower structures. The Administrator may share such information with other applicants or organizations seeking to locate antennas within the City. 
2.  Site plan drawn to scale clearly indicating the location, height, and design of the proposed tower, equipment cabinets, transmission buildings and other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, and landscaped areas. 
3.  The linear separation distance from other transmission towers within a one-mile radius of the proposed tower site. The linear separation distance from all residentially-zoned properties, residential structures and applicable thoroughfares as outlined in Section 6.4.X.6.b, Proximity to Major Thoroughfares, within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed tower. 
4.  A visual impact analysis, presented as color photo simulations, showing the proposed site of the WTF. At least four (4) views shall be submitted looking toward the site (typically north, south, east and west) including views from the closest residential property and from adjacent roadways. The photo-realistic representation shall depict a "skyline" view showing the entire height of the proposed tower or WTF to scale, and the structures, trees, and any other objects contributing to the skyline profile. 
5.  Plans for the antenna and the antenna tower shall be prepared and signed by a licensed professional engineer and designed to withstand sustained winds of at least ninety (90) miles per hour. 
6.  All telecommunication facilities must meet or exceed the current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the Federal Government with the authority to regulate telecommunication facilities. An applicant for a permit shall submit an affidavit confirming compliance with applicable regulations. 
7.  Grid plan (propagation map) of the service area for existing and future structures for a period of not less than two (2) years. The submission should include a map showing the "search ring" that was required for siting the proposed facility. 
8.  No new tower shall be built, constructed, or erected in the City unless the tower is capable of supporting additional wireless telecommunication facilities. The applicant must submit a letter addressed to the City declaring an intent and willingness to construct a proposed tower that would allow additional service providers to locate on the new tower. 
9.  No new communications tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the approving authority that no existing tower, building, structure, or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. The applicant shall submit information related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative technology that can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. The Administrator or approving authority may request information necessary to demonstrate that reasonable alternatives do not exist. The applicant must submit: 
a.  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of other towers or usable antenna support structures within a one-half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including City-owned property. 
b.  A sworn affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent, but unsuccessful, efforts to obtain permission to install or collocate the new facility on existing towers or antenna support structures located within one-half (1/2) mile radius of the proposed tower site. The affidavit shall spell out the efforts taken by the applicant. 
c.  A description of the design plan proposed by the applicant to the City. The applicant must demonstrate the need for towers and why technological design alternatives, such as the use of microcell, cannot be utilized to accomplish the provision of the applicant's telecommunications services. 
7.  Conditional Use Permits . 
Major WTFs must apply for a conditional use permit (CUP) as outlined in Section 6.4.X.3, Permit table Locations, under the procedures set forth in Section 3.16, Conditional Use Permit. In addition to the standard guidelines, the following additional factors shall be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission when determining whether to grant a CUP for WTFs: 
a.  Height of the proposed tower, surrounding topography and surrounding tree coverage and foliage as they relate to: 
1.  Skyline impact, examining whether the proportions of the structure appears to dominate or blend in with the surrounding environment. 
2.  Shadow impact, whether or not the proposed tower will cast shadows that would prevent the reasonable use or enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
b.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness. 
c.  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries. 
d.  Economic impact on adjacent and nearby properties. 
e.  Proposed ingress and egress. 
f.  Availability of suitable alternatives and/or existing support structures. 
g.  All the information submitted as part of the site plan. 
8.  Abandonment . 
Any WTF that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such facility shall remove same within sixty (60) days of receipt of notice from the City notifying owner of such abandonment. If such facility is not removed within said sixty (60) days, the City may remove such facility at the property owner's expense. If there are two (2) or more users of a single WTF, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease operations on the tower. 
Y.  Places of Worship . 
1.  Where the parking lot abuts residential development, a ten-foot buffer yard with buffer plantings and a minimum six-foot privacy fence is required pursuant to Section 7.7, Buffer Requirements. 
2.  When outdoor accessory uses including, but not limited to, playgrounds, recreational areas, and special event areas abut residential uses, a minimum fifteen-foot buffer yard with buffer plantings and a six-foot privacy fence is required pursuant to Section 7.7, Buffer Requirements. 
Z.  Recreational Vehicle Park Standards (RV Parks) . 
1.  RV Parks shall allow for the temporary occupancy of vehicles that are built on a single chassis that are designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck and are primarily for use as temporary living quarters for recreational, travel, or seasonal use. 
2.  RV Parks shall be considered a non-residential use and shall meet the buffer requirements as found in Article 7 as a commercial use, regardless of zoning. 
3.  No person shall operate an RV Park unless they hold valid permits and licenses as required by the State of Texas and the Brazos County Health Department. 
4.  Development of any RV Park shall comply with the general site plan requirements of Article 3, Site Plan Review, and shall meet the following supplemental criteria: 
a.  The minimum area of an RV Park shall be ten (10) acres and shall consist of two (2) or more recreational vehicle pad sites that are intended for temporary occupancy by recreational vehicles for the purposes of recreation or vacation. 
b.  All RV Parks shall have direct access to a public road and shall include sufficient entrances and exits to facilitate the safe movement of recreational vehicles in and out of the site. Internal drives shall have a minimum paved width of twelve (12) feet for one-way traffic and twenty-four (24) feet for two-way traffic. All internal drives shall be built to City pavement standards and shall be privately maintained. 
c.  All RV Parks shall designate specific pad site locations for recreational vehicles. 
1.  Each pad site location shall have a minimum area of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet with provisions for wastewater disposal, public water hook-up and electrical supply. 
2.  All pad sites shall be sequentially numbered. Reflective site numbers shall be a minimum of four (4) inches in height and placed on a separate post on the site. A map of the site layout with site numbers shall be placed at the entrance to the park in such a manner as to be clearly visible to entrants. 
d.  Recreational vehicle pad sites shall be separated from each other by a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
e.  Recreational vehicle pad sites shall be separated from the recreation area in the park by a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
f.  All recreational vehicle pad sites shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way line of all adjacent public roads and any RV Park boundaries. 
g.  All recreational vehicle pad sites shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from any internal drives in the park. 
h.  A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided per recreational vehicle pad site. One (1) space shall be located on the RV site, the remainder may be located in an approved parking area. Size and paving of all parking spaces shall conform to the requirements in Article 7 regarding Off-Street Parking Standards. 
i.  In all RV Parks, a recreation area shall be provided that shall be centrally located, free of traffic hazards, and easily accessible to all park residents. Recreation areas shall constitute a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the gross RV Park site area and shall contain open space for recreational uses. Recreational areas shall also contain benches and landscaping. The area shall be adequately lighted to ensure safety of users. 
j.  RV Parks shall permit only seasonal placement and habitation of recreational vehicles. No recreational vehicle shall remain in an RV Park for more than one hundred twenty (120) days in any twelve-month period. 
Per Ordinance No. 3271 (August 26, 2010) 
AA.  Micro-Industrial Uses. 
1.  All production activities must be conducted within an enclosed building. No outside storage is allowed. 
2.  All Micro-Industrial uses are limited in size to no more than five thousand (5,000) gross square feet. 
3.  Accessory uses are permitted, provided that they are subordinate and incidental to the primary use. 
4.  In the CI Commercial-Industrial and BPI Business Park Industrial zoning districts an accessory restaurant, nightclub, bar or tavern is not permitted. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3312 (January 27, 2011) 
AB.  Live-Work Unit . 
1.  The square footage of the Live-Work Unit may not be greater than as set forth in the City's adopted International Building Code (IBC), as same may from time to time be amended. Currently said maximum size is 3,000 square feet. Further, the non-residential use may not be more than fifty percent (50%) of each Live-Work Unit. 
2.  Each Live-Work Unit shall not contain more than one (1) dwelling unit. The residential unit must be attached to the non-residential use and may be accessible separately from the non-residential use. 
3.  In a two-story building, the residential unit must be located on the second floor. 
4.  If a residential garage is provided, it must be attached and not visible from the public right-of-way. 
AC.  Mobile Food Court . 
Mobile food court shall mean a land use approved though a Conditional Use Permit (see Unified Development Ordinance) and developed in conformity with an approved site plan (see Unified Development Ordinance), where two or more mobile food vendors congregate to offer edible goods for sale to the public and amenities are provided for all vendors' customers. 
1.  Mobile Food Court Categories . 
a.  Short-Term . 
1)  A short-term food court is temporary in nature, intended to be an interim use on previously developed land where long-term utilization of the property or redevelopment is being investigated and/or pursued. A Conditional Use Permit for a short-term mobile food court may be granted for a period of up to two (2) years. 
2)  A short-term mobile food court may allow for: 
a)  The establishment of a site that provides for the gathering of two (2) to five (5) mobile food vendors. 
b)  The mobile food vendors within the mobile food court to remain on their pad sites overnight. Note: Mobile food vendors are required to leave the mobile food court at least once a year to retain mobile food vendor status. 
c)  Tables, chairs, and canopies for court customers. 
d)  Signage for the mobile food court, in accordance with the Signs section of this Unified Development Ordinance. 
e)  Small-scale entertainment and accessory uses for mobile food court customers, such as music (live acoustic or recorded) that is played or broadcast at a reasonable volume inside the court's property boundaries and small playground area as not to disturb other surrounding property owners. 
3)  A short-term mobile food court shall: 
a)  Be located a minimum of 100 feet from a single family, duplex, or townhouse zoning district. 
b)  Have a site manager that will remain on property during the hours of operation. 
c)  Have all valid permits and licenses as required by the Brazos County Health Department. 
d)  Allow only mobile food vendors that hold valid permits and licenses as required by the City of College Station and the Brazos County Health Department to operate within the mobile food court. 
e)  At a minimum, not operate between the hours of 3 a.m. and 5 a.m. 
f)  Provide only portable or temporary improvements to a site. Long-term or permanent improvements to a site are not allowed. 
g)  Provide adequately maintained trash receptacles for customer use. 
h)  Comply with general site plan requirements described in the Site Plan Review section of Article 3, Development Review Procedures, the applicable requirements of Article 7 General Development Standards, and the specific use standards below. 
b.  Long-Term . 
1)  Long-term mobile food courts are intended to have more permanency than short-term mobile food courts and shall be held to the same development standards as restaurant developments, with the exceptions identified in the specific use standards below. 
2)  A long-term mobile food court may allow for: 
a)  The establishment of a site that provides for the gathering of two (2) or more mobile food vendors. 
b)  The mobile food vendors within the mobile food court to remain on their pad sites overnight. Note: Mobile food vendors are required to leave the mobile food court or move within the court at least once a year to retain mobile food vendor status. 
c)  Mobile food vendors to access potable water and sewage disposal facilities onsite. If these utilities are made available, they shall be located in a manner to necessitate the movement of each mobile food vendor to access the utilities. 
d)  Tables, chairs, and canopies or enclosed seating areas for court customers. 
e)  Signage for the mobile food court, in accordance with the Signs section of this Unified Development Ordinance. 
f)  Small-scale entertainment and accessory uses for mobile food court customers, such as music (live acoustic or recorded) that is played or broadcast at a reasonable volume inside the court's property boundaries and small playground area as not to disturb surrounding property owners. 
g)  Larger-scale entertainment and accessory uses for court customers, such as a volleyball court and bar, at a scale as not to disturb surrounding property owners. 
h)  Accessory structures. 
i)  Alcohol sales with approved permits and licenses from the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. 
3)  A long-term mobile food court shall: 
a)  Be located a minimum of 100 feet from a single family, duplex, or townhouse zoning district. 
b)  Have a site manager that will remain on property during the hours of operation. 
c)  Have all valid permits and licenses as required by the Brazos County Health Department. 
d)  Allow only mobile food vendors that hold valid permits and licenses as required by the City of College Station and the Brazos County Health Department to operate within the mobile food court. 
e)  At a minimum, not operate between the hours of 3 a.m. and 5 a.m. 
f)  Comply with general site plan requirements described in the Site Plan Review section of Article 3, Development Review Procedures, the applicable requirements of Article 7 General Development Standards, and the specific use standards below. 
c.  Restroom and Hand Washing Facilities for Short-Term and Long-Term Mobile Food Courts. 
1)  Mobile food courts will provide at least two (2) handicapped accessible porta potties with one (1) mobile handwashing station for every ten (10) mobile food vendors. 
2)  Mobile food courts that are within one hundred (100) feet of a public restroom facility may be exempted from the requirement for porta potties. 
3)  Mobile food vendors shall comply with the Brazos County Health Department's requirements for hand washing facilities. 
2.  Specific Use Standards for Mobile Food Courts . 
The following shall apply to all short-term and long-term mobile food courts, unless otherwise noted: 
a.  Mobile food courts shall designate pad site locations for mobile food vendors. 
b.  Mobile food vendor pad sites and dining areas shall be setback a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from rights-of-way and public ways. 
c.  All mobile food vendor pad sites shall be separated from other pad sites, dining areas, and structures by a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
d.  Pad sites and dining areas shall not be located within fire lanes, easements, setbacks, buffers, or visibility triangles. 
e.  All mobile food vendors located in a mobile food court shall be on an improved, permanent surface as described in the Off-Street Parking Standards of this Unified Development Ordinance. 
f.  A minimum of two (2) Off-Street Parking spaces shall be provided per mobile food vendor pad site. 
g.  A minimum of a twenty-foot (20') fire apparatus access route is required around a mobile food court. 
h.  Mobile food vendors, portable restroom trailers, and other temporary structures shall not be subject to the Non-Residential Architectural Standards section of this UDO. 
i.  Electrical connections shall be provided for all mobile food vendors on site. Use of generators shall not be allowed in a mobile food court. 
j.  Short-term mobile food courts only. 
1)  Short-term mobile food courts shall not impede vehicular circulation or block fire lanes or sanitation routes through the existing sites upon which they are located, 
2)  Short-term mobile food courts shall not be subject to the requirements of the Landscaping and Tree Protection section of this Unified Development Ordinance. 
3)  Short-term mobile food courts shall utilize existing solid waste collection sites on the properties on which they are located, and provide proof of permission to do so. 
k.  Long-term mobile food courts only . 
If water and wastewater facilities are provided to mobile food vendors in a long-term mobile food court, the site shall be designed to require all mobile food vendors to remain mobile to access these amenities. Additional tanks or portable tanks for wastewater are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. G), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. H), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-3708 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 10-8-2015; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-3999 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 4-12-2018) 
Sec. 6.5. - Accessory Uses. 
A.  Accessory Uses. 
Accessory uses are allowed with permitted, established primary structures and uses subject to the following: 
1.  The use or structure is subordinate to and serves a primary use or principal structure; 
2.  The accessory use shall be subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the primary use served; 
3.  The accessory use shall contribute to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the primary use served; 
4.  The accessory use shall be located within the same zoning district as the primary use is permitted; and 
5.  Accessory uses located in residential districts shall not be used for commercial purposes other than permitted home occupations. 
B.  Accessory Structures. 
1.  In combination, all accessory uses shall contain no more square footage than twenty-five (25) percent of the habitable floor area of the principal structure or 400 square feet, whichever is greater. Garage or carport areas devoted to the storage of vehicles shall not be included in the calculation of the twenty-five (25) percent restriction. 
2.  No accessory structure shall be erected in any required setback area. Excluded from this requirement is any portable storage building or structure if the Building Official has determined that it does not require a Building Permit. 
3.  On lots with approved rear access all setbacks shall be measured from the nearest boundary of the access easement or alley. On all other lots rear setbacks shall be measured from the rear property line. In no event shall more than thirty (30) percent of the rear yard area (that portion of the yard between the rear setback line of the principal structure and the rear property line) be covered with accessory buildings, structures, or uses. 
4.  The following restrictions shall apply to accessory buildings, structures, or uses other than garages, carports, and living quarters. 
a.  A minimum rear setback of fifteen (15) feet; and, 
b.  A maximum building eave height of eight (8) feet. 
5.  Garage and Carports . 
Garages and carports in residential zoning districts, including those of a temporary nature, shall have a minimum rear setback of twenty (20) feet. A minimum side yard setback of twenty (20) feet shall also be applied when garages and carports, including those of a temporary nature, gain access from a side street. All other setbacks shall be applied as required in the district in which the structure is located. The following restrictions shall apply to garages and carports: 
a.  A minimum rear setback of twenty (20) feet; and, 
b.  A minimum side street setback of twenty (20) feet is required for garages or carports that face onto side streets. 
6.  Living Quarters . 
In areas zoned and used for single family residential use, accessory living quarters are allowed subject to the following: 
a.  The property owner resides on-site and uses the subject property as their primary residence. 
b.  There is a limit of one (1) accessory living quarter per building plot. 
c.  No more than two (2) unrelated persons live in the accessory living quarters; and 
d.  One (1) additional off-street parking space is provided for the living quarters. 
C.  Home Occupation. 
A home occupation is that accessory use of a dwelling that shall constitute all or some portion of the livelihood of a person or persons living in the dwelling. 
1.  In-home Day Care (six (6) or fewer people). 
2.  Bed and Breakfast. 
A bed and breakfast facility shall be considered accessory to a single-family dwelling. 
a.  No more than four (4) unrelated individuals may occupy the property overnight. 
b.  The facility must maintain a residential appearance and be the permanent residence of the proprietor. 
c.  Limit number of rooms to four (4) where shared/common bathrooms may be provided. 
d.  No cooking facilities are permitted in individual rooms. 
3.  Taxicab Services. 
Taxicab services may be permitted as a home occupation provided that no more than two (2) commercial vehicles associated with a taxicab service are parked or stored on- or off-street at any time. 
Per Ordinance No. 3281 (September 9, 2010) 
4.  Exclusions to Home Occupations. 
No home occupation shall be permitted that results in any of the following: 
a.  Changes the outside appearance of the dwelling; 
b.  Is visible from the street; 
c.  Generates traffic, parking, sewerage, or water use in excess of what is normal in the residential neighborhood; 
d.  Results in the off-street or on-street parking of more than two (2) vehicles at any one (1) time not owned by members of the occupant family; 
e.  Creates a hazard to persons or property; 
f.  Results in electrical interference; 
g.  Is a nuisance; 
h.  Results in the any outside storage or display; or 
i.  Includes employment within the home or on the premise of persons other than members of the occupant family. 
5.  Prohibited Home Occupations. 
The following are prohibited as home occupations: 
a.  Barber, beauty, and other personal service shops; 
b.  Animal hospitals, stables, or kennels; 
c.  Dance studios, schools; 
d.  Mortuaries; 
e.  Private clubs; 
f.  Repair shops; 
g.  Restaurants; 
h.  Automobile paint or repair shops; 
i.  Doctor, dentist, veterinarian, or other medically related office; or 
j.  Rooming/Boarding House. 
D.  Recycling Facilities - Small. 
1.  Single Feed Reverse Vending Machines. 
Single feed reverse vending machines may be located with a permit either in the interior or immediate exterior of commercial, industrial, or public facilities. 
2.  Small Collection Facilities. 
Small collection facilities may be permitted when established on an improved surface in conjunction with an existing commercial or industrial use or public facility. The host facility must be in compliance with all City codes. No facility may occupy more than five hundred (500) square feet, nor occupy more than five (5) parking spaces of the host site. All vehicular and pedestrian circulation aisles shall be unobstructed. 
a.  Setbacks. 
Each facility shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any right-of-way line when located in front of the host use. Side, side street, and rear setbacks established for commercial uses shall be maintained. 
Containers intended for twenty-four-hour donation of materials shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet from property zoned or developed for residential use. Attended facilities within one hundred (100) feet of residentially-zoned or developed property shall operate between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
b.  Landscaping. 
A small collection facility shall not be placed on the host site in such a manner as to impair the landscaping required for the subject site. 
c.  Parking. 
One (1) space will be required if an attendant is provided. Occupation of parking spaces by the collection facility and attendant shall not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required by ordinance for the host site. 
d.  Noise. 
Noise levels shall not exceed sixty (60) dBA as measured at the property line of residentially-zoned or developed property, otherwise noise levels shall not exceed seventy (70) dBA. 
e.  Signage. 
Each container must be clearly labeled with a sign, limited to one (1) per container and no larger than twenty (20) percent of the side upon which the sign is placed, to provide information pertaining to the type of material to be collected within the container, and the name and telephone number of a person responsible for maintenance who may be contacted at all times. 
E.  Portable Storage Structures. 
1.  General Provisions. 
a.  A permit shall be obtained prior to placing a Portable Storage container on property unless otherwise exempted herein. 
b.  The following are exempt from the requirements of this Section: 
1.  Property with an active building or development permit. 
2.  Properties zoned M-2, Heavy Industrial or BPI Business Park Industrial. M-2 Heavy Industrial and BPI Business Park Industrial that abut residential zoning districts or uses shall comply with this exemption. 
3.  Sites in which storage containers constitute a principal use, as determined by the Administrator. 
4.  Containers that receive site plan approval as per 3.b, Development of a Permanent Storage Container Area, of this Section. 
c.  Placing material on top of, or the vertical stacking of, Portable Storage containers is prohibited. 
d.  Permits shall be posted on the storage container. If a container is replaced by another during the permit period, the permit shall be removed and placed on the newly placed container. If the container is visible from a right-of-way, then the permit shall be posted in view of the right-of-way. 
e.  Storage containers shall be placed outside of right-of-way and the sight triangle as established in Section 7.2.C, Visibility at Intersections in all Districts. 
f.  Storage containers shall be places on an improved surface as specified in Section 7.3.G, Off-Street Parking Standards, Surfacing. 
g.  In the event of a natural disaster of extenuating circumstance, the Administrator may grant that a permit be extended up to thirty (30) additional days. 
h.  An application for permit of a storage container shall be accompanied by a fee of forty dollars ($40.00). 
2.  Additional Provision for Residential Property. 
a.  No more than one (1) Portable Storage container shall be allowed at a time per dwelling unit. 
b.  A permit is not required for the first fourteen (14) days a storage container is located on residential property. An extension for up to an additional fourteen (14) days may be obtained through an approved permit. A storage container shall not be located on residential property for longer than twenty-eight (28) days. 
c.  No more than two (2) permits may be issued to a dwelling unit per calendar year and there shall be a minimum of thirty (30) days between issuance of permits. 
d.  No storage container shall exceed a height of eight (8) feet, a width of eight (8) feet, or a floor area of one hundred thirty (130) square feet. 
e.  Storage containers may be screened from view of the right-of-way and adjacent properties instead of being placed on an improved surface. 
3.  Additional Provisions for Non-Residential Property. 
a.  Temporary Placement. 
1.  Each address shall be allowed one (1) storage container. Additional storage containers are permissible provided that all containers do not utilize the area of more than five (5) percent of the existing parking spaces, or sixteen (16) spaces, whichever is smaller. 
2.  Storage container(s) shall not be allowed more than three (3) separate time periods per calendar year and there shall be a minimum of thirty (30) days between the issuance of permits. 
3.  A permit shall remain valid for a maximum of forty-five (45) days. If multiple permits are allowed, as per 3.a.1 above, all containers must be removed within forty-five (45) days of the date of the initial permit is issued. 
4.  Storage containers shall not be placed in the front yard of a site, adjacent to right-of-way, or interfere with on-site traffic flow. If rear or side yard placement is not possible, the alternate location shall be approved by the Administrator. 
5.  Storage containers shall meet front and side street setbacks as stated in Section 5.4, Non-Residential Dimensional Standards. Storage containers shall also meet side and/or rear setbacks when the property line abuts a residential use. 
b.  Development of a Permanent Storage Container Area. 
1.  In lieu of a permit, site plan approval identifying the location of an area to be used for the placement of storage container(s) for an indefinite period shall be obtained prior to placing container(s) on property. 
2.  Storage container(s) shall be screened from view when visible from a right-of-way or adjacent property. If required, screening shall be accomplished by landscaping and an eight-foot wooden fence or wall. 
3.  Additional parking shall be provided based on the square footage of the screened area for the container(s) according to Section 7.3, Off-Street Parking Standards. 
Per Ordinance No. 3253 (June 24, 2010) 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. G), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2018-4059 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-19-2018) 
Sec. 6.6. - Temporary Uses. 
Temporary Uses, as set forth below, are declared to have characteristics which require certain controls in order to insure compatibility with other uses in the district within which they are proposed for location. 
A.  Particular Temporary Uses Permitted. 
1.  Garage Sales; 
2.  Indoor and outdoor art and craft shows, exhibits, and sales; 
3.  Sales of Christmas trees or other seasonal goods; 
4.  Religious revival tents; 
5.  Temporary buildings and equipment for uses incidental to construction work on premises in any zone but shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction work. None shall be located on any public street or public right-of-way at any time during construction; 
6.  Temporary facilities for manufacturing concrete or concrete products may be located in all zoning districts where they are directly associated with construction in the area. Retail sales of concrete products shall be prohibited in conjunction with temporary concrete plants. The production site must be returned to its pre-construction state following completion of the associated project. 
7.  Farmers' Markets. 
a.  Temporary outdoor sales of products in an unrefined state, by a State Certified Farmers' Market may be operated for a maximum of two (2) days per week and are permitted on: 
1)  Public properties, with locations approved by the Administrator, and 
2)  Private property in zoning districts that allow for retail sales as a permitted use. 
b.  The Market must be located within a paved parking lot, and shall not utilize more than ten (10) percent of the required number of parking spaces on private property. The Market may not be located within drive aisles, fire lanes, or parking setbacks, and in no case shall the market be located within the public right-of-way. 
c.  The Market must comply with Section 7.5 Signs. Attached signs advertising the Market, or any products for sale, must be securely attached to the sales area. Temporary Freestanding Signs and Commercial Banners, as described in Section 7.5 Signs, are not permitted. 
d.  The Market shall have approval of the City of College Station prior to location or sales. 
B.  Temporary Residential Sales Offices and Model Homes. 
The following regulations shall apply to the conduct of temporary residential sales offices and model homes within residential zoning districts: 
1.  Temporary residential sales offices and model homes may be located within a residential district as part of an on-going residential development; however, they shall only be located at the end of a residential block on the periphery of a subdivision or at the entrance to a subdivision; 
2.  Any temporary residential sales office or model home shall be removed or converted to a use permitted within the district when Certificates of Occupancy have been issued to ninety-five (95) percent of the associated residential units or when use as a sales office or model home has ceased; and 
3.  Model homes for new subdivisions shall only be occupied for residential habitation after all business activities have ceased and upon sale of the home. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. G), 9-27-2012) 
Article 7. - General Development Standards 
The following general development standards shall apply to all zoning districts, except where expressly stated to apply to, or exclude, specific districts. 

Sec. 7.1. - Applicability. 
The following general development standards shall apply to all zoning districts, except where expressly stated to apply to, or exclude, specific districts. The provisions of this article shall not apply to property zoned BioCorridor Planned Development District. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. J), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 7.2. - General Provisions. 
A.  Health and Environmental Safeguards. 
No machine, process, or procedure shall be employed on any property in the City, in which: 
1.  Emission of smoke, dust, or noxious, toxic or lethal gases are detectable beyond the perimeter of the property; 
2.  Materials are stored or accumulated in such a way that they may be carried by rainwater in natural drainage channels beyond the limits of the property, which are noxious, toxic, radioactive, contain oil or grease, wood, cellulose fibers, hair, feathers, or plastic, or have a pH factor greater than ten (10) or less than five (5); 
3.  Vibration is discernible beyond the property line; or 
4.  Noise above the ambient noise level is discernible beyond the property line. 
B.  Minimum Requirements. 
1.  No building plot shall have lower or less stringent standards or dimensions than those prescribed for respective zones in this UDO. 
2.  No building permit or development approval may be issued for a lot that does not meet the minimum lot area requirements of this UDO except as provided for in Article 9, Nonconformities. 
3.  In the absence of public water or public sewer, no building permit shall be issued until the lot meets all applicable requirements of this UDO and the Texas Department of Health and Environmental Control. A septic system that has been approved by the Brazos County Health Department may be permitted if an exception to sewer service has been granted under Section 11-2 of the City of College Station Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
4.  Utilities using land or an unoccupied building covering less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of site area shall be exempt from minimum lot area standards. 
C.  Visibility at Intersections in all Districts. 
Within a departure sight triangle as defined by the latest edition of the American Association of State Highway & Transportation Officials' (AASHTO) "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets", nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner that would obstruct the drivers' view at intersections. Sight triangles shall apply to street intersections, commercial driveways, and multifamily driveways. Obstacles prohibited include but are not limited to: fences, walls, entry signage, structures, buildings, hedges, etc. However, fences, walls, and/or hedges that do not impair vision from three (3) feet to nine (9) feet above the curb may be permitted with the approval of the City Engineer. Required public use facilities such as fire hydrants, traffic signage, utility structures, etc. are exempted. 
D.  Required Yards (Setbacks). 
1.  Purpose and Intent. 
a.  Setbacks are measured from the property line; 
b.  On lots with approved rear access, the rear setback shall be measured from the nearest boundary of the access easement or alley; 
c.  No structure that is taller than eight (8) feet in height and that has a roof structure that completely or partially blocks the view to the sky shall be located within the required setback area unless specifically allowed herein; 
d.  No part of a yard or other open space required in connection with any building, building plot, or use for the purpose of complying with this UDO, shall be included for any other building, building plot, or use as part of a yard or open space; and 
e.  Where an existing lot was created by an approved plat prior to July 15, 1970 and the property is designated as Neighborhood Conservation in the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use and Character Map a new (infill) single-family dwelling unit shall use the adjacent lots to determine the appropriate front yard setback. The new dwelling unit shall be set no closer to the street or farther back from the street than the nearest neighboring units. Areas zoned NPO, Neighborhood Prevailing Overlay District are exempt from this requirement. Setbacks for areas zoned NCO, Neighborhood Conservation Overlay are stated in the specific rezoning ordinance for the area. 
2.  Reduction for Public Purpose. 
a.  When an existing setback is reduced because of a recent or pending conveyance to a federal, state, or local government for a public purpose and the remaining setback is at least fifty (50) percent of the required minimum setback for the district in which it is located, then that remaining setback will be deemed to satisfy the minimum setback standards of this UDO. 
b.  For the purposes of this subsection, such conveyance shall have occurred within one (1) year immediately proceeding submittal for site plan approval, or be anticipated to occur within one (1) year of site plan approval. 
3.  Features Allowed Within Required Yards. 
The following features may be located within a required yard but may be subject to additional regulations applied herein: 
a.  Trees, shrubbery, or other landscape features, excluding gazebos or other similar structures that require a building permit; 
b.  Fences and walls; 
c.  Driveways; 
d.  Sidewalks; 
e.  Utility lines, wires, and associated structures, such as power poles; 
f.  Mechanical equipment such as air conditioning units, pool pumps, and similar equipment; 
g.  Uncovered Porches, uncovered steps to building entrances, and uncovered patio decks; 
h.  Covered Porches that are open on three (3) sides, may extend up to six (6) feet, including eaves, into any required front or side street setback; 
i.  Openwork fire balconies and fire escapes may extend up to six (6) feet into any required rear setback; 
j.  Sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses, chimneys, flues, eaves, and other architectural features may extend up to eighteen (18) inches into any required yard; 
k.  Balconies or decks located more than eight (8) feet from the ground may project up to six (6) feet into the required front yard; 
l.  Accessory structures that do not require building permits; 
m.  Bus stops that offer shelter from the elements. Such shelters may be located within a front or side street yard. Shelters may be located within a public right-of-way if a Private Improvement in Public right-of-way permit has been duly issued; and 
n.  Swimming pools and hot tubs without shelter. 
E.  More Than One (1) Principal Structure on a Lot or Parcel. 
1.  In any single-family or duplex residential district, no more than one (1) structure housing a permitted principal use may be erected on a single lot or building plot. 
2.  In all other districts, more than one (1) structure housing a permitted principal use may be erected on a building plot. Yard and other requirements herein shall apply to the building plot. 
F.  Fences/Walls. 
Fences of wood, chain-link, or similar material, and less than eight (8) feet in height, and walls of brick, stone, concrete, or similar material, and less than six (6) feet in height, shall not be construed to be structures, nor shall they require a building permit. 
G.  Building Plot. 
1.  Building plot refers to all of the land within an area defined by the Administrator that consists of one (1) or more platted lots for a single development. Such determination shall be made at the platting stage or at the time of site plan. 
2.  In the event that two (2) or more lots are under single ownership and the existing structure does not meet the required yard setback, both lots shall be construed as the building plot. 
3.  The Administrator shall determine the building plot using the following criteria: 
a.  Contiguous properties that consist of less than two (2) acres and have one (1) or fewer frontages on a street classified as a collector or higher on the current Thoroughfare Plan will be consolidated and defined as one (1) building plot for the purposes of signage; 
b.  Contiguous properties that develop according to a common plan or design for similar or compatible uses, which singularly or in phases, is treated as such for site plan review purposes including signage; or 
c.  Contiguous properties that as determined by the Administrator need to be consolidated for ease of access, reduction of the proliferation of signage along the public right-of-way, or other public health, safety, or general welfare reasons. 
H .  Low-Density Residential Height Protection . 
1 .  Purpose . 
The purpose of low-density residential height protection is to help mitigate negative visual impacts of higher-density residential and non-residential uses on adjacent, low-density residential uses and districts. This is accomplished by regulating the height of such higher-density residential or any non-residential uses when adjacent to low-density residential uses and districts. 
2 .  Applicability . 
a.  This subsection shall apply to all multifamily and nonresidential structures to be constructed or reconstructed in any way that would increase the building height as defined in Section 11.2 Defined Terms of this UDO, on property adjacent to a detached single-family, manufactured home park, or townhouse use or district. 
b.  Unless otherwise stated in this UDO, the regulations herein shall not apply to any of the following: 
1.  Structures located in NG, RDD, and P-MUD zoning districts; 
2.  Utility structures such as elevated water storage tanks and electrical transmission lines; 
3.  Individual architectural structures such as flagpoles, belfries, cupolas, spires, domes, monuments, chimneys, bulkheads, elevators, or chimney flues; or any other similar structure extending above the roof of any building where such structure does not occupy more than thirty-three (33) percent of the surface area of the roof; 
4.  Residential radio/television receiving antennas; 
5.  When the detached single family, manufactured home park or townhome use on the adjacent tract is nonconforming; 
6.  When the use on the adjacent tract is agricultural; or 
7.  Developments designed to be mixed use or that are within areas where it has been identified that redevelopment is appropriate, as shown on the Future Land Use and Character Map of the City's Comprehensive Plan. Such developments at the periphery of the mixed use area or area identified as appropriate for redevelopment shall meet the terms of Low-Density Residential Height Protection, when applicable. 
3 .  Slope Requirement . 
a.  Multi-family and non-residential structures shall remain under an imaginary line formed by a 1:2 slope as illustrated by the inclined plane in the graphic below, where 'A' is located at the property line shared with a detached single-family, manufactured home park or townhouse use or district. 
When the adjacent lot is one dedicated by plat for detention or open area and is not buildable for a detached single-family house, townhouse, or manufactured home or residential amenity, the measurement shall be taken from the closest property line shared with a buildable detached single-family, townhouse, or manufactured home lot. 

b.  In addition to the height limitations set forth above in this subsection, the following additional height limitations apply in WC Wellborn Commercial zoning: 
1.  No building may exceed two (2) stories; 
2.  Maximum eave height shall be twenty-four (24) feet; 
3.  Maximum overall height to peak of roof shall be thirty-five (35) feet; 
4.  Any structure with an eave height over fifteen (15) feet will be constructed to resemble a two-story facade; 
5.  Buildings located closest to detached single-family, manufactured home park or townhouse use or district and that are within fifty (50) feet of the property line are limited to one-story in height with an eave maximum of twelve (12) feet; and 
6.  An eave maximum of fourteen (14) feet in height is permitted when mechanical equipment is housed within a mezzanine. 
I.  Public Address Systems. 
Public Address Systems shall not be audible to an adjacent residential use. 
J.  Bicycle Facilities . 
1.  Number Required . 
a.  For sites subject to the Non-Residential Architectural Standards of this UDO except for Mini-Warehouse/Self-Storage, Industrial and Manufacturing land uses, and property located in the Rural Zoning District. The number of bicycle parking spaces shall be as set forth in the chart below (Figure 1) and in any event no less than two (2) bicycle parking spaces must be provided. 
b.  Bicycle Parking Requirements: The number of bicycle parking spaces shall be based on the required automobile parking spaces and shall be provided in accordance with the following. 
Fig. 1: Bicycle Parking Standard Chart 

c.  Notwithstanding the above, in multi-tenant buildings in excess of twenty thousand (20,000) gross square feet, one (1) or more facilities capable of storing eight (8) bicycles shall be provided at a minimum. 
d.  In MU Mixed-Use districts, bicycle storage facilities shall be provided at a rate [of] one (1) bicycle for every 15,000 square feet of non-residential uses, and one (1) bicycle for every two (2) dwelling units. 
e.  Refer to the Alternative Parking Plan Section for the potential to substitute additional bicycle facilities for vehicular parking. 
2.  Placement and Design . 
a.  Facilities shall be separated from motor vehicle parking to protect both bicycles and vehicles from accidental damage and shall be sufficiently separated from building or other walls, landscaping, or other features to allow for ease and encouragement of use. This separation shall be a minimum of three (3) feet. 
b.  Bicycle Corrals: In areas with limited sidewalk space and frequent bicycle activity, bicycle parking may be provided in "bike corrals" located in the vehicular parking area adjacent to a curb. Design will be considered as context dictates as approved by the Administrator. Bicycle corrals shall be designed to distinguish and define the parking stall they inhabit for visibility and safety purposes. The corral should be well defined, such as generally surrounded by a painted white box on the pavement with flexible vertical delineators and a wheel stop where vehicles in adjacent parking spots might back into the corral. See example image below: 

c.  Where bicycle facilities are provided for two (2) bicycles, a standard footprint which is at least four feet wide by six feet long shall be used. 
Fig. 2: Examples of Bicycle Parking Footprint and Dimensions


d.  Facilities shall be placed in clearly designated, safe, and convenient locations and such that no primary building entrance is further than one hundred fifty (150) feet from a bicycle facility. 
e.  Bicycles may be permitted on sidewalks or other paved surfaces provided that the bicycles do not block or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
f.  Bicycle facilities shall be constructed so as to enable the user to secure a bicycle by locking the frame and one (1) wheel of each bicycle parked therein. Facilities must be easily usable with both U-locks and cable locks and support the bicycle frame at two (2) points. Facilities shall be anchored securely to the ground. 
K.  Pedestrian Facilities. 
1.  In SC Suburban Commercial and WC Wellborn Commercial districts, pedestrian connections adjacent to residential areas shall be provided as determined by the Administrator so as to enhance pedestrian, bicycle mobility, and connectivity. 
2.  In MU Mixed-Use districts, minimum eight (8) foot wide sidewalks shall be provided along all public rights-of-way, streets, and public ways adjacent to and within the development. 
3.  For sites subject to the Non-Residential Architectural Standards of this UDO except for MU Mixed-Use districts: 
a.  Public entry faades of retail buildings that exceed 200 feet in horizontal length shall place a minimum ten (10) foot sidewalk along the full frontage of its public entry faade. Tree wells and planter boxes may be placed along this walkway and in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian movement. Bike parking facilities are allowed in this area. Vehicular parking or cart storage is prohibited. Outside display is allowed but only if it does not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of this area and meets the requirements of Outside Storage and Display Section. 
b.  A site or sites part of a building plot in excess of ten (10) acres shall provide designated connections among primary buildings and pad sites for pedestrian and bicycle traffic. Locations for sidewalks and bicycle parking facilities shall be provided and shown on the site plan. Pedestrian walkways may be incorporated into the landscape strips separating parking areas only if the strip is ten (10) feet in width. Pedestrian walkways shall be a minimum of five (5) feet wide and shall connect public street sidewalks, transit stops, parking areas and other buildings in a design that ensures safe pedestrian use. 
c.  A site or sites part of a building plot in excess of ten (10) acres shall provide one plaza developed as an integral part of the development and not less than five hundred (500) square feet in area. This area shall not count toward required parking islands or area requirements of a parking concept as described in the Large Parking Lots Section. This area shall incorporate a minimum of three (3) of the following: 
1.  Seating components 
2.  Structural or vegetative shading* 
3.  Water features* 
4.  Decorative landscape planters* 
5.  Public Art* 
6.  Outdoor eating accommodations 
7.  Hardscape elements at entrances and within the parking area such as decorative pavers, low masonry walls, clock towers, etc. 
* These public areas may be located within the parking landscape areas. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3458 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 11-8-2012; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-3663 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 5-28-2015; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3802 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-25-2016; Ord. No. 2018-3990 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-22-2018; Ord. No. 2018-3999 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 4-12-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4060 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 11-19-2018) 
Sec. 7.3. - Off-Street Parking Standards. 
A.  Purpose . 
The purpose of this Section is to establish the guidelines for off-street parking areas consistent with the proposed land use to: 
1.  Reduce the occurrence of non-resident on-street parking in adjoining neighborhoods; 
2.  Avoid the traffic congestion and public safety hazards caused by a failure to provide such parking areas; 
3.  Expedite the movement of traffic on public thoroughfares in a safe manner, thus increasing the carrying capacity of the streets and reducing the amount of land required for streets, thereby lowering the cost to both the property owner and the City; and 
4.  Provide flexibility and parking alternatives for developing and redeveloping properties to increase their viability. 
B.  Off-Street Parking Spaces Required . 
1.  In all districts, for all uses, at the time any building or structure is erected, enlarged, or increased in capacity, or at any time any other use is established, there shall be off-street parking spaces provided for motor vehicles in accordance with the requirements specified herein, except as noted below. 
Exception : 
a.  In all single-family residential and townhouse uses, at the time of construction, redevelopment, or when an addition to the number of existing bedrooms is completed there shall be off-street parking spaces provided for motor vehicles in accordance with the requirements specified herein. 
2.  Where off-street parking facilities are provided in excess of the minimum amounts specified by this Section, or when off-street parking facilities are provided but not required, said off-street parking facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements for parking and maneuvering space as specified in this Section. 
3.  It shall be unlawful to discontinue or dispense with, or cause the discontinuance or reduction of, the required parking facilities apart from the discontinuance of the building, use, or structure without establishing alternative off-street parking facilities that meet these requirements. 
C.  Dimensions, Access, and Location . 
This Section applies to any development or redevelopment of uses other than single-family residential, duplexes, or townhouses unless otherwise noted. 
1.  Each off-street parking space for automobiles shall have an area of not less than nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet and each stall shall be striped. This standard shall apply for off-street parking for all uses including single-family residential, duplexes, and townhouses. Single-family residential and townhouses are not required to stripe parking spaces. 
2.  For properties located within the area described as "Area V" in the Southside Area Neighborhood Plan, an amendment of the City's Comprehensive Plan (Ordinance No. 2012-3442), a new single-family structure may locate its parking, including both required and additional parking in the areas described below: 
a.  Anywhere on the lot behind the structure with no limit on the size of the area; 
b.  Anywhere in the side yards of the lot with no limit on the size of the area; and, 
c.  An area located in front of the structure not to exceed a size equivalent to fifty (50) percent of the front portion of the property. The front portion of the property is the area of the lot within the side lot lines, the front setback, and the public right-of-way line (see graphic below). The square footage of parking allowed by this calculation may be located within or outside the boundary of the area used for calculations (see graphic below). The portion of the driveway located between the front property line and the structure shall be included in the maximum parking area square footage. 
AREA V - ALLOWABLE LOCATION FOR PARKING

3.  For all detached single-family uses other than as set forth in subsection 2 above, at the time of construction, reconstruction, or addition to the number of existing bedrooms, parking shall be located in the areas described below: 
a.  Anywhere on the lot behind the structure with no limit on the size of the area. Parking located behind the structure shall be screened by a solid hedge wall, fence, or wall, at least six (6) feet in height. All solid hedge walls shall be one-hundred (100) percent opaque. All shrubs planted for a hedge wall shall be a minimum of 15 gallons each and evergreen; 
b.  Anywhere in the side yards of the lot with no limit on the size of the area; and, 
c.  Any area located in front of the primary structure not to exceed a size equivalent to fifty (50) percent of the front area. The front area is defined as the area of the lot within the side lot lines, the front plane of the primary structure and the public right-of-way (see graphic below). The driveway area shall be included in this calculation. 
DETACHED SINGLE-FAMILY USES - ALLOWABLE LOCATION FOR PARKING

4.  When existing detached single-family parking is expanded in front of the structure, it shall not exceed a size equivalent to fifty (50) percent of the front area as described above. 
5.  An eighteen-foot paved space (ninety-degree only) may be utilized where the space abuts a landscaped island with a minimum depth of four (4) feet. An eighteen-foot space may also be used when adjacent to a sidewalk provided that the minimum width of the sidewalk is six (6) feet. This standard shall also apply to off-street parking for single-family residential, duplexes, and townhouses. 
6.  The width of an alley may be assumed to be a portion of the maneuvering space requirement for off-street parking facilities located adjacent to a public alley. This standard shall apply for off-street parking for all uses including single-family residential, duplexes, and townhouses. 
7.  Each parking space intended for use by the handicapped shall be designed in accordance with the standards of the Texas Architectural Barriers Act (TABA) administered by the Texas Department of License and Regulation. 
8.  Each parking space and the maneuvering area thereto shall be located entirely within the boundaries of the building plot except where shared parking is approved by the City. 
9.  All parking spaces, aisles, and modules shall meet the minimum requirements, as shown in the following table. All dimensions are measured from wall to wall. 
PARKING SPACE AND AISLE DIMENSIONS 
A B C D E F Angle 
(degrees) Width 
of stall Depth 
of stall 
90 
to aisle Width of aisle Width 
of stall 
parallel 
to aisle Module width One way Two way One way Two way 0 22 feet 10 feet 12.0 feet 20.0 feet 22.0 feet 22.0 feet 40.0 feet 45 9 feet 21.1 feet 12.0 feet 20.0 feet 12.7 feet 54.2 feet 62.2 feet 60 9 feet 22.3 feet 15.0 feet 22.0 feet 10.4 feet 59.6 feet 66.3 feet 90 9 feet 20.0 feet 23.0 feet 23.0 feet 9.0 feet 63.0 feet 63.0 feet  

10.  Parking lots located within fifteen (15) feet of a public right-of-way shall have a maximum of seven (7) contiguous spaces separated by an eighteen- by twenty-foot landscaped island. 
11.  All parking lots and drive aisles shall be setback a minimum of six (6) feet from any public right-of-way or public way. In sites subject to the Non-Residential Architectural Standards of this UDO, where parking or drive aisles are located between the building and the public right-of-way or public way, there shall be a minimum setback of ten (10) feet from the public right-of-way or public way to the parking area or drive aisle. 
12.  In SC Suburban Commercial and WC Wellborn Commercial districts, parking shall not be located between the structure and an adjacent single-family use or zoning district. Drive aisles and service aisles shall be permitted between the structures and an adjacent single-family use or zoning district. 
13.  Parking is discouraged along entrance drives and should be limited on major circulation aisles of large developments and major retail centers. 
14.  The Design Review Board may waive parking lot dimension requirements in the Northgate and Wolf Pen Creek districts if the development meets the goals of the master plan for the respective district. 
D.  Landscape Islands . 
1.  End Islands . 
a.  A raised island, encompassing not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet in area, shall be located at both ends of every interior and peripheral parking row, regardless of the length of the row. End islands may have sidewalks through them. Examples of interior and peripheral parking are shown in the figure below. 

b.  All end islands must be raised at least six (6) inches and curbed, with the majority of the area of each island planted or treated with enhanced paving. The soil within the planted area shall not be compacted or stabilized and shall be contiguous with the soil at the natural grade. 
2.  Interior Islands . 
a.  All interior islands shall be evenly distributed throughout the interior of the parking area. 
b.  For every fifteen (15) interior parking spaces, one hundred eighty (180) square feet of landscaping must be provided somewhere in the interior rows of the parking lot. Interior island areas may be grouped and configured as desired provided that circulation aisles remain clear and the minimum island area is not less than one hundred eighty (180) square feet. Interior islands may have sidewalks through them. 
c.  End island areas that exceed the minimum required may be counted toward the interior parking island requirement. 
d.  All interior islands must be raised at least six (6) inches and curbed, with the majority of the area of each island planted or treated with enhanced paving. The soil within the planted area shall not be compacted or stabilized and shall be contiguous with the soil at the natural grade. 
E.  Requirements Apply to All Parking Areas . 
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public parking area, including commercial parking lots, visitor parking areas for single-family and townhouse uses, and parcels used for open-air sales lots, shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the requirements in this Section and as described in the City of College Station Site Design Standards. The requirements in this Section do not apply to overflow parking for churches, nor to temporary overflow parking for City events and temporary parking for special events. 
F.  Surfacing . 
1.  General . 
All surfacing of off-street parking areas shall be constructed of either asphalt or concrete as described in the City of College Station Site Design Standards. Alternatives to the standards may be approved by the Administrator if it is demonstrated that the materials and design are equal or superior to the requirements in the Standards. All off-street parking areas shall be graded to drain and be maintained so as to dispose of surface water accumulated within the area. Parking spaces shall be arranged and marked so as to provide for orderly and safe parking of vehicles. 
2.  Non-Public, All-Weather Drive Surfaces . 
Temporary or permanent drive surfaces required for emergency access or turnaround for emergency vehicles must be constructed to function under all weather conditions. To accommodate a project during construction, phasing, or permanent installation, drive surfaces that do not meet the requirements for permanent pavement surfaces may be allowed at the discretion of the Administrator for the specific conditions stated below: 
a.  Temporary All-Weather Surface (During Construction) . 
A structure under construction must be accessible by an all-weather drive surface as specified in the City of College Station Site Design Standards. This temporary all-weather surface must be reworked or replaced to meet the permanent pavement standard as described in the City of College Station Site Design Standards prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy; 
b.  Semi-Permanent All-Weather Surface (During Phasing) . 
In cases during phasing of a large project, emergency access and turnarounds often must be added as a temporary measure until additional phases are constructed. These emergency access areas may consist of permanent pavement surfaces as specified in the City of College Station Site Design Standards. When the additional phase is constructed, these areas must be removed or reworked to meet the permanent pavement standards as described in the City of College Station Site Design Standards; 
c.  Permanent Surfaces . 
1)  All-Weather Surface (Permanent) . 
In some development scenarios, an emergency access or turnaround must be constructed to meet emergency access purposes and is not required for public traffic, service vehicles or sanitation vehicles. In these cases, the area required for emergency access only may meet the permanent pavement standards as specified in the City of College Station Site Design Standards. 
2)  Permeable Surface . 
(a)  The use of porous materials (such as permeable concrete and pavers) to mitigate storm water sheeting and pooling of water may be used in off-street parking areas if the material meets vehicular loading standards and is approved by the Administrator. 
(b)  Fire lanes may be constructed of porous materials such as permeable concrete and pavers to mitigate storm water sheeting and pooling of water, so long as it is demonstrated that the permeable surface can obtain sufficient land and compaction ratings for its application as approved by the City of College Station Fire and Sanitation Departments. 
(c)  Single-family and townhouse visitor parking areas, as required in Single-Family Residential Parking Requirements for Platting, may also be constructed of porous materials such as permeable concrete and pavers to mitigate storm water sheeting and pooling of water. 
(d)  Permeable surfaces approved as provided above shall be maintained in accordance with industry standards and to achieve mitigation of storm water sheeting and pooling of water. Failure to maintain permeable surfaces as required herein, shall constitute a violation of this Section of the UDO for which penalty provisions may be involved. 
G.  Curbing Required . 
1.  General . 
The perimeter of all paved surfaces shall be curbed as described in the City of College Station Site Design Standards. Unless otherwise required pursuant of this Section, curbs may be omitted where drive aisles or parking spaces are located adjacent to a building if bollards or other protective devices are installed to protect pedestrian areas. Alternatives to the standards may be approved by the Administrator if it is demonstrated that the materials and design are equal or superior to the requirements in the Standards. 
2.  Temporary Curbing . 
A temporary curb may be permitted in lieu of the minimum standard stated in the City of College Station Site Design Standards, at the discretion of the Administrator, when a project is phased in such a way that a permanent, monolithic curb may preclude development of future phases or limit access to a recorded private or public access easement adjoining properties. Wheel stops shall not be permitted as a temporary curbing. Temporary curbing must have the appearance of permanent curbing and shall be temporarily attached to the pavement surfacing below and meet the minimum standards for dowelled-in curbs as described in the City of College Station Site Design Standards. 
H.  Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required . 
In computing the number of parking spaces required, the following rules shall govern: 
1.  Parking requirements based on square footage shall be based upon the gross floor area, unless otherwise stated. Service areas such as mechanical rooms, restrooms, and closets shall be included in the calculation of "gross floor area" for determining required parking spaces; 
2.  Where fractional spaces result in computing required parking spaces, the required number of spaces must be increased to the nearest whole number. At least one (1) parking space must be provided unless otherwise specified in this UDO; 
3.  The parking space requirements for a use not specifically listed shall be the same as those for the most similar to the proposed use, as determined by the Administrator; 
4.  Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this UDO is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity, or otherwise, parking requirements shall be met on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this UDO is enlarged, the enlarged building or increased use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein; 
5.  At the time of construction, redevelopment, or when an addition to the number of existing bedrooms is completed, all single-family and townhouse uses shall come into compliance with the minimum off-street parking requirements. Garages that meet minimum dimensional standards may be counted towards parking requirements; 
6.  Where requirements are established on the basis of the number of seats, such requirements shall be based on the seating capacity as determined by the Building Official; 
7.  Where a manufacturing/industrial use has more than one (1) working shift of employees, parking shall be provided to accommodate overlap requirements during transition periods; and 
8.  The Design Review Board may waive parking space requirements in the Northgate and Wolf Pen Creek districts if the development meets the goals of the master plan for the respective district. 
MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
Use Unit Spaces/Unit Plus Spaces For: Assisted Living/Residential Care Facility As determined by the Administrator ***** Airport As determined by the Administrator ***** Banks 250 s.f. Floor area over 500 s.f.: 1.0 Bowling Alley As Determined by the Administrator ***** Bus Depot As Determined by the Administrator ***** Car Wash (Self-Serve) Wash Bay 1.0 1.0 space per vacuum bay Church Seat 0.33 * Convalescent Home/Hospital Bed 0.5 Duplex Dwelling:   1 & 2 Bedroom DU 2.0   3+ Bedroom BR 1.0 Dormitory Bed 0.75 Day Care Center 250 s.f. Floor area over 500 s.f.: 1.0 Fraternal Lodge 75 s.f. Floor area over 150 s.f.: 1.0 Fraternity/Sorority House Person 1.0 1/30 s.f. meeting room Freight Station As Determined by the Administrator ***** Funeral Parlor Seat 0.33 Furniture Sales, Freestanding 350 s.f. Floor area over 700 s.f.: 1.0 Golf Driving Range Tee Station 1.0 Health Club/Sports Facility As Determined by the Administrator ***** Gasoline and Fuel Service 300 s.f. 1.0 Group Housing BR 2.0 As Determined by the Administrator Health Studio 150 s.f. Floor area over 300 s.f.: 1.0 Hospital As Determined by the Administrator ***** Hotel/Motel DU 1.0 1/200 s.f. meeting room HUD-Code Manu. Home DU 2.0 Laundry 150 s.f. Floor area over 300 s.f.: 1.0 Live-Work Unit 250 s.f. of non-residential portion of structure Floor area over 250 s.f.: 1.0 1/BR, Residential DU Motor Vehicle Sales/Service:   Office/Sales Area 250 s.f. 1.0   Service Area 200 s.f. 1.0 Medical or Dental Clinic   < 20,000 s.f. 200 s.f. Floor area over 400 s.f: 1.0 Mixed-Use Structure **** 250 s.f. of non-residential portion of structure Floor area over 500 s.f.: 1.0 1/BR, including residential DU and hotel/motel DU Multi-Family Dwelling:   1 Bedroom BR 1.5   2+ Bedroom BR 1.0 Night Club 50 s.f. 1.0 Office Building 250 s.f. Floor area over 500 s.f.: 1.0 Personal Service Shop 250 s.f. Floor area over 500 s.f.: 1.0 Priv. School or Comm. Studio 100 s.f. Floor area over 200 s.f.: 1.0 Retail Sales & Service:   GC, SC, WC, C-3 250 s.f. Floor area over 500 s.f.: 1.0   CI 350 s.f. Floor area over 700 s.f.: 1.0 Restaurant (w/o drive-through) 65 s.f. Floor area over 130 s.f.: 1.0 Restaurant (w/drive-through) 100 s.f. Floor area over 200 s.f.: 1.0 Rooming/Boarding House Person 1.0 Sales Display 250 s.f. Floor area over 500 s.f.: 1.0 Single-Family Dwelling *** BR 1.0 *** 
Minimum of 2, Maximum of 4 1.0/Accessory Living Quarter Single-Unit Dwelling BR 1.0 Shopping Center ** :   GC, SC, WC, C-3 250 s.f. 1.0   CI 350 s.f. 1.0 Townhouse *** BR 1.0 *** 
Minimum of 2, Maximum of 4 Theater Seat 0.25 Truck Terminal As Determined by the Administrator ***** Two-Dwelling Unit BR 1.0 Veterinary Clinic 300 s.f. Floor area over 600 s.f.: 1.0 Warehouse 1,000 s.f. 1.0  
"s.f." = square footage. "DU" = Dwelling Unit. "BR" = Bedroom. 
* Overflow parking above required parking spaces may be grassed rather than paved. All unpaved spaces shall be shown on site plan and organized for efficient traffic circulation using wheel stops and other appropriate measures as required by the Administrator. 
**  The minimum number of parking spaces for a shopping center shall be calculated at a rate of 1:250 in GC SC, or WC, and 1:350 in CI regardless of the composing uses unless otherwise determined by the Administrator that such composing uses require a modification to the applicable requirements. 
*** For areas designated Neighborhood Conservation on the Comprehensive Plan's Future Land Use and Character Map there shall be no maximum number of parking spaces. 
**** Mixed-Use structures in the MU Mixed-Use and MF Multi-Family districts. 
***** When determining the required off-street parking requirements for the uses noted above, the Administrator shall consider the anticipated traffic demand, traffic circulation, and surrounding conditions. The Administrator may also consider information provided by the applicant that demonstrates the proposed number of off-street parking spaces is adequate for the proposed use and has been successfully employed in other locations. 
I.  Drive-Through Facility Queuing Requirements. 
1.  Minimum Number of Spaces . 
Drive-through queuing spaces shall be provided as indicated in the following table: 
Minimum Off-Street Queuing Requirements Activity Type Minimum
Spaces Measure From Automated Teller Machine 3 Teller Bank Teller Lane 4 Teller or Window Car Wash Stall, Automatic 4 Service Position Car Wash Stall, Self-Service 3 Service Position Dry cleaning or Laundry 2 Window Oil-Change Station 3 Service Position Photo Lab 4 Pick-Up Window Restaurant Drive-Through 4 Order Box Restaurant Drive-Through 3 Order Box to Pick-Up Window Other As determined by the Administrator  
2.  Design and Layout . 
Queuing spaces or queuing areas shall be designed in accordance with the following criteria: 
a.  Queue spaces or queuing areas may not interfere with parking spaces, parking aisles, loading areas, internal circulation or driveway access; 
b.  Each queue space shall consist of a rectangular area not less than ten (10) feet wide and eighteen and one-half (18.5) feet long with a vertical clearance as specified in the building code; 
c.  Queue spaces are not interchangeable with parking spaces except for the following uses where the space providing services may count toward the parking requirement: bank teller, car wash, and oil-change station; 
d.  A twelve-foot by-pass lane may be required adjacent to queue lines to allow vehicles an opportunity to circumvent the drive-through activity and exit the site; 
e.  Queue areas and drive-through facilities shall be clearly identified with the appropriate signing and marking; and 
f.  Spaces within a car-wash facility or drive-through oil-change station may be counted toward the queuing requirement. 
J.  Alternative Parking Plans . 
1.  Scope . 
An "Alternative Parking Plan" represents a proposal to meet vehicle parking and transportation access needs by means other than providing parking spaces on-site in accordance with the ratios established in Section 7.3.I, Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required. 
2.  Applicability . 
Applicants who wish to provide fewer or more off-street parking spaces than allowed above shall be required to secure approval of an Alternative Parking Plan, in accordance with the standards of this Section. The Administrator may require that an Alternative Parking Plan be submitted in cases where the Administrator deems the listed standard to be inappropriate based on the unique nature of the use or in cases where the applicable standard is unclear.' 
3.  Contents . 
Alternative Parking Plans shall be submitted in a form established by the Administrator and made available to the public. At a minimum, such plans shall detail the type of alternative proposed and the rationale for such a proposal. 
4.  Review and Approval Procedure . 
The Administrator shall be authorized to approve Alternative Parking Plans. Appeals of the Administrator's decision may be made to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
5.  Recording . 
An attested copy of an approved Alternative Parking Plan shall be submitted to the County Clerk's office for recordation on forms made available in the Department of Development Services. Proof of recordation of the agreement shall be presented to the Administrator prior to issuance of a Building Permit. An approved Alternative Parking Plan may be amended by the Administrator. 
6.  Eligible Alternatives . 
A number of specific parking and access alternatives are described below. The Administrator shall, however, be authorized to consider and approve any alternative to providing off-street parking spaces on the site of the subject development if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed plan shall result in a better situation with respect to surrounding neighborhoods, City-wide traffic circulation, and urban design than would strict compliance with otherwise applicable off-street parking standards. 
a.  Demand-Based Parking . 
When the developer of a non-residential or multi-family development can demonstrate that such development will require fewer parking spaces than required by the standards of this Section, the Administrator may permit a reduction in the number of required parking spaces for the development. Such a reduction in parking spaces shall be justified by the applicant through the development of a parking study prepared by a professional engineer or transportation planner and submitted to the Administrator. Duplex, townhomes and single family developments are not eligible for the demand-based parking option. 
b.  Shared Parking . 
The Administrator may authorize a reduction in the number of required off-street parking spaces for multiple-use developments or for uses that are located near one another and that have different peak parking demands or different operating hours. Shared parking shall be subject to the following standards: 
1)  Location . 
Shared off-street parking spaces shall be located no farther than five hundred (500) feet from the building site. The Administrator may waive this distance limitation, if adequate assurances are offered regarding the usability of the shared lot and the principle use (such as the operation of a van or shuttle service, etc.). 
2)  Zoning Classification . 
Shared-parking areas shall be considered accessory uses of principal uses that the parking spaces are intended to serve. Shared parking areas shall require the same or a more intensive zoning classification than that required for the most intensive of the uses served by the shared parking area; 
3)  Required Study and Analysis . 
The applicant shall submit a shared parking analysis to the Administrator that clearly demonstrates the feasibility of shared parking. The study shall be provided in a form established by the Administrator and made available to the public. It shall address, at a minimum, the size and type of the proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover, and the anticipated peak parking and traffic loads for all uses that shall be sharing off-street parking spaces. The Administrator shall have the authority to require a revised study and analysis should conditions change that may result in a change in site parking conditions; 
4)  Shared Parking Agreement . 
A shared parking plan shall be enforced through written agreement among the owners of record. An attested copy of the agreement shall be submitted to the County Clerk's office for recordation on forms made available in the Department of Development Services. Proof of recordation of the agreement shall be presented to the Administrator prior to issuance of a Building Permit. If a shared parking agreement is revoked by the parties to the agreement, either off-street parking must be provided pursuant to this Section or an Alternative Parking Plan must be approved by the Administrator; and 
5)  Revocation . 
Failure to comply with the shared parking provisions of this Section shall constitute a violation of this UDO and shall specifically be cause for revocation of a Certificate of Occupancy or Building Permit. 
c.  Off-Site Parking . 
The Administrator may permit all or a portion of the required off-street parking spaces to be located on a remote and separate lot from the lot on which the principal use is located, subject to the standards of this Section. 
1)  Location . 
No off-site parking space shall be located more than five hundred (500) feet from the building site. The Administrator may waive this distance limitation if adequate assurances are offered regarding the usability of the off-site lot and the principle use (such as the operation of a van or shuttle service, etc.). 
2)  Zoning Classification . 
Off-site parking areas shall be considered accessory uses of principal uses that the parking spaces are intended to serve. Off-site parking areas shall require the same or a more intensive zoning classification than that required for the use served; 
3)  Off-Site Parking Agreement. 
In the event that an off-site parking area is not under the same ownership as the principal use served, a written agreement among the owners of record shall be required. An attested copy of the agreement between the owners of record shall be submitted to the County Clerk's Office for recordation on forms made available in the office of the Administrator. Proof of recordation of the agreement shall be presented to the Administrator prior to issuance of a Building Permit. If an off-site parking agreement is revoked by the parties to the agreement, either off-street parking must be provided on-site pursuant to this Section or an Alternative Parking Plan must be approved by the Administrator. 
d.  Bicycle Parking . 
The Administrator may authorize reducing the number of required off-street parking spaces by up to five (5) percent for developments or uses that make special provisions to accommodate bicyclists. Examples of accommodations include bicycle lockers, employee shower facilities, dressing areas for employees, or the provision of bicycle parking spaces above the minimum requirements provided that adequate accessibility by motor vehicle and bicycle to the subject site is maintained. For developments that provide bicycle parking spaces above the minimum requirements, the reduction in automobile parking spaces shall be calculated at a one-to-one ratio. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3458 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 11-8-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3522 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. J), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-3663 , Pt. 1(Exh. E, F), 5-28-2015; Ord. No. 2016-3741 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2017-3923 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-24-2017; Ord. No. 2018-3990 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 2-22-2018; Ord. No. 2018-3999 , Pt. 1(Exh. F), 4-12-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4034 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-23-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4040 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-13-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4059 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 11-19-2018) 
Sec. 7.4. - Access Management and Circulation. 
A.  Location of Existing and Planned Multi-Modal Routes. 
Any proposed development shall take into account the location of existing and planned multi-modal routes (i.e., bikeways, pedestrian ways, and transit routes) and provide pedestrian and/or vehicular connections to the route(s) within or adjacent to the development. 
B.  Easements. 
1.  Street Access. 
No use shall be permitted to take direct access to a street except as allowed in this Section. 
a.  Local Streets. 
All residential uses and associated visitor parking areas may take direct access to local streets. Residential visitor parking areas may take direct access to local streets via a driveway, however no backing maneuvers onto local streets shall be allowed. Nonresidential uses shall not take direct access to local streets, provided that any lot located within a nonresidential subdivision or any parcel adjacent to a street within a nonresidential subdivision may take direct access to the local street internal to the subdivision, and provided that any corner lot abutting a local street and an arterial or collector street or freeway may take access to the local street if such access is required by the highway governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
b.  Minor Collector Streets. 
No single-family dwelling, townhouse, or duplex shall take direct access to minor collector streets except when permitted by the Subdivision Regulations. Residential visitor parking areas may take direct access to minor collector streets via a driveway, however no backing maneuvers onto local streets shall be allowed. 
c.  Major Collector Streets. 
No single-family dwelling, townhouse, or duplex shall take direct access to major collector streets. Residential visitor parking areas may take direct access to major collector streets via a driveway, however no backing maneuvers onto local streets shall be allowed. 
d.  Arterial Streets. 
No single-family dwelling, townhouse, or duplex shall take direct access to arterial streets. 
e.  Shared Driveways. 
The Development Engineer may require a shared driveway at the time of platting, development, or redevelopment of the affected lots. 
2.  Cross-Access Easements. 
a.  If a parcel is to be developed for any nonresidential land use, a cross-access easement shall be provided by the property owner to adjoining properties that front on the same street and that are, or may be, developed as nonresidential land uses. 
b.  Cross-access easements shall be situated parallel to the street right-of-way line abutting both parcels. The property owner shall maintain access easements. 
c.  The property owner shall provide appropriate documentation of a good faith effort to extend the access easement through all immediately abutting properties. If such an effort fails, the portion of the easement on the subject site shall be developed and designed to ensure future connection to the neighboring properties. 
d.  Where a cross-access easement is granted, no permanent structures or parking that would interfere with the proposed access shall be permitted in the easement. Some improvements such as medians and parking islands may be constructed within an access easement if it has been demonstrated that adequate circulation and cross access has been accomplished, and that all applicable standards of this UDO have been met. 
e.  The Development Engineer may waive the requirement for an easement of access required above in those cases where unusual topography or site conditions would render such an easement of no useable benefit to adjoining properties. 
f.  The Development Engineer may approve the vacation of an easement of access in those cases where adjoining parcels are subsequently developed with a residential use. 
C.  Driveway Access Location and Design. 
1.  General. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break, or remove any curb or install a driveway along a street except as herein authorized. Openings in the curb may be approved by the Development Engineer for the purposes of drainage. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter, extend, permit, or cause to be constructed, altered, or extended any driveway approach which can be used only as a parking space or area between the curb and private property. 
c.  This Section shall be deemed to be supplemental to other Sections regulating the use of public property, and in case of conflict, this Section shall govern. 
d.  Adequate sight distance shall be provided for a passenger motor vehicle making a left or right turn exiting from a driveway. This determination shall be made by the Development Engineer. 
e.  The specifications and guidelines set forth in this UDO are to be applied to driveways providing access to commercial and multi-family developments and visitor parking areas for single-family and townhouse uses. Single-family and duplex residential driveways are excluded from this policy unless otherwise indicated. 
f.  As determined by the Development Engineer, engineering judgment shall override the required dimensions set forth in this Section if warranted by specific traffic conditions. 
2.  Location of Driveway Access. 
a.  In making a determination as to the location of driveway access, the Development Engineer shall consider: 
1)  The characteristics of the proposed use; 
2)  The existing traffic flow conditions and the future traffic demand anticipated on the development and the adjacent street system; 
3)  The location of the property; 
4)  The size of the property; 
5)  The orientation of structures on the site; 
6)  The number of driveways needed to accommodate anticipated traffic; 
7)  The number and location of driveways on existing adjacent and opposite properties; 
8)  The location and carrying capacity of intersections; 
9)  The proper geometric design of driveways; 
10)  The spacing between opposite and adjacent driveways; 
11)  The internal circulation between driveways; and 
12)  The speed of the adjacent roadway. 
b.  Driveway access to arterials shall not be permitted for parking or loading areas that require backing maneuvers in a public street right-of-way. Driveway access to collector streets for commercial or multi-family developments shall not be permitted for parking or loading areas that require backing maneuvers in a public street right-of-way. 
c.  One (1) curb cut shall be allowed for access to single-family and duplex residential tracts. Alternative access configurations, including circle driveways, may be allowed upon approval by the Development Engineer. 
d.  For corner residential lots, side access driveways shall be subject to rear building setback requirements. 
e.  No cuts through a left-turn reservoir of a median shall be permitted in order to provide for left-turn movements to driveway approaches. 
f.  Driveways in right-turn lane transition areas shall not be permitted. The right-turn lane transition area is defined as the taper and deceleration/acceleration length. 
g.  When a commercial or multi-family development abuts more than one (1) public street, access to each abutting street may be allowed only if the following criteria are met: 
1)  It is demonstrated that such access is required to adequately serve driveway volumes and will not be detrimental or unsafe to traffic operations on public streets. The Development Engineer may require the submittal of a traffic study that demonstrates that such access is required. 
2)  The minimum requirements for corner clearance for commercial or multi-family driveways are met. 
3.  Spacing of Driveway Access. 
a.  Application of the driveway access location and design standards requires identification of the functional classification of the street on which access is requested and then applying the appropriate spacing requirements. The City of College Station streets are classified as follows and defined in Article 11, Definitions: 
1)  Major Arterial; 
2)  Minor Arterial; 
3)  Collector; and 
4)  Local Street. 
b.  Major arterial, minor arterial, and collector streets in the City of College Station are indicated on the Thoroughfare and Transportation Improvement Plan. The functional classification of any street in the City not indicated as an arterial or collector street on this plan shall be determined using the functional street classification defined by the most recent edition of the AASHTO, A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. 
c.  Driveway access spacing shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway pavement to the nearest edge of the roadway of the adjacent or opposite driveway or street as indicated in the illustration below. 

d.  A minimum of one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be required for opposite left driveways for all street classifications. 
e.  If the centerline of an opposite drive is less than fifteen (15) feet from the centerline of the proposed drive, the drives form an intersection and the minimum spacing requirements shall apply for the closest drive. 
f.  Spacing of Adjacent Driveways. 
1)  Adjacent drives shall be located no closer than the spacing requirement in the table below. The Development Engineer or his/her designee may allow adjacent driveway spacing less than the spacing requirement below if it is determined that favorable conditions exist under peak traffic conditions. 
2)  On divided streets with raised or depressed medians, it is the City's policy to align other streets, alleys, private roads, and driveways on either side of the median openings. Therefore, when locating such an intersection, it shall be assumed that this type of intersection will exist at median openings and other intersections between median openings should be spaced accordingly. The Development Engineer may waive this requirement if an existing condition precludes access at a median opening. 
3)  Residential alleys may be allowed on major collectors, minor collectors, and local streets at spacings less than those shown in the table below with the approval of the Development Engineer. 
Adjacent Driveways Street ClassificationSpacing (feet)Major Arterial 350 Minor Arterial 300 Major Collector 235 Minor Collector and Local Street* 175  
      
* This standard does not apply to single-family residential, duplexes, or townhomes. 
g.  Spacing of Opposite Right Driveways. 
1)  Opposite right driveways shall be located no closer than the standard requirements of the table below. The Development Engineer may allow opposite right spacing below the standard spacing requirement if it is determined that favorable conditions exist under peak traffic conditions. 
2)  Additional opposite right spacing over and above that set forth in the table below may be required if it is determined by the Development Engineer that there is insufficient left turn queue storage or weave maneuver area between the opposite right and proposed driveway. This determination shall be made under peak traffic conditions. 
3)  On roadways that include raised or depressed medians prohibiting left-turning movements, this standard shall not apply. 
4)  Residential alleys may be allowed on major collectors, minor collectors, and local streets at spacings less than those shown in the table below with the approval of the Development Engineer. 
Opposite Right Driveways Street ClassificationSpacing (feet)Major Arterial 400 Minor Arterial 350 Major Collector 300 Minor Collector and Local Street* 175  
* This standard does not apply to single-family residential, duplexes, or townhomes. 
4.  Freeway Frontage Road Access and Location Requirements. 
a.  Driveways shall be located in accordance with the most recent version of the Access Management Manual, as administered by the Texas Department of Transportation (TXDOT). 
b.  These guidelines apply to existing and planned interchanges. 
c.  In addition to ramp spacing, driveways on frontage roads under the jurisdiction of the Texas Department of Transportation shall also meet the other requirements of this Section as major arterial streets. 
5.  Corner Clearance. 
a.  No residential driveway approach shall be constructed within the site distance triangle detailed in Section 7.2.C, Visibility at Intersections in all zoning districts. 
b.  At intersections of arterials with channelized right turn lanes with yield control, a corner clearance distance in accordance with those set forth in the illustration below shall be required for the first downstream driveway when adjacent spacing requirements cannot be met due to lack of frontage and all means to acquire shared-access drives or cross-access easements have been exhausted. This distance shall be measured from the channelized median to the nearest edge of the proposed driveway as indicated in the illustration. 

c.  When the requirements of the previous two (2) tables cannot be met due to lack of frontage and all means to acquire shared-access driveways or cross-access easements have been exhausted, no commercial driveway approach may be located closer to the corner than seventy-five (75) feet on collector streets, one hundred (100) feet on minor arterials, and one hundred twenty (120) feet for major arterials. This measurement shall be taken from the intersection of property lines at the corner. When these requirements cannot be met due to lack of frontage, the driveway may be located such that the radius will begin at the farthest property line. 
6.  Shared Access. 
a.  A joint private access easement may be required between adjacent lots fronting on arterial and collector streets in order to minimize the total number of access points along those streets and to facilitate traffic flow between lots. The location and dimensions of said easement shall be determined by the Development Engineer. 
b.  A private cross-access easement may be required across any lot fronting on an arterial or collector street in order to minimize the number of access points and facilitate access between and across individual lots. The location and dimension of said easement shall be determined by the Development Engineer. 
7.  Geometric Design of Driveway Access. 
a.  All driveways shall meet the City of College Station's Standard Specifications for Street Construction. 
b.  Curb cuts for driveways shall not be permitted in the curb return of an intersection. 
c.  The curb return radii for driveways intersecting at right angles with the roadway and without a deceleration lane shall be as follows: 
1)  Curb return radii for residential (single-family, townhouse, and duplex) driveways shall be between three (3) feet and ten (10) feet. Flare type residential driveways must also adhere to these dimensional criteria. 
2)  Curb return radii for commercial and multi-family driveways shall vary between twenty-five (25) feet and thirty (30) feet. When special traffic conditions exist, the Administrator may require larger curb return radii up to fifty (50) feet. 
3)  Curb return radii for driveway types not included in 1) or 2) above shall be determined by the Administrator. 
d.  The maximum width of residential driveway approach, measured at the property line, shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width, while the minimum width shall not be less than twelve (12) feet. 
e.  The maximum width of commercial and multi-family driveway approaches for two-way operation shall not exceed thirty-six (36) feet, except that the Administrator may issue permits for driveway approaches greater than thirty-six (36) feet in width on major streets to handle special traffic conditions. The minimum width of commercial and multi-family driveway approaches for two-way operation shall be not less than twenty-four (24) feet. 
f.  The combination of two (2) driveways for residential circular drives shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
g.  The angle of driveway approach shall be approximately ninety (90) degrees for two-way drives and between forty-five (45) degrees and ninety (90) degrees for one-way drives. 
h.  A minimum driveway throat length shall be required to allow traffic entering the site to be stored on site, avoiding a queue of traffic onto the adjacent roadway causing delays to the through traffic stream. The driveway throat length shall be defined as the distance from the street to the first point of conflict in the driveway. Minimum driveway throat depths are provided in the figure below. For more intense uses (i.e., retail shopping center) a minimum throat depth of one hundred thirty (130) feet will be required. 

i.  Gated residential communities shall use the City of College Station Subdivision Regulations Section 8.3.V.3, Geometric Design Guidelines as a guideline for throat depth and entry designs. 
j.  For the benefit of traffic safety and flow on collector and arterial streets, access points may be required to be designed to prohibit certain types of turning movements. Driveways not meeting the standard opposite and adjacent spacing guidelines may be designed for limited access by the addition of a median to the driveway. 
k.  For the benefit of traffic safety and flow on collector and arterial streets, auxiliary lanes may be required at driveways where high turning volumes are expected. 
l.  A right-turn deceleration lane with storage length plus taper may be required for any access with a projected peak hour right-turn ingress turning volume greater than fifty (50) vehicles per hour (vph). If the posted speed is greater than forty (40) mph, a right-turn deceleration lane and taper may be required for any access with a projected peak hour ingress turning volume greater than twenty-five (25) vph. 
m.  Driveways shall be constructed as to avoid altering the drainage patterns of the street and adjoining property. 
n.  Driveways shall be constructed to provide a crossing path within the right-of-way that meets the minimum Texas Accessibility Standards. 
o.  A right-turn acceleration lane with taper may be required for any access with a projected peak hour right-turning volume greater than fifty (50) vph when the posted speed on the roadway is greater than forty (40) mph. Design of right-turn deceleration lanes shall be in accordance with the AASHTO Green Book on auxiliary lanes. 
p.  The spacing requirements for driveways not meeting the specifications in Section 7.4.C.3, Spacing of Driveways, may be lessened or waived if auxiliary lanes are used. 
q.  Access points on arterial and collector streets may be required to be signalized in order to provide safe and efficient traffic flow. A development may be responsible for all or part of any right-of-way dedication, design, hardware, or construction costs of a traffic signal if it is determined that the signal is necessitated by the traffic generated from the development. The procedures for signal installation and the percent of financial participation required of the development in the installation of the signal shall be in accordance with criteria set forth in the City's Traffic Signal Policy. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3522 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 9-12-2013) 
Sec. 7.5. - Signs. 
A.  Purpose. 
The purpose of this Section is to establish clear and unambiguous regulations pertaining to signs in the City of College Station and to promote an attractive community, foster traffic safety, and enhance the effective communication and exchange of ideas and commercial information. 
B.  Applicability. 
The City Council recognizes that signs are necessary for visual communication for public convenience, and that businesses and other activities have the right to identify themselves by using signs that are incidental to the use on the premises where the signs are located. The Council herein seeks to provide a reasonable balance between the right of a person to identify his or her business or activity, and the rights of the public to be protected against visual discord and safety hazards that result from the unrestricted proliferation, location, and construction of signs. This Section will insure that signs are compatible with adjacent land uses and with the total visual environment of the community, in accordance with the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
1.  The City Council finds that the rights of residents of this City to fully exercise their rights of free speech by the use of signs containing non-commercial messages are subject to minimum regulation regarding structural safety and setbacks for purposes of traffic protection. The City Council seeks herein to provide for the reasonably prompt removal and disposal of such signs after they have served their purpose, and yet to avoid any interference with First Amendment freedoms, especially as to persons who are of limited financial means. 
2.  The City Council finds that instances may occur in the application of this Section where strict enforcement would deprive a person of the reasonable use of a sign, or the reasonable utilization of a sign in connection with other related property rights, and herein provides for such persons to have the right to seek variances from the requirements of this UDO for good cause. The City Council finds that it is imperative that enforcement officials apply this Section as it is written, in the interest of equality and fair and impartial application to all persons, and that the procedures to appeal a denial of a sign permit to the ZBA shall remain the sole administrative means to obtain any exception to the terms hereof. 
3.  The regulations of this Section shall apply for developments within the zoning districts listed in Section 12-7.5.C Summary of Permitted Signs. These regulations only apply to special districts within the City of College Station so far as is stated in the following Sections of this UDO: 
a.  Wolf Pen Creek District (WPC), Section 12-5.8.A; 
b.  Northgate Districts (NG-1, NG-2, NG-3), Section 12-5.8.B; and 
c.  Corridor Overlay District (OV), Section 12-5.10.A. 
C.  Summary of Permitted Signs. 
The following signs are permitted in the relevant zoning districts of the City: 
    Click here to access a PDF version of the Summary of Permitted Signs table. 
R WE E WRS R-1B GS D T MF MU R-4 R-6 MHP O SC WC GC CI C-3 BP BPI R&D M-1 M-2 Apartment/Condominium/Manufactured Home Park Identification Signs X **** X X X Area Identification/Subdivision Signs X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Attached Signs*** X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Campus Wayfinding Signs X X X X X X X X X X Commercial Banners*** X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Development Signs X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Directional Traffic Control Signs X X X X X X X X X X X X Freestanding Signs*** * ** X X X X Hanging Signs X Home Occupation Signs X X X X X X X X X X X X X Low Profile Signs*** X X X X X X X X X X X X Non-Commercial Signs X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Projection Signs X X Real Estate, Finance, and Construction Signs X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X Roof Signs X X X X  
* One (1) Freestanding Sign shall be allowed in the O Office zone only when the premises has a minimum of two (2) acres. 
** Freestanding Signs are permitted for building plots with freeway frontage only. See 7.5.N "Freestanding Commercial Signs" for additional standards. 
*** Except as provided for in Section 7.5.Y, Signs for Permitted Non-residential Uses in Residential or Agricultural Districts. 
**** Apartment signage is permitted in the MU Mixed-Use district as attached signs only. 
D.  Prohibited Signs. 
The following signs shall be prohibited in the City of College Station: 
1.  Portable and trailer signs, and temporary freestanding signs. 
2.  Signs painted on rooftops. 
3.  Inflated signs, pennants, wind driven devises (excluding flags), tethered balloons, and/or any gas filled objects for advertisement, decoration, or otherwise, except as permitted in Section 7.5.P, Grand Opening Signs and Section 7.5.V, Special Event Signs. 
4.  Vehicle signs except as permitted in Section 7.5.W, Vehicle Signs. 
5.  Flags containing copy or logo, excluding the flags of any country, state, city, or school, are prohibited in residential zones and on any residentially-developed property (except when flags are used as subdivision signs). 
6.  Signs and displays with flashing, blinking, or traveling lights, or erratic or other moving parts, including electronic message boards that change more than once per fifteen (15) minutes, either internal or external to the premise, and oriented and visible to vehicular traffic, provided that time and temperature signs are permissible if the maximum area and setback requirements of this Section are met and if the commercial information or content of such signs are restricted to no more than eight (8) square feet. 
7.  Signs containing manual change copy which are greater than thirty (30) percent of the allowable sign area. 
8.  Any signs that are intended to or designed to resemble traffic signs or signals and bear such words as "stop", "slow", "caution", "danger", "warning", or other words, and that are erected for purposes other than actual traffic control or warning to the public. 
9.  Any sign located within the site triangle in any district as stated in Section 7.2.C, Visibility at Intersections in all Districts. This does not include traffic control or directional signs. 
10.  Any sign that emits sound, odor, or visible matter. 
11.  Off-premises signs, including commercial and non-commercial billboards. 
E.  Exempt Signs. 
The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this UDO: 
1.  Signs that are not easily identified from beyond the boundaries of the lot or parcel on which they are located or from any public thoroughfare or traveled right-of-way, as determined by the Administrator. Such signs are not exempt from the safety regulations contained herein and in City Building and Electrical Codes; 
2.  Official notices posted by government officials in the performance of their duties: government signs controlling traffic, regulating public conduct, identifying streets, or warning of danger. Bulletin boards or identification signs accessory to government buildings or other buildings are subject to the provisions of this UDO; 
3.  Signs related to a Primary & Secondary Educational Facility, except that such signs shall adhere to the limitations of Section 7.5.D Prohibited Signs; 
4.  Temporary signs erected by private property owners for the purpose of warning of a dangerous defect, condition, or other hazard to the public; 
5.  Non-commercial signs on private property or works of art that in no way identify or advertise a product or business, or by their location and placement impede traffic safety, except as stated in Section 7.5.S, Non-Commercial and Political Signs; 
6.  Temporary decorations or displays, if they are clearly incidental to and are customarily and commonly associated with any national, local, or religious celebration; 
7.  Temporary or permanent signs erected by public utilities or construction companies to warn of the location of pipelines, electrical conduits, or other dangers or conditions in public rights-of-way; 
8.  Non-Commercial Signs carried by a person and not set or affixed to the ground, that in no way identify or advertise a product or business, or by their location and placement impede traffic safety; 
9.  Commercial Signs carried by a person and not set on or affixed to the ground, provided that the sign is temporary, on-premises, and not used by the person on the premises for more than three (3) consecutive days, more than four (4) times per calendar year; 
10.  Outdoor advertising display signs for sponsors of charitable events held on public properties. These signs may be displayed for the duration of the event or not more than three (3) days with approval of the City Manager; 
11.  Flags used as political symbols; and 
12.  Special District Identification Signs, as defined by Section 11.2 Defined Terms, that in no way advertise a product or a business, or by their location and placement impede traffic safety. Special District Identification Signs must be approved by the appropriate Board or Committee. 
13.  On-premises and/or off-premises signs where there has been a resolution adopted by the City of College Station or an executed contract with the City of College Station and the display of the signs are for designated locations, a specified time period, and; 
a.  Promotes a positive image of the City of College Station for the attraction of business or tourism; 
b.  Depict an accomplishment of an individual or group; or 
c.  Creates a positive community spirit. 
14.  Temporary signs erected for a neighborhood event sponsored by a neighborhood group that is registered with the City of College Station, provided that the signage is: 
a.  Located within the perimeter of the neighborhood; 
b.  Provides the name of the association sponsoring the event on the sign; 
c.  In good repair; 
d.  Allowed up to fourteen (14) days prior to the event; and 
e.  Removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the event. 
15.  Home Tour Event signs, as defined by Section 11.2 Defined Terms, with a limit of two (2) events per calendar year. Such signage shall: 
a.  Be in good repair; 
b.  Display the name of the group sponsoring the event (if applicable); 
c.  Be allowed up to ten (10) consecutive days per event; 
d.  Be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of the event; 
e.  Comply with the following if located within a right-of-way: 
1.  Located outside the visibility triangle of intersections as defined in Section 7.2.C Visibility at Intersections in all Districts. 
2.  Permitted by the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation if located on any state highway or roadway. 
3.  Be constructed of durable material and no sign shall be greater in size than three (3) feet by three (3) feet. 
Per Ordinance No. 3280 (September 9, 2010) 
F.  Sign Standards. 
The following table summarizes the sign standards for the City of College Station: 
Sign Type Maximum
Area (s.f.)** Maximum
Height (ft.) Setback
From
ROW (ft.) Number Allowed Apartment/Condominium/Manufactured Home Park Identification Signs 100 10 10 1/frontage Area Identification Signs 16 4 10 1/10-50 acre subdivision or phase Attached Signs Varies, see Section 7.5.I below Not to exceed one (1) foot from top of wall, marquee, or parapet to which it is attached -- Any number allowed if within the total allowed square footage of attached signs Campus Wayfinding signs 30 6 -- See Section 7.5 BB below Commercial Banners 36 No to exceed the top of structure to which it is attached 10 1/premises Development Signs 15 10 1/premises Residential/Collector Street 35 Arterial Street 65 Freeway (As designated on Thoroughfare Plan) 200 Directional Traffic Control Signs 3 4 4 1/curb cut Freestanding Signs Varies, see 7.5.N below 1/building plot where lot exceeds 75 feet of frontage Hanging Signs 4 -- -- 1/building entrance Home Occupation Signs 2 Not to exceed top of wall to which it is attached -- 1/dwelling unit Low Profile Signs 60 4 10 See 7.5 R "Low Profile Signs" below/*** Low Profile Signs (In lieu of permitted Freestanding Sign) 60 4 10 1/150 feet of frontage * Projection Signs Varies, see 7.5.U below Not to exceed one (1) foot from top of wall, marquee, or parapet to which it is attached -- 1/frontage Real Estate, Finance, and Construction Signs 1/frontage(Real Estate) Up to 150-foot frontage 16 8 10 1/property (Finance) Greater than 150-foot frontage 32 8 10 3/property (Construction) Roof Signs Determined by frontage. Same as freestanding Max. 100 s.f. 10 feet above structural roof -- 1/building plot in place of a freestanding sign Subdivision Signs 150 15 10 1/primary subdivision entrance. Not to exceed 2 signs.  
* Except as provided for in Section 7.5.N.10, Freestanding Commercial Signs. 
** The area of a sign is the area enclosed by the minimum imaginary rectangle or vertical and horizontal lines that fully contains all extremities (as shown in the illustration below), exclusive of supports. 
*** In SC Suburban Commercial, WC Wellborn Commercial, BP Business Park, and BPI Business Park Industrial, one (1) low-profile sign per structure is permitted. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3348 (May 26, 2011), Ordinance No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. K) (Dec. 18, 2014, and Ordinance No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), (July 28, 2016)) 

G.  Area Identification and Subdivision Signs. 
1.  Area Identification Signs shall be permitted upon private property in any zone to identify multiple-lot subdivisions of ten (10) to fifty (50) acres in size and subject to the requirements set forth in Section 7.5.F, Sign Standards above. Area Identification Signs may also be used within a large subdivision to identify distinct areas within that subdivision, subject to the requirements in Section 7.5.F, Sign Standards above. 
2.  Subdivision Signs shall be permitted upon private property in any zone to identify subdivisions of greater than fifty (50) acres, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 7.5.F, Sign Standards above. 
3.  Both Area Identification and Subdivision Signs must be located on the premises as identified by a preliminary or master preliminary plat of the subdivision. Subdivision Signs will be permitted only at major intersections on the perimeter of the subdivision (intersection of two (2) collector or larger streets). At each intersection either one (1) or two (2) Subdivision Signs may be permitted so long as the total area of the signs does not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet. Flags may be utilized in place of a Subdivision Identification Sign, but the overall height shall not exceed twenty (20) feet and twenty-five (25) square feet in area in a residential zone and thirty-five (35) feet in height and one hundred (100) square feet in area in industrial or commercial districts. 
4.  Subdivision markers of no more than one (1) square foot in area and used in conjunction with a subdivision or area identification sign are permitted attached to architectural elements within the subdivision. 
5.  Indirect lighting is permissible but no optical effects, moving parts, or alternating, erratic, or flashing lights shall be permitted. Landscaping valued at two hundred fifty (250) points shall be installed around each Subdivision Sign. Adequate arrangements for permanent maintenance of all signs and any landscaping in conjunction with such signs shall be made, which may be through an owners association if one (1) exists or is created for this purpose. 
6.  All signs shall be setback as shown in Section 7.5.F, Sign Standards above except in areas where a Private Improvement in Public Right-of-Way permit has been issued. 
H.  Apartment/Condominium/Manufactured Home Park Identification Signs. 
1.  One (1) Apartment/Condominium/Manufactured Home Park Identification Sign may be located at a primary entrance on each frontage to a public road. 
2.  The maximum area allowed for each frontage may be divided among two (2) signs if those signs are single sided and mounted at a single entrance. 
3.  An Apartment/Condominium/Manufactured Home Park Identification Sign may be either an attached sign or a freestanding monument sign. It shall be placed upon the private property of a particular multi-family project in the appropriate zone as established in Section 7.5.C, Summary of Permitted Signs subject to the requirements set forth in Section 7.5.F, Sign Standards above. 
4.  The Apartment/Condominium/Manufactured Home Park Identification Sign shall list the name and may list the facilities available and have leasing or sales information incorporated as a part of the sign. 
5.  An apartment or condominium project must have a minimum of twenty-four (24) dwelling units to qualify for an identification sign. 
6.  Indirect lighting is permissible, but no optical effects, moving parts, or alternating, erratic, or flashing lights or devices shall be permitted. 
7.  Any manufactured home parks existing at the time of this UDO that are nonconforming may still utilize an identification sign meeting the provisions of this Section and Section 7.5.F, Sign Standards above. 
I.  Attached Signs. 
1.  Attached Signs are commercial signs under this Section. 
2.  Attached Signs on any commercial building or tenant lease space shall not exceed a total of two and one-half (2.5) square feet per linear foot of all public entry faades, with a maximum of five hundred (500) square feet of attached signage allowed for any one (1) tenant. Multi-story businesses will be allowed one hundred (100) square feet of additional attached signage. 
3.  The division of allowable building signage amongst building tenants shall be the sole responsibility of the owner or property manager, and not the City of College Station. 
4.  Signs attached to features such as gasoline pumps, automatic teller machines, mail/package drop boxes, or similar on-site features, if identifiable from the right-of-way, as determined by the Administrator, shall count as part of the allowable sign area of the attached signs for the site. Information contained on such features pertaining to federal and state requirements, and operation/safety instructions are not counted. All other signage on such features shall count towards the allowable attached sign area. 
5.  Architectural elements, which are not part of the sign or logo and in no way identify the specific business tenant, shall not be considered attached signage. 
6.  An attached sign: 
a.  Shall advertise only the name of, uses of, or goods or services available within the building or tenant lease space to which the sign is attached; 
b.  Shall be parallel to the face of the building; 
c.  Shall not be cantilevered away from the structure; 
d.  Shall not extend more than one (1) foot from any exterior building face, mansard, awning, or canopy; 
e.  Shall not obstruct any window, door, stairway, or other opening intended for ingress or for needed ventilation or light; and 
f.  Shall not be attached to any tree or public utility pole. 
7.  Attached Signs may be mounted to site lighting poles located on private property and may be constructed of cloth, canvas, or other flexible material provided such signage is maintained in good condition and complies with the following restrictions: 
a.  No part of any sign attached to a light pole will be allowed to overhang or encroach into any portion of the public right-of-way 
b.  Light pole signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and shall have a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance from the grade below; 
c.  Light pole signs shall only be attached to one (1) side of a light pole; 
d.  Light pole signs shall not project more than three (3) feet from the edge of the light pole; and 
e.  Light pole signs constructed of cloth, canvas, or other flexible material shall be secured on a minimum of two (2) opposing sides to prevent wind-driven movement. 
J.  Commercial Banners. 
1.  A Commercial Banner: 
a.  Shall be in good repair; 
b.  Shall have the permit number conspicuously posted in the lower right hand corner of the banner; 
c.  Shall be allowed in addition to the signage provided for in Section 7.5.I, Attached Signage; 
d.  Shall advertise only the name of, uses of, or goods or services available within the building or tenant lease space to which the sign is attached; 
e.  Shall be mounted parallel to the face of a building or permanent structure; 
f.  Shall not be located within public road right-of-way of the State of Texas or the City of College Station; 
g.  Shall not obstruct any window, door, stairway, or other opening intended for ingress or for needed ventilation or light; and 
h.  Except for J.2. below, shall be allowed for a maximum fourteen-day period per permit. 
2.  An annual banner permit may be allowed for places of worship meeting in public spaces on a temporary basis. Banners allowed by this Section shall only be displayed on the day of the worship service. 
3.  The applicant shall pay an application fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) upon submission of a banner permit application to the City. The application fee is waived for a non-profit association or organization. This fee shall not apply to banners associated with special events as provided for in Section 7.5.V, Special Event Signs. 
K.  Development Sign. 
1.  A Development Sign may be placed only on private property subject to the requirements in Section 7.5.F, Sign Standards above. 
2.  A Development Sign for a building project shall be removed if the project has not received a Building Permit at the end of twelve (12) months. The Administrator may renew the sign permit for one (1) additional twelve-month period upon request. Once a Building Permit for the project is received, the sign may stay in place until seventy-five (75) percent of the project is leased or a permanent sign is installed, whichever comes first. 
3.  A Development Sign for a proposed subdivision shall be removed if a Preliminary or Final Plat has not been approved by the end of twelve (12) months. The Administrator may renew the Sign Permit for one (1) additional twelve-month period upon request. Once a plat has been approved, the Sign Permit is valid as long as a Preliminary Plat is in effect, or in the absence of a valid Preliminary Plat, for twenty-four (24) months from the date of approval of a Final Plat. 
L.  Directional Traffic Control Sign. 
1.  Directional Traffic Control Signs may be utilized as traffic control devices in off-street parking areas subject to the requirements set forth in Section 7.5.F, Sign Standards above. 
2.  For multiple lots sharing an access easement to public right-of-way, there shall be only one (1) directional sign located at the curb cut. 
3.  Logo or copy shall be less than fifty (50) percent of the sign area. 
4.  No Directional Traffic Control Sign shall be permitted within or upon the right-of-way of any public street unless its construction, design, and location have been approved by the City Traffic Engineer. 
M.  Flags. 
1.  One (1) freestanding corporate flag per premise, not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height or one hundred (100) square feet in area, is allowed in multi-family, commercial, and industrial districts. 
2.  Flags used solely for decoration and not containing any copy or logo and located only in multi-family, commercial, and industrial districts or developments are allowed without a permit. In multi-family developments, such flags will be restricted to sixteen (16) square feet in area. In all permitted zoning districts such flags will be restricted to thirty (30) feet in height, and the number shall be restricted to no more than six (6) flags per building plot. 
3.  Flags containing commercial copy or logo, excluding the flags of any country, state, city, school, or church are prohibited in residential zones and on any residentially developed property (except when flags are used as Subdivision Signs). 
N.  Freestanding Commercial Signs. 
1.  Any development with over seventy-five (75) linear feet of frontage will be allowed one (1) Freestanding Commercial Sign. All Freestanding Commercial Signs shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Allowable Area. 
Allowable Area For Freestanding Signs Frontage (Feet) Maximum Area (s.f.) 0-75 Low Profile only 76-100 50 101-150 75 151-200 100 201-250 125 251-300 150 301-350 175 351-400 200 401-450 225 451-500 250 501-550 275 551-600+ 300  
b.  Area. 
For the purposes of this Section, area shall be considered the area in square feet of a single-face sign, or one (1) side of a double-face sign, or half the sides of a multi-face sign. 
c.  Frontage. 
1.  For the purposes of this Section, frontage shall be considered the number of feet fronting on a public street to which a sign is oriented; and 
2.  On corner lots, the frontage street shall be the greater street as classified on the thoroughfare plan. Where the two (2) streets are classified the same, the applicant may choose the frontage street. 
d.  Allowable Height. 
1.  The allowable height of a Freestanding Commercial Sign is determined by measuring the distance from the closest point of the sign to the curb or pavement edge and dividing this distance by two (2). No Freestanding Commercial Sign shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height; 
2.  For the purposes of this Section, height of a sign shall be measured from the elevation of the curb or pavement edge; 
3.  For the purposes of this Section, the distance from curb shall be measured in feet from the back of curb or pavement edge to the nearest part of the sign; and 
4.  For properties with Freeway frontage in SC Suburban Commercial districts, the maximum height of the sign may not exceed the eave height of the structure to which it most closely relates. Sign must be adjacent to and orient to the Freeway. 
2.  Freestanding Commercial Signs are allowed only on developed commercial property established in the appropriate zones as set forth in Section 7.5.C, Summary of Permitted Signs. One (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed in the O zone only when the premises has a minimum of two (2) acres, subject to the requirements set forth in Section 7.5.F, Sign Standards. One (1) Low Profile Sign shall be allowed in the O zone when the premises has less than two (2) acres subject to the requirements set forth in Section 7.5.F, Sign Standards, above. 
3.  A premises with more than one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage shall be allowed to use one (1) Freestanding Commercial Sign or any number of Low Profile Signs as long as there is a minimum separation between signs of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
In lieu of one (1) Low Profile Sign every one hundred fifty (150) feet, hospital uses may have one (1) low profile sign located at each driveway. 
4.  Premises with less than seventy-five (75) feet of frontage may be combined in order to utilize signage corresponding to the resulting frontage as described in the preceding two (2) paragraphs. 
5.  No more than one (1) Freestanding Commercial Sign shall be allowed on any premises except when the site meets one (1) of the following sets of criteria: 
a.  The building plot, as recognized on an approved Plat or Site Plan, must be twenty-five (25) acres or more in area with at least one thousand (1,000) feet of continuous unsubdivided frontage on any major arterial street or higher (as classified on the Thoroughfare Plan) toward which one (1) additional Freestanding Commercial Sign may be displayed (see diagram below); or 

b.  The Building plot, as recognized on an approved Plat or Site Plan, must be fifteen (15) acres or more in area with at least six hundred (600) feet of continuous unsubdivided frontage on any major arterial street or higher (as classified on the Thoroughfare Plan) and the site must have additional frontage on a street classified as a minor arterial or greater on the Thoroughfare Plan, toward which the additional Freestanding Commercial Sign may be displayed. 

6.  Any sign where two (2) or more panels have separate supports extending to them shall be considered to be more than one (1) Freestanding Commercial Sign, even where only one (1) main support extends to the ground. 
7.  Sites with limited or no street frontage, due to a proliferation of pad sites, that are not contained within the building plot, as defined by the Administrator, and are fronting along a street classified as a collector or greater on the Thoroughfare Plan, will be allowed the area of the sign to be less than or equal to the square of one-sixth of the distance from the closest portion of the sign to the curb or pavement edge, with the maximum area not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet. 
8.  Any site defined as a single building plot, and containing one (1) or more pad sites, shall be permitted to erect a Freestanding Commercial Sign in accordance with Section 7.5.N, Freestanding Commercial Signs, and to the standards of Section 7.5.N.1.a, Allowable Area, with the maximum area not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet. In addition, each pad site will be permitted one (1) Low Profile Sign per pad site according to the restrictions of 7.5.F, Sign Standards. 
O.  Fuel Price Signs. 
Facilities with fuel sales will be allowed one (1) additional sign for the purposes of fuel pricing, either freestanding or attached, per premises. 
1.  The area of the fuel price sign shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. 
2.  Fuel pricing may be incorporated into the allowable square footage of a Freestanding Commercial Sign or Attached Sign. 
3.  This sign shall follow the setback requirements for a Freestanding Commercial Sign and shall not be located within the right-of-way. 
P.  Grand Opening Signs. 
1.  Flags, commercial banners, and balloons, which advertise a business's grand opening, may be displayed for one (1) consecutive fourteen-day period, selected by the business owner, within sixty (60) days of the granting of the initial Certificate of Occupancy, a change in the use, or of a change in the name of the business. A permit is required. 
2.  A Commercial Banner: 
a.  Shall advertise only the name of, uses of, or goods or services available within the building, or tenant lease space, to which the sign is attached; 
b.  Shall be parallel to the face of the building; 
c.  Shall not be cantilevered away from the structure; 
d.  Shall not extend more than one (1) foot from any exterior building face, mansard, awning, or canopy; 
e.  Shall not obstruct any window, door, stairway, or other opening intended for ingress or for needed ventilation or light; and 
f.  Shall not be attached to any tree, fence, or public utility pole. 
Q.  Hanging Signs . 
a)  Hanging signs shall be suspended from canopies or awnings and located in front of building entrances, perpendicular to the faade. 
b)  A maximum of one (1) hanging sign per building entrance is allowed. 
c)  The hanging sign shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size and shall have a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance from the walkway grade, four (4) inches of clearance from the building face, and eight (8) inches of clearance from the edge of the canopy/awning. 
d)  Hanging signs located in or over the public right-of-way shall require a Private Improvement in the Public Right-of-Way agreement (PIP) in addition to the necessary Building Permit. 
R.  Home Occupation Sign . 
1.  A person having a legal home occupation may have one (1) sign on the building or porch of a residence. 
2.  The sign may contain only the name and occupation of the resident. 
3.  It shall be attached directly to the face of the building or porch. 
4.  It shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area, shall not be illuminated in any way, and shall not project more that twelve (12) inches beyond the building. 
5.  No display of merchandise or other forms of commercial communication shall be allowed within a residential area, unless same are in existence prior to the adoption of the UDO in connection with a use that is presently a lawful nonconforming use within the district. 
6.  Such a nonconforming sign may be maintained until the nonconforming use of the building ceases, subject to the requirements for maintenance herein. Discontinuance of the use of such a sign for more than three (3) months shall prevent future use, even if the nonconforming use of the premises is continuous. 
S.  Low Profile Signs. 
In addition to meeting the other requirements of this Section, Low Profile Signs are subject to the following: 
1.  A premises with less than seventy-five (75) feet of street frontage shall be allowed to use one (1) Low Profile Sign in lieu of a Freestanding Commercial Sign; 
2.  Each single building plot containing one (1) or more pad sites, shall be permitted one (1) Low Profile Sign per pad site according to the restrictions of 7.5.F, Sign Standards; and 
3.  In SC Suburban Commercial, WC Wellborn Commercial, BP Business Park, and BPI Business Park Industrial, one (1) Low Profile Sign per structure is permitted. 
T.  Non-Commercial and Political Signs. 
This Section does not regulate the size, content, or location of non-commercial signs except as follows: 
1.  No commercial message shall be shown on any non-commercial sign. 
2.  No non-commercial sign: 
a.  May be greater than fifty (50) square feet in size; 
b.  May be located within public road right-of-way of the State of Texas or the City of College Station; 
c.  May be located off the premises of the property owner who is displaying the sign; and 
d.  May be located within any sight distance triangle as defined in Section 7.2.C, Visibility at Intersections in All Districts, or where determined by the Administrator as a location that would hinder intersection visibility. This provision is necessary to avoid clutter, proliferation, and dangerous distraction to drivers caused by close proximity of such signs to automobile traffic, to avoid damage to automobiles which may leave the paved surface intentionally or by accident, and to avoid the necessity for pedestrians to step into the roadway to bypass such signs. No regulatory alternative exists to accomplish this police power obligation. 
3.  In the event that any non-commercial sign is located in a public right-of-way of the State or City, the City shall remove it. 
4.  All non-commercial signs addressing a particular event are allowed up to ninety (90) days prior to the event and shall be removed within ten (10) days after. 
U.  Projection Signs . 

Projection signs will be allowed in the MU Mixed-Use District with the following restrictions: 
1)  One (1) projection sign per frontage along a public right-of-way will be allowed except where otherwise stated in this Section. 
2)  The total square footage of all projection signs used will be applied toward the total allowable area for attached signage. 
3)  The division and placement of allowable building signage amongst building tenants shall be the sole responsibility of the owner or property manager, and not the City of College Station. 
4)  Projection signs shall be mounted perpendicular to buildings. 
5)  Internally lit plastic signs will not be permitted. 
6)  Projection signs may utilize fabric or other flexible material provided that they remain in good condition at all times. 
7)  Projection signs shall have a minimum of eight (8) feet of clearance from the walkway grade and four (4) inches of clearance from the building face. Excluding the four-inch minimum clearance requirement, no part of a projection sign shall project more than three (3) feet from the building face. 
8)  Projection signs shall not extend above the faade of the building to which it is attached. 
9)  Buildings with one (1) story may have a sign that shall not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in size. For each additional building story, an additional eight (8) square feet of signage is allowed, up to a maximum of fifty (50) square feet per sign. 
10)  Projection signs located in rover the public right-of-way shall require a Private Improvement in the Public Right-of-Way agreement (PIP) in addition to the necessary Building Permit. 
V.  Real Estate/Finance/Construction Signs. 
1.  One (1) Real Estate Sign not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in total area (exclusive of stakes and posts) may be erected at any time while a property is offered for sale or lease to the public. Properties with a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet of frontage shall be allowed one (1) Real Estate Sign not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in total area. Properties with a minimum of two (2) acres and frontage on two (2) streets shall be allowed one (1) real estate sign on each frontage street with the area of the sign to be determined by the amount of frontage as stated above. 
2.  One (1) Finance Sign and three (3) Construction Signs (for a total of four (4) signs), not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in total area each (exclusive of stakes and posts) may be erected once a building permit has been issued on a property. Properties with a minimum of ten (10) acres and one thousand (1,000) feet of frontage shall be allowed one (1) Finance Sign and three (3) Construction Signs not exceeding thirty-two (32) square feet in total area each. 
3.  Real Estate, Finance, and Construction Signs may be either attached or freestanding and only those visible from the street are limited in number. 
4.  All such signs shall be maintained by the persons in control of the premises so as to remain erect and in good repair. Such signs shall be removed by the property owner or other person in control of the premises if they are damaged, broken, or incapable of remaining erect. 
5.  Such signs must be removed by the owner or person in control of the premises when either the property has sold or been leased and/or when performance under the construction contract or subcontract (in the case of Construction Signs) has been completed. In all cases, Financing and Construction Signs shall be removed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. 
W.  Roof Signs. 
1.  Signs mounted to the structural roof shall be regulated as Freestanding Commercial Signs. 
2.  Painted or applied roof signs are prohibited. 
X.  Special Event Signs. 
1.  Signs, including commercial banners and balloons, advertising or announcing a Special Event, as defined in Section 4-4.B of the Code of Ordinances, are permitted as a part of the Special Event License and shall be limited to the property holding the event. 
2.  The Special Event Signage is allowed up to fourteen (14) days prior to the event and must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of the event. 
Y.  Vehicle Signs. 
1.  Signs that are displayed on motor vehicles that are being operated or stored in the normal course of a business, such as signs indicating the name or the type of business, excluding all banners, that are located on moving vans, delivery trucks, trailers or other commercial vehicles are permitted; but only if the primary purpose of such vehicles is not for the display of the signs thereon, and only if such vehicles are parked or stored in areas appropriate to their use as commercial or delivery vehicles, such as service areas or locations close to the business building away from public traffic areas. 
2.  Signs or advertisements permanently attached to non-commercial vehicles, excluding all banners, are permitted. 
Z.  Signs for Conditional Uses. 
1.  Signs for Conditional Uses shall comply with the regulations for the zoning district in which the Conditional Use is permitted. 
2.  Signs for Conditional Uses in residential or rural zoning districts shall comply with Section 7.5.F, Sign Standards, "Low Profile Signs." 
AA.  Signs for Permitted Non-residential Uses in Residential or Rural Districts. 
1.  Signs for permitted non-residential uses in residential or rural zoning districts shall comply with Section 7.5.F, Sign Standards, "Low Profile Signs." 
2.  Signs for Places of Worship with frontage on a street classified as Freeway/Expressway on the Thoroughfare Plan are allowed one (1) "Freestanding Sign" in accordance with Section 7.5.N, "Freestanding Commercial Signs" or "Low Profile Signs" in accordance with Section 7.5.F, Sign Standards, "Low Profile Signs." The "Freestanding Sign" must be adjacent to and orient to the Freeway/Expressway. 
3.  Signs for Places of Worship and Government Facilities in residential or rural zoning districts may utilize signage in accordance with Section 7.5.I, Sign Standards, "Attached Signs" and Section 7.5.J, "Commercial Banners." 
BB.  Abandoned, Damaged, or Unsafe Signs. 
1.  The provisions of this Section shall apply when in conflict with the provisions of the Building Code; but where the provisions of both ordinances are consistent, the enforcement of either shall be permissible and remedies or penalties cumulative. 
2.  Nonconforming signs that have become deteriorated or damaged to an extent that the cost of the reconstruction or restoration of such signs is in excess of fifty (50) percent of its replacement value exclusive of foundations, will be required to be removed or brought into full compliance with the current sign regulations. 
3.  All abandoned signs and their supports shall be removed within sixty (60) days from the date of abandonment. All damaged signs shall be repaired or removed within sixty (60) days. The Administrator shall have authority to grant a thirty-day time extension where he determines there is a reasonable necessity for same. 
4.  Discontinuance of use or removal of any nonconforming sign or any sign in connection with a nonconforming use shall create a presumption of intent to abandon said sign. A nonconforming sign that is damaged and not repaired within sixty (60) days shall be presumed to be abandoned. 
5.  When a building is demolished, the associated signs and sign structures shall also be removed. 
CC.  Signs in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. 
All off-premise and portable signs shall be prohibited within the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction of the City of College Station. 
DD.  Campus Wayfinding Signs. 
1.  A campus wayfinding sign: 
a.  May be utilized as part of a Planned Development District (PDD) or unified development that is at least twenty (20) acres in size, contains multiple buildings and that may include multiple building plots; 
b.  A maximum of one (1) campus wayfinding sign shall be allowed per intersection of two (2) primary circulation drive aisles, when parking is not provided along the drive aisle; or intersection of a primary circulation drive aisle and public way, when parking is not provided along the drive aisle and public way; 
c.  All signs shall be internal to the development and shall not be located along a public right-of-way or at the intersection of a primary circulation aisle or public way and right-of-way. 
d.  Shall be limited in height to no greater than six (6) feet, measured from the elevation of the curb or pavement edge, with a maximum total sign area of thirty (30) square feet; 
e.  Shall not be located within a site visibility triangle. 
f.  All campus wayfinding signs shall be submitted as part of a sign package for the development; and, 
g.  Shall utilize a common design or theme throughout the development and contain no commercial logo or graphics. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3348 (May 26, 2011) 
EE.  Electronic Reader Boards. 
In addition to meeting the other requirements of this Section, Electronic Reader Boards (ERB) are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The sign display (message) change shall be instantaneous; scrolling, fading, or animation between messages is prohibited; 
2.  No electronic reader board shall exceed a brightness level of 0.3 foot candles above ambient light as measured using a light meter capable of measuring in foot candles at a distance based upon sign area, measured as follows: 
Measurement distance = v (sign display area of ERB x 100) 
3.  The sign shall be equipped with automatic brightness control keyed to ambient light levels; 
4.  In the event of a malfunction, the sign display must go dark; and, 
5.  Electronic Reader Board size is limited to thirty (30) percent of the allowable sign area. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. J), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2014-3547 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-9-2014; Ord. No. 2014-3588 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-24-2014; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. K), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-4001 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 4-12-2018) 
Sec. 7.6. - Landscaping and Tree Protection. 
A.  Purpose and Intent . 
The purpose and intent of this Section is to regulate the manner in which land in the City is used and developed, to minimize adverse effects on surrounding property owners or the general public, and ensure that high quality development is maintained throughout the community. 
For the purpose of landscaping, College Station, Texas falls within Zone 8 of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Hardiness Zone Map. Also, dwarf plants will not be allowed in required screening or buffer areas. 
B.  Application of Section . 
The landscaping requirements of this Section apply to all land located in the City of College Station proposed for site development with the exception of those zoned NG-1, NG-2, and NG-3. The requirements also do not apply to single-family, duplex, townhouse, or mixed use developments in the MU district, except as follows: 
1.  The requirements of this Section have limited application to properties developed for duplexes, as follows: 
a.  A minimum of two hundred (200) points of landscaping as calculated in this Section shall be provided for each new duplex unit; 
b.  Where parking is provided in the front yard, an eight-foot landscaped setback shall be required between the property line and the nearest side of the parking pad. This eight-foot setback area must be landscaped and contain a three-foot high screen consisting of a continuous berm, hedge, or wall. In addition, an eight-foot landscaped setback shall be required between the dwelling unit and the nearest side of the parking pad; and 
c.  The maintenance and completion requirements of this Section also apply to duplex uses. Every development must employ an irrigation system. All new plantings must be irrigated. An irrigation system shall be designed so that it does not negatively impact existing trees and natural areas. Soaker hose and drip irrigation system designs may be permitted as the Administrator deems appropriate. 
2.  The requirements of this Section have limited application to properties developed for single- family and townhouse uses, as follows: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) trees of at least two (2) inches in caliper or one (1) tree of four-inch caliper shall be planted on each lot with every new single-family home. 
b.  For townhouse developments, the Administrator may allow the required trees to be dispersed throughout the development, including common areas. 
c.  The landscaping requirements of this Section shall apply to manufactured home parks, but not to individual manufactured homes on separate lots. 
3.  The requirements of this Section have limited application to properties developed in the MU Mixed-Use district, as follows: 
a.  Within fifty (50) feet of the property line along the street, and located between the structure and the public right-of-way, street, or public way, one (1) canopy tree for every twenty-five (25) linear feet of frontage shall be installed. One (1) existing tree (minimum four-inch caliper) may be substituted for a new tree. 
b.  Canopy trees must be selected from the College Station Streetscape Plant List and may be grouped as desired so long as the canopy trees are reasonable dispersed across each public right-of-way, street, or public way frontage. 
c.  Parking areas adjacent to a right-of-way shall be screened from the right-of-way. Screening is required along one hundred (100) percent of the street frontage (such as ten (10) shrubs for every thirty (30) linear feet of frontage), with the exception of areas within the visibility triangle. Screening may be accomplished using plantings, berms, structural elements, or combinations thereof, and must be a minimum of three (3) feet above the parking lot pavement elevation. Walls and planting strips shall be located at least two (2) feet from any parking area. Where the street and the adjacent site are at different elevations, the Administrator may alter the height of the screening to ensure adequate screening. Fifty (50) percent of all shrubs used for screening shall be evergreen. 
d.  One hundred (100) percent coverage of groundcover, decorative paving, decorative rock, or a perennial grass is required in parking lot islands, swales and drainage areas, and the parking lot setback unless otherwise landscaped or existing plants are preserved. One hundred (100) percent coverage of groundcover or perennial grass is also required in all unpaved portions of street or highway right-of-way or on adjacent property that has been disturbed during construction. If grass is to be used for groundcover, one hundred (100) percent live grass groundcover is required whether by solid sod overlay or pre-planting and successful takeover of grasses. No point value shall be awarded for ground cover. 
e.  All new plantings must be irrigated. An irrigation system shall be designed so that it does not negatively impact existing trees and natural areas. Soaker hose and drip irrigation system designs may be permitted as the Administrator deems appropriate. 
4.  All landscaping/streetscaping requirements under this Section shall run with the land once the development has begun and shall apply against any owner or subsequent owner. 
5.  The landscaping requirements of this Section apply to all unsubdivided property, improved subdivided lots and to other improved lands where buildings or structures are being added or replaced within the City. 
6.  Each phase of a multi-phase project shall comply with this Section. 
7.  All plantings must be in accordance with the College Station Plant List, or as deemed appropriate by the USDA for Zone 8 in their Hardiness Zone Map. The plant list is approved and amended as needed by the Administrator. 
C.  Landscaping Point Requirements . 
1.  The landscaping point requirements for a site is determined by the combined point total of Site Area and Streetscape subtotals. 
2.  Site Area Points . 
a.  Minimum thirty (30) landscape points per one thousand (1,000) square feet of site area. 
b.  The minimum total number of points for any development is eight hundred (800) points; 
c.  Undeveloped floodplains may be removed from site size calculations; in such case, existing trees within that floodplain shall not be claimed for points; and 
d.  Projects may be phased with the phase lines being drawn twenty (20) feet beyond any new site amenity. The portion left for subsequent phases shall be of developable size and quality. 
3.  Streetscape Points . 
a.  Six (6) additional landscape points shall be required for every one (1) linear foot of frontage on a right-of-way or public way; and 
b.  Driveway openings, visibility triangles, and other traffic control areas may be subtracted from total streetscape frontage. 
4.  Point Credits . 
The following point credits will apply to the total landscaping point requirement so long as the total reduction does not cause the development to have a point total lower than the minimum eight hundred (800) point requirement: 
a.  A twenty (20) percent point credit will be awarded where the irrigation system employed is a recognized water-conserving system as defined in the Site Design Standards, or utilizes a commercial soil moisture meter. 
b.  A ten (10) percent point credit will be awarded if twenty-five (25) percent or more of parking area consists of enhanced paving. 
c.  A ten (10) percent point credit will be awarded for every one (1) percent of site area devoted to special facilities including water features, public art, or other public features determined by the Administrator. 
d.  A ten (10) percent point credit will be awarded for landscape plans that are prepared by a landscape architect registered in Texas, an International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) certified arborist or other professional as deemed appropriate by the Administrator. 
e.  A ten (10) percent point credit will be awarded where berms are utilized for parking screening. 
5.  Point Values . 
a.  Point values will be awarded for any type of canopy tree, non-canopy tree, or shrub, except for those listed on the Non-Point Tree List as prepared by the Administrator. No point value shall be awarded for ground cover. For the purpose of this Section, Texas Native, as referenced in the College Station Site Design Standards, shall be considered those notated as both native to Texas and recommended by the Texas Forest Service for Brazos County. 
b.  All caliper measurements shall be twelve (12) inches above grade. The minimum caliper for non-canopy trees are measured on a single cane of a multi-trunk tree. 
c.  Landscaping points are accrued as follows: 
Plant Material Point Values Plant Material Points Accrued (per Plant) Installed Size Caliper (Inches) New Plantings Canopy Tree 75 1.5 to 2 150 2.1 to 3.4 300 3.5 and larger Texas Native Canopy Tree 110 1.5 to 2 225 2.1 to 3.4 450 3.5 and larger Non-Canopy Tree 40 1.25 and larger Shrubs 10 Min. 5 gallon Shrubs, not for screening 1 Min. 1 gallon Existing Trees with no Barricade Protection Area Canopy Tree 40 4 to 14.5 Non-Canopy Tree 35 2 and larger Existing Trees Within Barricade Protection Area Canopy Tree 800 Between 4 and 8 1,000 8 and larger Non-Canopy Tree 300 Between 2 and 4 400 4 and larger  
d.  To receive landscape points for existing trees, all existing trees must be in good form and condition and reasonably free of damage by insects and/or disease. 
e.  To receive additional points for barricaded trees, such trees must be barricaded to the dripline of the tree. A barricade detail must be provided on the landscape plan. Barricades must be in place prior to any activity on the property including, but not limited to, grading. If the required barricades are not in place prior to any activity and maintained during construction, barricaded points will be forfeited. 
f.  No points shall be awarded for existing Post Oak trees. 
D.  Planting and Screening Requirements . 
1.  General Requirements . 
a.  Every project must expend a minimum of fifty (50) percent of its point total on canopy trees. 
b.  Landscaping must be reasonably dispersed throughout all visible areas of the site. 
c.  One hundred (100) percent coverage of groundcover, decorative paving, decorative rock, or a perennial grass is required in parking lot islands, swales and drainage areas, and the parking lot setback unless otherwise landscaped or existing plants are preserved. When decorative rock is used, it shall be designed such that it will not migrate into sidewalks or other paved areas. One hundred (100) percent coverage of groundcover or perennial grass is also required in all unpaved portions of street or highway right-of-way or on adjacent property that has been disturbed during construction. If grass is to be used for groundcover, one hundred (100) percent live grass groundcover is required whether by solid sod overlay or pre-planting and successful takeover of grasses. 
d.  All landscape materials shall be installed in accordance with the current planting procedures established by the most recent addition of The American Standard for Nursery Stock, as published by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
e.  For existing plantings, the Administrator may require a health appraisal if the applicant wishes to receive point credits. 
f.  All new plantings must be irrigated. An irrigation system shall be designed so that it does not negatively impact existing trees and natural areas. Soaker hose and drip irrigation system designs may be permitted as the Administrator deems appropriate. 
2.  Streetscape . 
a.  Within fifty (50) feet of the property line along all major arterials, freeways, and expressways as designated on the Thoroughfare Plan, one (1) canopy tree for every twenty-five (25) linear feet of frontage shall be installed; 
b.  Within fifty (50) feet of the property line along all other roadways including public ways, one (1) canopy tree for every thirty-two (32) feet of frontage shall be installed; 
c.  Fractional amounts shall be increased to the nearest whole number; 
d.  Two (2) non-canopy trees may be substituted for one (1) canopy tree; 
e.  Trees used to meet the requirement along one (1) streetscape frontage shall not be counted toward another frontage; 
f.  Canopy and non-canopy trees must be selected from the Administrator's Streetscape Plant List and may be grouped as desired so long as the trees are reasonably dispersed across each frontage; and 
g.  One (1) existing tree (minimum four-inch caliper) may be substituted for a new tree. Existing trees must be of acceptable health, as determined by the Administrator. 
3.  Additional Landscaping along Large Building Faades . 
This subsection applies to sites subject to the Non-Residential Architectural Standards of this UDO: 
a.  Sites with building faades that face a public right-of-way or public way and that exceed two hundred (200) feet in length shall place landscaping between the faade and roadway; 
b.  One (1) canopy tree is required for every forty (40) feet of faade length. Fractional amounts shall be increased to the nearest whole number; 
c.  The trees shall be placed within fifty (50) feet of the building facade; 
d.  Two (2) non-canopy trees may be substituted for one (1) canopy tree; and 
e.  Trees counting toward Streetscape planting requirements may also count toward the Additional Landscaping along Large Building Faades requirement. 
4.  Parking Screening . 
a.  Parking areas adjacent to a right-of-way or public way shall be screened from the right-of- way or public way. 
b.  Screening may be accomplished using plantings, berms, structural elements, or combinations thereof as described below, and must be a minimum of three (3) feet above the parking lot pavement elevation. 
c.  Walls and planting strips shall be located at least two (2) feet from any parking area. 
d.  Where the street and the adjacent site are at different elevations, the Administrator may alter the height of the screening to ensure adequate screening. 
e.  A minimum fifty (50) percent of all shrubs used for screening shall be evergreen. 
f.  The following options are allowed as parking lot screening methods: 
i.  A solid hedgerow (such as ten (10) shrubs for every thirty (30) linear feet of frontage) to screen the parking to a height of three (3) feet. The screening must be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches at planting and reach thirty-six (36) inches within one (1) calendar year of planting, and such method is certified to meet these requirements by a registered Landscape Architect, landscape designer, or landscape contractor; 
ii.  Berms with a minimum height of three (3) feet as measured from the parking lot pavement, and a maximum slope of 1:3. Berms may be designed around trees that are barricaded for tree preservation. Where there will be gaps in berm screening for the preservation of existing trees, other screening methods shall be used to meet the minimum three-foot screening requirement; or 
iii.  Half-berms with a minimum height of three (3) feet as measured from the parking lot pavement, and a maximum allowable slope of 1:3. Retaining walls shall be designed to face the parking lot and sidewalks located between the retaining wall and right-of-way or public way may not be closer than three (3) feet to the top of a retaining wall. 
g.  For redeveloping sites maintaining existing parking lot perimeters, the Administrator may authorize the use of masonry walls, or lower the minimum berm height to a height that may be safely maintained in the existing parking setback when additional parking lot screening is provided. The cumulative height of plant material and berm shall be a minimum of three (3) feet. 
h.  Variations to the requirements of this section may be approved if the landscape/streetscape plan is sealed by a registered Landscape Architect and approved by the Administrator. Such plans must show reasonable evidence that the requirements, as set forth in this section were used as a guide. 
5.  Detention Ponds . 
Detention ponds shall be integrated into the overall landscaping theme and design of the site as described in Section 7.9.B. Detention Pond Aesthetic Design. 
E.  Landscape/Streetscape Plan Requirements . 
When a Landscape/Streetscape Plan is required, the landscape/streetscape plan shall contain the following: 
1.  The location of existing property lines and dimensions of the tract; 
2.  A north arrow and scale; 
3.  Topographic information and final grading adequate to identify and properly specify planting for areas needing slope protection; 
4.  Location and dimensions of existing and proposed structures, parking lots and drives, sidewalks, refuse disposal areas, fences, and other features as determined necessary by the Administrator; 
5.  Location, size, spread, type, and quantity of all proposed landscaping and screening materials, along with common and botanical names; 
6.  The location of existing and proposed utilities and all easements on or adjacent to the lot; 
7.  An indication of adjacent land uses, existing development and roadways; 
8.  An irrigation system plan or a general note indicating that an irrigation system to service all new plantings will be installed by a certified installer before a certificate of occupancy will be issued; and 
9.  Landscape Information . 
a.  Landscape points required for site and calculations shown in the landscape legend. 
b.  A legend showing the size, type (canopy, non-canopy, shrub) and points claimed for proposed landscaping. 
c.  Location of landscape plants on plan identified by a symbol defined in a landscape legend (see sample legend below). 

10.  Streetscape Information . 
a.  Streetscape points required for site and calculations shown. 
b.  A table showing the scientific and common plant names, size, type (canopy, non-canopy, and shrub), and points claimed for proposed streetscaping. 
c.  Location of streetscape plants on plan identified by a symbol defined in a landscape legend (see sample legend above). 
11.  The location and diameter of protected existing trees claimed for either landscape or streetscape requirements, and an indication of how the applicant plans to barricade the existing trees from damage during construction. Barricading shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Prior to land development or redevelopment, or any construction thereof, the developer shall clearly mark all qualifying and significant trees to be preserved; 
b.  The developer shall erect a fence around each tree or group of trees to prohibit the placement of debris or fill, or the parking of vehicles within the drip line of any qualifying or significant tree; 
c.  During construction, the developer shall prohibit the cleaning of equipment or materials within the drip line of any tree or group of trees that are protected and required to remain. The developer shall not allow to dispose of any waste material such as, but not limited to, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar, or other harmful liquids or materials within the drip line of any tree or groups of trees that are required to remain; 
d.  No attachments or wires of any kind shall be attached to any tree, except those used to stabilize or protect such tree; 
e.  With grade changes in excess of six (6) inches, a retaining wall or tree well of rock or brick shall be constructed around the tree not closer than one-half (1/2) the distance between the trunk and the drip line. The mid-point of the retaining wall shall be constructed at the new grade. Grade changes greater than one (1) inch may not be made without the prior approval of the Administrator; and, 
f.  All vegetation must be planted in accordance with the visibility triangle referenced in Section 7.2.C, Visibility at Intersections in all Districts. 
F.  Maintenance and Changes . 
1.  Landscaping/Streetscaping shall be maintained and preserved in accordance with the approved Landscape/Streetscape Plan. Replacement of landscaping/streetscaping must occur within forty- five (45) days of notification by the Administrator. Replacement material must be of similar character and the same or higher point total as the dead or removed landscaping. Failure to replace dead or removed landscaping, as required by the Administrator, shall constitute a violation of this Section of the UDO for which the penalty provision may be invoked. 
2.  Landscaping/Streetscaping Changes to Existing Sites . 
a.  If changes constituting twenty-five (25) percent or more of the number of canopy and non- canopy trees are proposed, a revised Landscape/Streetscape Plan must be submitted for approval and is required to comply with this Section. Planting must occur pursuant to this approved landscape/streetscape plan within forty-five (45) days. 
b.  Revised Landscape/Streetscape Plans shall meet the requirements of the ordinance in effect at the time of the revised Landscape/Streetscape Plan submittal. 
c.  The replacement of existing canopy and non-canopy trees must be replaced caliper for caliper, or as determined by the Administrator. 
G.  Completion and Extension . 
The Administrator shall review all landscaping for completion in compliance with this Section and the approved Landscape/Streetscape Plan. Landscaping/streetscaping shall be completed in compliance with the approved plan before a Certificate of Occupancy will be issued. However, the applicant may receive an extension of four (4) months from the date of the Certificate of Occupancy upon the approval of an application for extension with a bond or letter of credit in the amount of one hundred fifty (150) percent of the landscape/streetscape bid, as well as the irrigation required for the project. Failure to complete the landscaping/streetscaping according to the approved Landscape/Streetscape Plan at the expiration of the bond or letter of credit shall constitute forfeiting the bond or cashing of the letter of credit. Also, failure to complete the approved landscaping/streetscaping shall constitute a violation of this UDO. 
H.  Review and Approval . 
Landscape/Streetscape Plans shall be reviewed and approved by the Administrator. 
I.  Parking, Storage, or Display . 
No parking, storage, or display of vehicles or merchandise shall be allowed in the required landscape/streetscape areas or on required parking islands. 
J.  Alternative Compliance Permitted . 
Variations to the requirements of this Section may be approved if the landscape/streetscape plan is sealed by a registered landscape architect and approved by the Administrator. Such plans must show reasonable evidence that the requirements as set forth in this Section were used as a guide. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. L), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-3633, Pt. 1(Exh. G), 5-28-2015; Ord. No. 2017-3906 , Pt. 1(Exhs. A, B), 7-27-2017; Ord. No. 2018-4018 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 6-14-2018) 
Sec. 7.7. - Buffer Requirements. 
A.  Purpose . 
The purpose of buffer requirements, which generally include a buffer yard, plantings, and a fence or wall, is to provide a visual barrier between different zoning districts and to help mitigate any negative impacts of adjacent land uses on developed or developing properties. A buffer should visibly separate one (1) use from another and shield or block noise, glares, or other nuisances. 
B.  Applicability . 
1.  Perimeter buffers shall be provided on building plots abutting developed or developing sites in accordance with the standards of this Section, as outlined in Section 7.7.F, Minimum Buffer Standards. The following shall provide buffers: 
a.  Vacant sites that develop; 
b.  Existing sites when additions, expansions, and/or redevelopments equal or are greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the existing improvements; 
c.  Existing sites when cumulative additions, expansions, and/or redevelopments total twenty- five (25) percent or more of the existing improvements; 
d.  Existing sites when a change of use intensifies the development in terms of elements such as traffic, processes, noise, water or air pollution, etc.; 
e.  Existing sites with lawfully established nonconforming uses when the use is expanded; and 
f.  Sexually-oriented businesses. 
2.  Exceptions to the terms of this Section will be made when: 
a.  The adjacent developed use is nonconforming; 
b.  The adjacent developed use is agricultural; 
c.  The Land Use Plan designates the area as Redevelopment; 
d.  The property is zoned P-MUD or PDD and the buffer requirement was determined through the rezoning process; 
e.  The developing use is a Primary or Secondary Educational Facility containing a building with a Group "E" occupancy as defined in the International Building Code; or 
f.  Properties in NG and RDD districts. 
Per Ordinance No. 3280 (September 9, 2010) 
g.  The required buffer yard is adjacent to FEMA designated 100-year floodplain or residential common area, with approval by the Administrator. 
C.  Relationship to Other Landscaping Standards . 
All buffer requirements shall be included on a development's Landscaping Plan. Landscaping provided to meet the buffer landscaping standards of this Section may not be counted towards meeting a project's landscape point requirements. The area of a site dedicated to a perimeter buffer shall not be included in calculating a site's minimum landscaping point requirements. 
D.  Location . 
The buffer shall abut property boundaries shared with less intense uses or zoning districts as shown in Section 7.7.F, Minimum Buffer Standards. In the event that a property abuts a less intense use and a less intense zoning district, the more stringent buffer shall be required along the shared boundary. 
E.  Permitted Uses . 
1.  A buffer yard may be used for passive recreation or stormwater management. It may contain pedestrian, bike, or equestrian trails provided that: 
a.  No plant material is eliminated; 
b.  The total width of the buffer yard is maintained; and 
c.  All other regulations of this Section are met. 
2.  No active recreation area, storage of materials, parking, driveways, or structures, except for approved pedestrian, bike or equestrian trails and necessary utility boxes and equipment, shall be located within the buffer yard. 
3.  Pedestrian access through a perimeter fence or wall and buffer yard may be provided at the abutting resident's, homeowners association's, or the Administrator's option to provide convenient pedestrian access to nonresidential uses such as commercial areas or schools. 
F.  Minimum Buffer Standards . 
The buffer requirements are designed to permit and encourage flexibility in the widths of buffer yards, the number of plants required in the buffer yard, and opaque screens. Standard buffer requirements are depicted in the table below. The numbers shown are the required buffer widths. 
DEVELOPING USE 
(Classification) ABUTTING PARCEL* 
(Use more restrictive of the zoning
or the developed use.) Single-Family Residential (ii) Multi-Family Residential (i) Non-Residential (iii) Single-family (ii) N/A N/A N/A Multi-Family (i) (iii) 10' (1) N/A N/A Office 10' (1) N/A N/A Commercial *** 15' (2) 10' (1) N/A Industrial 25' (2) 15' (2) 5' Business Park 50' (2) 15' (2) 5' Business Park - Industrial 50' (2) 30' (2) 10'** SOB 50' (2) 50' (2) 50' (2)  
(i) Includes duplexes. 
(ii) Includes manufactured homes, mobile homes, manufactured home parks, and townhouses. 
(iii) Includes commercial and other non-residential uses developed in the MF Multi-Family district. 
* When an abutting parcel is vacant and zoned R Rural, the Administrator shall use the future land use of the property as designated on the Comprehensive Land Use Plan in lieu of the zoning category in determining the buffer requirement. 
** When an abutting parcel is zoned BP Business Park or BPI Business Park Industrial, the buffer width shall be reduced to five feet (5'). 
*** When a developing parcel is zoned WC Wellborn Commercial and adjacent to single-family, the buffer width shall be twenty (20) feet with a fence. 
(1) Fence 
(2) Wall 
1.  Buffer Yards . 
a.  Buffer yards shall be measured from the common property line and may be located within established building setbacks. 
b.  Where utility or drainage easements or other similar situations exists in the required buffer yard, the buffer yard may be reduced by the width of the easement; however, an additional five (5) feet may be required beyond the width of the easement in these situations to allow for the required plantings and fence or wall. All new plantings and irrigation shall be located outside of the easement. The Administrator has the discretion to allow a required fence or wall within the easement. 
c.  In WC Wellborn Commercial: 
1.  Buffer required plantings shall be doubled along property lines adjacent to single-family residential zoning or land use. In lieu of a fence, plantings may be tripled. 
2.  When adjacent to single-family use, zoning, or future Land Use and Character designation, a buffer wall is required for the length of any adjacent parking, loading areas, or dumpster uses (including required maneuvering space). 
d.  In BP Business Park, required buffer plantings shall be doubled along property lines adjacent to single-family residential zoning or development. 
e.  In BPI Business Park Industrial, required buffer plantings shall be doubled along property lines adjacent to any zoning district or use other than BP Business Park or BPI Business Park Industrial. 
f.  In MF Multi-Family and MU Mixed-Use, buffer yards shall only be required along the perimeter of the development, unless otherwise exempted in this Section. No buffer yards are required between uses contained within the development. 
2.  Plantings . 
a.  If a fence or wall is not required per the table above, the following plantings shall be installed in the buffer yard: 
1.  A minimum of one (1) five-gallon shrub at a minimum of three (3) feet in height per three (3) linear feet of landscaping buffer; and 
2.  A minimum of one (1) two-inch caliper canopy tree per twenty-five (25) linear feet of landscape buffer. 
b.  If a fence or wall is required per the table above, the following plantings shall be installed in the buffer yard, unless expressly provided for otherwise in this UDO: 
1.  A minimum of one (1) 1.25-inch caliper non-canopy tree per fifteen (15) linear feet of landscaping buffer. The Administrator may allow the substitution of a minimum of one (1) five-gallon shrub at a minimum of three (3) feet in height per three (3) linear feet of landscaping buffer for the non-canopy tree requirement, or may require the substitution to mitigate potential negative impacts of a development; and 
2.  A minimum of one (1) two-inch caliper canopy tree per twenty-five (25) linear feet of landscape buffer. 
c.  All buffer yard landscaping areas not dedicated to trees or shrubs shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover, or other appropriate landscape treatment in accordance with Section 7.6.C.3, Landscaping and Tree Protection. 
d.  Fifty (50) percent of all required shrubs within the buffer yard shall be evergreen. 
e.  Plant materials shall show a variety of texture, color, shape, and other characteristics. Recommended buffer materials can be found in the College Station Plant List or in those listed as appropriate for Zone 8 on the USDA Hardiness Zone Map. 
f.  The arrangement of trees and shrubs in the buffer area shall be done in a manner that provides a visual separation between abutting land uses. Shrubs shall be massed in rows or groups to achieve the maximum screening effect. 
g.  Irrigation is required for all new plantings. 
h.  Existing vegetation may count toward the planting requirement if: 
1.  The vegetation is in good health and the landscaping plan verifies that it will meet the plantings criteria listed above (non-point trees may count towards a natural buffer); and 
2.  The vegetation is protected in accordance with Section 7.6.C.2.c, Landscaping and Tree Protection, of this UDO. 
i.  Plantings will not be allowed to encroach into a required visibility triangle for a public or private right-of-way except as provided for in Section 7.2.C, Visibility at all Intersections in All Districts. 
3.  Fences and Walls . 
a.  Fences may be solid wood or solid wood accented by masonry, stone, EIFS (Exterior Insulation and Finish System), or concrete columns. Walls may be masonry, stone, EIFS, concrete, or a combination of these materials, and shall be finished on both sides (framing not visible). Walls and masonry columns for fences must meet the footing standards prescribed by the Building Code for such structures. 
b.  Fences and walls shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height and a maximum of eight (8) feet. Walls over six (6) feet must obtain a building permit. When the adjacent property and the buffer yard are at different elevations, the Administrator may require a greater fence or wall height to ensure adequate buffering. 
c.  Fences and walls shall be placed within one (1) foot of the common boundary line when physically possible. In the event that there is a physical constraint that will not allow the construction of a fence on the common boundary line (including, but not limited to, the existence of a creek, access easement, or existing vegetation), the Administrator may authorize an alternative fence location. 
d.  Fences or walls will not be allowed to encroach into a required visibility triangle for a public or private right-of-way. 
4.  Substitutions . 
a.  Existing natural vegetation may be used in lieu of plantings and a fence or wall under the following circumstances: 
1.  The existing vegetation consists of canopy and non-canopy trees which are shown through a tree survey to meet the minimum buffer planting requirements (non-point trees may be considered) and is of sufficient density to provide one hundred (100) percent opacity to a height of six (6) feet; and 
2.  The vegetation is protected in accordance with Section 7.6.C.2.c, Landscaping and Tree Protection, of this UDO. 
b.  Fences and walls may be substituted with a solid plant or hedge wall that is greater than six (6) feet in height with approximately one hundred (100) percent opacity. All shrubs planted for a hedge wall must be a minimum of fifteen (15) gallons each. The solid plant or hedge wall must be evergreen and may not be counted towards meeting the buffer planting requirement. 
c.  Fences and walls may be substituted with a landscaped earthen berm if the combination of berm and landscaping is not less than six (6) feet in height from the elevation at the property line with approximately one hundred (100) percent opacity. The berm plantings must be evergreen and may not be counted towards meeting the buffer planting requirement. Berms must be a minimum of four (4) feet in height with a maximum slope of 3:1. Berms in excess of six (6) feet in height shall have a maximum slope of 4:1 as measured from the exterior property line. 
d.  The required height of fences or walls may be reduced if used in combination with an earthen berm or a landscaped earthen berm if the height of the screening is six (6) feet from the elevation at the property line with approximately one hundred (100) percent opacity. The berm plantings must be evergreen and may not be counted towards meeting the buffer planting requirement. 
e.  Walls may be substituted with fences if the required buffer yard area and plantings are doubled. 
f.  Walls and fences may be omitted if the required buffer yard area and plantings are tripled. 
g.  Walls and fences may be omitted if two (2) rows of evergreen plantings (minimum six (6) feet in height at time of planting) are provided to create a solid screen along the common property line. 
h.  Buffer plantings may be reduced by half if providing a wall where a fence is required. 
G.  Maintenance and Replacement. 
1.  Upon installation or protection of required landscape materials, appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure their continued health and maintenance. Required landscape areas and buffers shall be free of garbage and trash, weeds, pests, and disease. Required plant materials that do not remain healthy shall be replaced consistently with these provisions. 
2.  All landscaping materials and/or fences, walls, or berms shall be maintained by the owner(s) of the property that was required to install such landscaping materials and/or fences, walls, or berms under this Section. 
3.  Any canopy tree removed or otherwise destroyed by the willful act or negligence of the property owner, tenant, or contractor shall be replaced by a tree of the same or larger caliper. 
H.  Appeals . 
1.  Appeals of the terms of this Section, with the exception of Section G, Maintenance and Replacement, shall be to the Design Review Board (DRB). 
2.  An appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date of the notification of the decision by filing with the Administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
3.  The DRB may authorize on appeal alternative buffer standards for a specific property or a waiver to the Buffer Requirements of this Section when such standards or variance will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to unique and special conditions not normally found in like areas, a strict enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance by the Administrator would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this Section shall be observed and substantial justice done. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. K), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. M), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-3999 , Pt. 1(Exh. G), 4-12-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4018 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 6-14-2018) 
Sec. 7.8. - Solid Waste. 
A.  Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this Section to establish the guidelines for the provision of solid waste collection in all developments within the City of College Station where curb service will not take place, in order to: 
1.  Provide for the safe and efficient collection and removal of waste from commercial and residential developments; and 
2.  Reduce nuisances associated with waste collection containers. 
B.  Responsibility. 
The City shall make the final determination as to the appropriate collection system; however, it is the responsibility of the developer to ascertain the appropriateness of the proposed collection system. Staff will endeavor to accommodate applicants to the extent equipment, efficiency, and policy allow. 
C.  Guidelines. 
The following minimum standards shall be met: 
1.  All dumpsters shall be screened. Screening shall be at least as tall as the dumpster(s) and may be achieved through the use of buildings, fences, or walls. Plant materials may be used to supplement required screening. 
Dumpster screens should be located outside of utility easements. Property owners with dumpster screens located within utility easements are hereby warned that they will be responsible for the replacement of the screens if it becomes necessary to remove them for utility construction and/or maintenance. 
2.  Multi-family developments shall provide the required pad and screening for one (1) eight-yard dumpster per forty (40) bedrooms; 
3.  Townhomes not served by approved, accessible alleys, shall provide the required pad and screening for one (1) eight-yard dumpster per sixteen (16) dwelling units; 
4.  The interior clearance (inside the screen) dimensions for a single three hundred-gallon container enclosure shall be ten (10) feet deep by ten (10) feet wide; 
5.  The interior clearance (inside the screen) dimensions for a single (one (1) eight-yard) dumpster enclosure shall be twelve (12) feet deep by twelve (12) feet wide; 
6.  The interior clearance (inside the screen) dimensions for a double (two (2) eight-yard) dumpster enclosure shall be twelve (12) feet deep by twenty-four (24) feet wide; 
7.  Bollards and other such devices shall not be set within the minimum width dimensions noted above; 
8.  All required containers and dumpsters pads shall be constructed of six (6) inches of steel-reinforced concrete; 
9.  All required containers and dumpsters shall be screened by means of an approved six-foot high opaque device on a minimum of three (3) sides. Depending on visibility to pedestrian and vehicular traffic, a gate may be required for all enclosures except three hundred-gallon side-loading automated containers. Gates shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet when open, shall swing one hundred eighty (180) degrees from the closed position, and shall utilize a positive-locking mechanism while in the open position. Three hundred-gallon side-loading automated container enclosures shall be open on the side, facing the collection point. The open side cannot be facing the public right-of-way. Materials may be dictated by the terms of a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) or the Design Review Board (DRB); and 
10.  The ingress, egress, and approach to all dumpster pads shall conform to the fire lane requirements. 
11.  In SC Suburban Commercial and WC Wellborn Commercial, consolidated sanitation service is required and shall be located furthest from single-family use or zoning. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it may be located adjacent to single-family if a buffer wall is used. 
12.  In BP Business Park, consolidated sanitation service is required and shall be located furthest from single-family use or zoning. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3431 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-12-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. N), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 7-28-2016) 
Sec. 7.9. - Flood Hazard Protection. 
A.  Any reference to this Section shall also apply to Chapter 13 of the Code of Ordinances, Flood Hazard Protection. 
B.  Detention Pond Aesthetic Design . 
Detention ponds should be treated as aesthetic site amenities, adding quality and depth to the visual environment of the site. Therefore, the detention pond area shall be integrated into the overall landscaping design of the site by reasonably dispersing the required landscaping points. 
1.  Unless the landscape plan is sealed by a landscape architect and approved by the Administrator, only plantings found in the College Station Plant List for Detention Pond Areas may be used in a detention area. 
2.  Variations to the requirements of this Section may be approved if the development project is employing Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) development standards, using stormwater management to acquire LEED points. The project must be LEED certifiable (it does not have to be registered as a LEED project but must be eligible for certification), be sealed by a Landscape Architect, and show reasonable evidence that the requirements as set forth in this Section were used as a guide. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2017-3906 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 7-27-2017) 
Sec. 7.10. - Non-Residential Architectural Standards. 
A.  Purpose . 
The intent of the design standards provided in and related to this section are to: 
1.  Protect and enhance the character and quality of non-residential buildings and associated site elements in the interest of the general welfare of the City; 
2.  Establish minimum design parameters for the appearance of non-residential buildings including heightened standards for more visible and prominent areas of the community; 
3.  Not limit architectural creativity or prescribe a specific architectural style; and 
4.  Provide a balance between the community's economic and aesthetic concerns. 
B.  Applicability 
Except as expressly set forth otherwise herein, the design standards of this Section shall apply to development, redevelopment, and faade changes to all non-residential buildings including single tenant buildings, multiple tenant buildings, and any grouping of attached or stand-alone buildings and associated pad sites. 
The portions of structures containing non-residential uses located in the MF Multi-Family zoning district shall comply with the Non-Residential design standards of this Section. 
The following are exempt from this Section of the UDO as defined below: 
1.  BP Business Park. Any building located within BP Business Park districts is required to comply with this Section if it is along the periphery of the zoning district. All other interior buildings located within BP Business Park districts are exempt from this Section. 
2.  Districts. Uses located within the following districts are exempt from this Section: BPI Business Park Industrial, M-1 Light Industrial, M-2 Heavy Industrial, R&D Research & Development, NG-1 Core Northgate, NG-2 Transitional Northgate, and NG-3 Residential Northgate. 
3.  Uses. The following uses are exempt from this Section: Churches; Primary & Secondary Educational Facilities; Municipal Industrial facilities; and private utility buildings that are screened from public or private rights-of-way and adjacent properties. 
4.  Types of Structures. The following structures are exempt from the provisions of this Section: Freestanding structures such as pavilions, canopies, gazebos, ATM machines, etc. that are unenclosed buildings and do not have walls. Unenclosed structures that are attached or functionally appear part of an enclosed building are to be integrated with and meet the requirements associated with the building. 
C.  Standards for Non-Residential Structures . 
1.  Faade Terms . 
a.  Primary Faade. A faade is considered to be a "primary faade" when it is the primary entrance faade of a primary building (not accessory buildings) or when any faade of a primary building is facing a public right-of-way, private right-of-way, or public way. 
b.  Facing. A faade is considered facing a public right-of-way, private right-of-way, or public way when an imaginary plane could be extended unobstructed by a wall or structure in the building plot from at least 25% of the faade into the public right-of-way, private right-of-way, or public way adjacent to the building plot, as illustrated below. 
c.  Visible. The term visible is used in application of this Section. A side or rear faade of a building shall not be considered visible from a public right-of-way or public way if it is located more than four-hundred (400) feet away. 

2.  Required Screening . 
For all properties zoned SC Suburban Commercial and WC Wellborn Commercial, the following screening requirements apply: 
a.  All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view or located so as not to be visible from any public right-of-way, public way, or residential district when viewed within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the perimeter boundary of the subject lot or tract, measured from a height five (5) feet above grade. Such screening shall be coordinated with the building architecture, materials, colors and scale to maintain a unified appearance. Acceptable methods of screening are: encasement, parapet walls, partition screens, brick/stone/masonry walls or fences. Electrical panel boxes attached to the side of a building that are painted to match the building color do not require additional screening. 
b.  Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from any right-of-way, public way, or adjacent property by either the roof itself (including within a cut-out) or by a false roof element (i.e. chimney, cupola). Components of a mechanical equipment system, such as vents or exhaust pipes, protruding from the roof that are no larger than twelve (12) inches in diameter nor exceeding the height of the roof line are not required to be screened, but must be painted to match the roof color. 
3.  Building Mass and Design . 
a.  Horizontal Faade Articulation . 
1.  Faade articulation (wall plane projections or recessions) is required on the first two (2) stories of any primary faade that exceeds two-hundred (200) feet in horizontal length. No more than thirty-three (33) percent of any primary faade shall be on the same continuous geometric plane. Wall plane projections or recessions shall have a minimum depth of four (4) feet. 
2.  For all properties zoned SC Suburban Commercial: For buildings over eight thousand (8,000) square feet, primary faades shall have articulation of minimum four-foot (4) depth within each fifty-foot (50) section of faade. 
3.  For all properties zoned MU Mixed-Use: The vertical wall plane of any faade visible from public right-of-way, street, or public way shall project and/or recess by a minimum of two (2) feet so that no more than sixty-six (66) percent of the faade is on the same plane. 
b.  Building Entry Design . 
1.  In order to provide a sense of arrival and shelter, public building entrances are to feature a protected entry through the use of an awning, canopy, porte-cochere, recessed entry or other similar architectural element. 
2.  Buildings that have multiple ground floor tenants or multiple primary building entrances shall have all entrances treated architecturally. 
3.  For all properties zoned WC Wellborn Commercial, the following additional standards shall apply: 
a.  All buildings shall be required to provide a covered front porch along the full length of the public entry faade, projecting a minimum four (4) feet from the face of the building. 
b.  All buildings that have frontage on Wellborn Road and/or Live Oak Street, shall have a public entry facing both rights-of-way. 
c.  In cases where more than two (2) facades require a public entrance, the administrator may determine which two (2) facades require entrances. 
c.  Architectural Relief . 
1.  In order to provide visual interest, the first two (2) stories of any primary faade or faade visible from a public right-of-way or public way shall use at least one (1) architectural relief element for every twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, or part thereof, of faade length. 
2.  Faades requiring architectural relief shall provide a minimum of two (2) different types of relief elements per faade. 
3.  To avoid monotony, no more than one-half (1/2) of the required minimum number of elements on a faade may consist of the same type of relief element. 
4.  The design elements may be grouped or spaced as needed along the faade, though in no case shall more than seventy-five (75) feet of continuous horizontal length be void of a relief element. 
5.  Design elements used to meet architectural relief must have a functional architectural purpose such as awnings may not be located over faux windows or a wall area that does not have an opening. 
6.  A relief element counted to meet the requirement of one (1) faade may not also be counted toward another faade. 
7.  Architectural relief is not required for faades, or parts of a faade, that are within fifteen (15) feet of another building that screens the faade. 
8.  Accessory buildings to a primary use, where each faade is equal to or less than twenty-five (25) horizontal feet in length or the perimeter of all faades is less than one hundred (100) horizontal feet in length, and where each faade incorporates the same building materials and colors as the primary structure, are not required to provide architectural relief elements. 
9.  Architectural relief elements may be added to a non-conforming faade of an existing building subject to the following limitation: if more than fifty (50) percent of the required number of elements on a faade are added, removed, or altered, including on a cumulative basis, the faade must be brought into compliance for architectural relief. 
10.  Qualifying Architectural Relief Elements: 
a.  For all applicable properties other than those located in SC Suburban Commercial, WC Wellborn Commercial, and MU Mixed-Use districts, the following types of architectural relief may be utilized to meet the requirements of this Section: 
1)  Canopies, permanent decorative awnings, or windows accompanied by overhangs that exceed eighteen (18) inches; 
2)  Wall plane projections or recessions with a minimum of four-foot depth; 
3)  Pilasters that project from a wall at least four (4) inches or columns; 
4)  Roofline articulation as described below may count as one (1) element for a faade if it is used on a faade where the articulation is not already required; 
5)  A well-defined cornice or other architectural termination to visually cap the building along a parapet may count as one (1) element for a faade if it is used on a faade where this feature is not already required; 
6)  Recessed entries, stoops, porches, or arcades; 
7)  Balconies that extend from the building; 
8)  Boxed or bay windows; 
9)  Decorative stormwater management initiatives physically integrated with the building, as approved by the Administrator; or 
10)  Other architectural relief elements that provide a visual interest to the affected faade and are of a physical scale to possess architectural significance may be approved by the Administrator. 
b.  For all properties zoned SC Suburban Commercial and WC Wellborn Commercial, the following types of architectural relief may be utilized to meet the requirements of this section: 
1)  Decorative or functional window shutters; 
2)  Covered front porch extending along at least fifty (50) percent of building faade and projecting a minimum of four (4) feet from the face of the building, if used on a faade where this feature is not already required; 
3)  Eaves in excess of eighteen (18) inches, if used on a faade that does not have a covered front porch; 
4)  Window planter boxes; 
5)  Window canopy; 
6)  Dormers; 
7)  Transom windows; 
8)  Decorative faade lighting; 
9)  Chimneys or cupolas; 
10)  Cross gables; 
11)  Entry Portico; 
12)  Horizontal articulation with a minimum depth of four (4) feet for WC Wellborn Commercial only; 
13)  Canopies, permanent decorative awnings, or windows accompanied by overhangs that exceed eighteen (18) inches for SC Suburban Commercial zoning only; 
14)  Pitched roof or peaked parapet roof if it gives the appearance of a pitched roof from all sides and has a minimum roof slope of 4:12 for SC Suburban Commercial zoning only; or 
15)  Other architectural relief elements that provide a visual interest to the affected faade and are of a physical scale to possess architectural significance as may be approved by the Administrator. 
c.  For all properties zoned MU Mixed-Use, the following types of architectural relief may be utilized to meet the requirements of this Section: 
1)  Canopies or permanent decorative awnings; 
2)  Wall plane projections or recessions with a minimum of four-foot depth; 
3)  Pilasters that project from a wall at least four (4) inches or columns; 
4)  Recessed entries, stoops, porches, or arcades; 
5)  Balconies that extend from the building; 
6)  Boxed or bay/oriel windows; 
7)  Hood/drip molding over windows; 
8)  Cornices, corbelling, quoining, or stringcourses; 
9)  Decorative or functional window shutters; 
10)  Window planter boxes; 
11)  Transom windows; 
12)  Decorative faade lighting; 
13)  Chimneys or cupolas; or 
14)  Other architectural relief elements that provide a visual interest to the affected faade and are of a physical scale to possess architectural significance may be approved by the Administrator. 
d.  Other Mass and Design Requirements : 
1.  For all properties zoned SC Suburban Commercial: Gross Floor Area of a single structure shall not exceed fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in area. 
2.  For all properties zoned WC Wellborn Commercial: Gross Floor Area of a single structure shall not exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area. 
3.  For all properties zoned MU Mixed-Use: 
a.  The ground-floor shall have a minimum floor-to-ceiling height of twelve (12) feet. 
b.  The commercial portions of any faade facing a public right-of-way, street, or public way shall be at least thirty (30) percent transparent between zero (0) feet and eight (8) feet above ground level. 
c.  Public entry is required on all faades facing a public right-of-way, street, or public way. In the event that more than two (2) faades require a public entrance, the Administrator may determine which two (2) faades require entrances. The Administrator may also forward the question to the Design Review Board for any reason. 
d.  Loading docks, overhead doors and service entries shall not be located on a faade facing a public right-of-way, street, or public way. In the case that more than two (2) faades face a public right-of-way, street, or public way, the Administrator shall determine the most appropriate faade for such activities. 
e.  Roof and Roofline Design . 
1.  On buildings three (3) stories or less, the horizontal line of a flat roof or parapet along a primary entrance faade, along any faade facing a public right-of-way of a street classified as a minor arterial or greater on the Thoroughfare Plan, and on all faades visible from a public right-of-way for properties that are zoned MU Mixed Use, shall vary by a minimum of two (2) feet up or down so that no more than sixty-six (66) percent of the roofline is on the same elevation, as represented below. 

2.  For all rooflines that are required to articulate as described above, the parapet roof line shall feature a well-defined cornice or other architectural termination to visually cap the building along the roofline. 
3.  For all properties zoned WC Wellborn Commercial: Roofs shall be similar to residential roof types. Flat roofs are not permitted. Shed roofs are only permitted as part of a peaked roof network. A peaked parapet is permitted if it gives the appearance of a pitched roof from all sides. Roof slope must be a maximum of 8:12 and a minimum of 4:12. 
4.  Building Materials. 
a.  The following minimum amount of fired brick, natural stone, marble, granite, or any concrete product so long as it has an integrated color and is textured or patterned (not aggregate material) to simulate brick, stone, marble, or granite shall be provided: 
1.  A minimum of ten (10) percent on any faade visible from a public right-of-way or public way; 
2.  A minimum of twenty (20) percent on primary entrance faades (single or multiple tenant building) that exceed two-hundred (200) feet in horizontal length; 
3.  A minimum of twenty (20) percent on any faade facing a public right-of-way of a street classified as a major collector on the Thoroughfare Plan; and 
4.  A minimum of thirty (30) percent on any faade facing a public right-of-way of a street classified as a minor arterial or greater on the Thoroughfare Plan. 
b.  Building materials used to meet the minimum material requirements as provided above may not be painted. 
c.  The following building materials are allowed on all faades subject to the following limitations: 
1.  Stucco, EIFS, high build textured paint on concrete to simulate the appearance of stucco, split-face concrete masonry that does not simulate brick or stone, fiber cement siding, reflective glass, or any material equivalent in appearance and quality as determined by the Design Review Board, shall not cover more than seventy-five (75) percent of any faade. 
2.  Wood or cedar siding, stainless steel, chrome, standing seam metal, premium grade architectural metal, or architecturally finished metal panels (not corrugated metal) shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of any faade. 
3.  Tile or smooth face, tinted concrete blocks shall only be used as an accent and shall not cover more than ten (10) percent of any faade. 
4.  Painted metal panel siding is allowed without limitation on a rear faade of a building when the faade is not visible from a right-of-way, parkland, greenway, or any residential area. 
5.  Galvanized steel and painted steel are allowed on doors, including roll-up doors. 
6.  Metal, standing seam metal, architectural metal or steel may be used as a roof and or canopy/awnings with no limitation on percentage. 
7.  In WC Wellborn Commercial wood or cedar siding shall be allowed but not cover more than seventy-five (75) percent of any faade and reflective glass shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of any faade. 
d.  When determining the area of a faade, doors, windows, and other openings are included and roof area is not included. 
e.  Existing buildings may continue to utilize materials other than those listed provided that any material replacement is for maintenance purposes only and the existing material is continued. Any material change or replacement of more than fifty (50) percent of the total area of a faade, including on a cumulative basis, shall require that all building materials be brought into compliance on that faade. 
f.  All architectural submittals shall provide elevation drawings for each faade and a material legend (see sample below) for each faade. 
SAMPLE LEGEND 
USE OF MATERIALS ON FAADE 'A' Total Square Footage of Faade 'A': 10,000 s.f. Materials Faade Area in Square Feet Percent of Facade Stucco 2,000 s.f. 20% Brick 5,000 s.f. 50% Doors and Windows 3,000 s.f. 30%  
D.  Alternative Compliance Permitted. 
The Design Review Board (DRB) may authorize variation to the overall requirements of the Non-Residential Architectural Standards through application from a licensed architect for an alternative compliance approval that would allow innovative or visually interesting design or to address unique circumstances not otherwise permitted through strict adherence to this section. Such requests must show reasonable evidence that the purposes of the requirements as set forth in this section were maintained and the additional design flexibility afforded does not provide a means to permit design of lesser quality. 
E.  Waivers and Appeals. 
The Design Review Board (DRB) shall review requests for deviations from the Non-Residential Architectural Standards. The DRB shall approve waivers or appeals found meeting the intent and general purposes of the standards as it is recognized that unique and unforeseen design circumstances exist in application of the standards. Financial hardship may not be considered in the review or determination of a waiver proposal. 
DRB may review and grant approval of the following: 
1.  Substitutions of building materials if the applicant shows that: 
a.  The building material is a new or innovative material manufactured that has not been previously available to the market or the material is not listed as an allowed or prohibited material herein; 
b.  The material is similar and comparable in quality and appearance to the materials allowed in this Section 7.10; or 
c.  The material is an integral part of a themed building (example 50's diner in chrome). 
2.  Alternate materials on each faade if the applicant shows that: 
a.  The applicant is a franchised and/or chain commercial use to be developed as a single detached building (not integrated into a multi-tenant building); 
b.  The proposed materials are part of its corporate branding; and 
c.  The applicant provides all of the alternative materials schemes the chain or franchise has used. 
3.  Alternative materials on faade work that does not involve an expansion of an existing building as defined in Article 9 of the UDO or constitute redevelopment if the applicant shows that: 
a.  The materials allowed in this Section cannot be utilized without a structural alteration(s) to the existing building; 
b.  A licensed professional engineer or architect verifies in writing that a structural alteration is required to apply the permitted faade materials to the building; and 
c.  The DRB may grant a variance of up to one hundred (100) percent from the faade articulation or roofline standards herein if the applicant shows that it is not financially or structurally feasible. 
4.  Alternatives to the options for required screening of mechanical equipment. 
5.  Alternatives to the design elements available to provide architectural relief. 
6.  Relief from the building orientation and access for buildings in MU Mixed-Use districts when physical characteristics limit the site or provide unique orientation and access opportunities. 
7.  Reduction in the percentage of required building transparency for the rehabilitation or expansion of existing buildings in MU Mixed-Use districts if it can be proven by the applicant that inherent site characteristics constrain the proposed project from meeting the transparency requirement. 
F.  Submittal Requirements . 
When the non-residential architectural standards are applicable, submitted building elevations shall include the following: 
1.  Scaled building elevations for each faade, depicting the following: 
a.  Required architectural relief and other design elements; and 
b.  Location of building materials. 
2.  Accurate building footprint(s) and general orientation of the building faades in relation to adjacent rights-of-way, public ways, and properties; 
3.  Sample building material details as required by the Administrator; and 
4.  Table of vertical square footage and percentage of building materials for each faade. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. O), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-3663 , Pt. 1(Exh. H), 5-28-2015; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-3970 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 1-11-2018; Ord. No. 2018-3991 , Pt. 1(Exhs. G-J), 2-22-2018; Ord. No. 2018-3999 , Pt. 1(Exhs. H, I), 4-12-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4034 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-23-2018) 
Sec. 7.11. - Outdoor Lighting Standards. 
It is recognized that no design can eliminate all ambient light from being reflected or otherwise being visible from any given development; however, the following requirements shall be followed to the fullest extent possible in order to limit nuisances associated with lighting and resulting glare. 
A.  Applicability. 
All lighting within developments shall meet the requirements of this Section, except that single-family residential, duplexes, Primary & Secondary Educational Facilities containing a building with a Group "E" occupancy as defined in the International Building Code, athletic fields, and lighting not visible from the perimeter of a development are exempted. 
B.  Site Lighting Design Requirements. 
1.  Fixture (luminaire). 
The light source shall not project below an opaque housing. No fixture shall directly project light horizontally. 
2.  Light Source (lamp). 
Only incandescent, florescent, metal halide, mercury vapor, or color corrected high-pressure sodium may be used. The same type must be used for the same or similar types of lighting on any one (1) site throughout any master-planned development. 
3.  Mounting. 
Fixtures shall be mounted in such a manner that the projected cone of light does not cross any property line. 
C.  Specific Lighting Requirements. 
The following specific lighting requirements apply: 
1.  Faade and flagpole lighting must be directed only toward the faade or flag and shall not interfere with the night-visibility on nearby thoroughfares or shine directly at any adjacent residential use; 
2.  All lighting fixtures incorporated into non-enclosed structures (i.e., gas pump canopies, car washes, etc.) shall be fully recessed into the underside of such structures; 
3.  For properties zoned SC Suburban Commercial, site and building lighting may not be located within required buffer areas or within required building setbacks adjacent to single-family use or zoning district, except when pedestrian walkways or trails are provided. 
4.  For properties zoned SC Suburban Commercial and WC Wellborn Commercial, site and parking lot lighting fixtures may not exceed the eave height of the building to which they principally relate, with a maximum height limit of twenty (20) feet; and 
5.  For properties zoned BP Business Park, site and parking lot lighting fixtures may not exceed the height of the building to which they principally relate, with a maximum height limit of twenty (20) feet. 

Per Ordinance No. 3280 (September 9, 2010) 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2018-3999 , Pt. 1(Exh. J), 4-12-2018) 
Sec. 7.12. - Outdoor Storage and Display. 
A.  General. 
Outdoor storage and display is allowed in nonresidential districts in accordance with this Section. Any merchandise, material, or equipment situated outdoors and visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent properties shall be subject to the requirements of this Section. No outdoor storage or display shall be allowed to occur in required parking areas. For the purpose of this Section, outdoor storage, display, and sales shall be broken down into four (4) types, as follows. 
B.  Categories of Outdoor Storage and Display. 
1.  Outdoor Display. 
Outdoor display is display of items actively for sale or rent. Outdoor display shall be allowed adjacent to a principle building wall and extending to a distance no greater than five (5) feet from the wall. In lieu of this requirement, a business may obtain site plan approval for outdoor display areas adjacent to the principal building's public entry faade. Such areas shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total gross floor area of the principal structure or two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, whichever is less. Such storage shall not be permitted to block windows, entrances, or exits, and shall not restrict pedestrian or vehicular circulation, access, or parking. 
2.  Permanent Outdoor Sales Areas. 
Merchandise may be stored or displayed on site for sale to customers. Permanent outdoor sales areas shall be enclosed by a minimum six-foot screen or wall. Such areas shall not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or ten (10) percent of the total site area, whichever is less. Permanent outdoor sales areas must comply with district setback requirements. Such areas may not interfere with parking or parking lot requirements. Permanent areas open to the public for the display and/or sale of merchandise shall be shown on a site plan and will be included in parking requirement calculations. 
3.  Temporary Outdoor Sales and Storage. 
Temporary Outdoor Sales Areas, including sales tents, may be displayed for a two-week period in a calendar year. Such areas shall be clearly defined and shall not interfere with parking lot requirements. Christmas trees may be displayed for sale from November 15 to December 31. 
4.  General Outdoor Storage. 
Outdoor storage consists of all remaining forms of outdoor storage not classified above. Outdoor storage visible to the public right-of-way or adjacent properties is allowed so long as it is completely screened from view outside the site by a solid wall or fence at least six (6) feet in height. Except for developments in the M-2 district, outdoor storage shall not exceed the height of required screening. Outdoor storage shall not be allowed within a required front setback. 
C.  Exceptions. 
1.  Vehicles for sale as part of a properly permitted vehicle sales use (including boats and manufactured housing) shall not be considered merchandise, material, or equipment subject to the restrictions of this Section. Such vehicles shall be located and displayed on a paved area that meets parking lot pavement standards and shall be screened under the same requirements for a parking lot. 
2.  Waste generated on-site and deposited in ordinary refuse containers shall not be considered outdoor display or storage. 
D.  Location of Outdoor Storage and Display. 
Unless specifically authorized elsewhere in the City's Code of Ordinances, all outdoor storage, display, and sales shall be located outside the public right-of-way and must adhere to the required district setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 7.13. - Traffic Impact Analyses. 
This section establishes requirements and procedures pertaining to traffic impact analysis ("TIAs"). This Article is intended to inform the applicant of the City's expectations to ensure safe and adequate access to development properties; adequate traffic flow on existing and proposed/planned roadways; and sufficient connectivity of the existing and proposed/planned roadway system attributable to their proposal. In addition this Article is intended to expedite the City's review of TIA reports, provide standard criteria for evaluating proposals, and identify some potential mitigation measures. 
The TIA is intended to form the basis for design of any proposed access/roadway system to ensure coordination of the proposed land use with the transportation needs resulting there from. The City of College Station and the developer share responsibility to identify and solve transportation issues arising from land development. 
College Station requires that TIAs accompany certain zoning applications, certain site plan applications, and certain preliminary plan applications. It is intended that any TIA required for any type of land development proposal will complement the overall goal of ensuring that adequate transportation facilities are in place to serve land uses by the time those uses are occupied and generating traffic. These purposes are further amplified below. 
A.  Purpose . 
1.  Zoning TIA . 
The goal of a TIA submitted in conjunction with a zoning request is to determine the effect that uses allowed within various proposed zones will have on existing and/or any proposed/planned roadway systems, and to ensure there is a balance between future land uses and future transportation systems. Zoning applications that are required to have a TIA are evaluated using both current and long-term traffic and roadway scenarios. 
The TIA will determine whether acceptable levels of service will be maintained for traffic flow within the proposed project and in its study area. Where service levels fall below acceptable standards, mitigation solutions will be analyzed for their effectiveness. A TIA for a zoning request should not recommend mitigation measures that are inconsistent with any traffic or roadway provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance or the City's Comprehensive Plan, including the Thoroughfare Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall consider the findings of the TIA in approving or disapproving zoning changes to the extent allowed by law. 
2.  Preliminary Plan TIA . 
The goal of a TIA submitted in conjunction with a preliminary plan is twofold: to assess the adequacy and safety of proposed access to adjacent existing or planned roadways (or designs proposed for such access or roadways); and to determine effects the proposed project may have on current and future land development and roadway systems in its study area. Generally, the TIA uses current and anticipated near-term traffic volumes and roadway configurations for the analysis. The process should ensure that the roadway system is, or will be, adequate to accommodate the proposed use and that safe and adequate access will be provided for travel between the site and the public roadway system. 
Where the TIA shows levels of service falling below acceptable minimums on roadway systems in its study area the TIA will recommend appropriate mitigation measures and demonstrate their effectiveness. Example mitigation techniques may include adding/lengthening deceleration/turn lanes, improving driveway access, providing connectivity, and modifying traffic control devices. Combinations of these techniques and other techniques can be considered. A TIA for a preliminary plan should not recommend mitigation measures that are inconsistent with any traffic or roadway provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance or the City's Comprehensive Plan, including the Thoroughfare Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the findings of the TIA in approving or disapproving preliminary plans to the extent allowed by law. 
3.  Site Plan TIA . 
The goal of a TIA submitted in conjunction with a site plan is twofold: to assess the adequacy and safety of proposed access to adjacent existing or planned roadways (or designs proposed for such access or roadways); and to determine effects the site project may have on current and future land development and roadway systems in its study area. Generally, the TIA uses current and anticipated near-term traffic volumes and roadway configurations for the analysis. The process should ensure that the roadway system is, or will be, adequate to accommodate the proposed use and that safe and adequate access will be provided for travel between the site and the public roadway system. 
Where the TIA shows levels of service falling below acceptable minimums on roadway systems in its study area the TIA will recommend appropriate mitigation measures and demonstrate their effectiveness. Example mitigation techniques may include adding/lengthening deceleration/turn lanes, improving driveway access, providing connectivity, and modifying traffic control devices. Combinations of these techniques and other techniques can be considered. A TIA for a site plan should not recommend mitigation measures that are inconsistent with any traffic or roadway provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance or the City's Comprehensive Plan, including the Thoroughfare Plan. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the findings of the TIA in approving or disapproving site plans to the extent allowed by law. 
B.  Definitions . 
1.  Trip Generation Rates . 
Trip Generation Rates are used to estimate the amount of vehicular traffic generated by proposed rezoning or a proposed site plan. For Zoning and Preliminary Plan TIAs, these rates are shown by zoning district in the table below. Preliminary Plan trip generation rates should be based on the underlying zoning district. Site plan TIAs shall use rates set forth in the latest edition of the Trip Generation Report published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), unless said Report does not adequately address the type or intensity of the proposed land use. In this event the applicant or his agent shall submit projected vehicle trips to the Administrator. For land uses adequately represented in said Report, alternate trip generation rates shall not be accepted. 
Table 1
Trip Generation: Residential Land UsesZoning
Classification Maximum
Units/Acre ITE Land
Use Code Trip Rate /
Unit Trip Rate /
Acre R 0.33 210 1.00 0.33 WE 0.5 210 1.00 0.5 E 1 210 1.00 1 WRS 2 210 1.00 2 RS 4 210 1.00 4 GS 8 210 1.00 8 D 12 230 0.52 6.24 T 14 230 0.52 7.28 MF 30 220 0.62 18.6 MU Determined by Administrator MHP Determined by Administrator P-MUD Determined by Administrator  
  
Table 2
Trip Generation: Non-Residential Land UsesZoning
Classification Maximum
Units/Acre* ITE Land
Use Code Trip Rate /
KSF Trip Rate /
Acre O 16,000 sf 710 1.55 25 SC 11,000 sf 820 3.75 40 WC 11,000 sf 820 3.75 40 GC 13,500 sf 820 3.75 50 CI 16,000 sf 710 1.55 25 BP N/A 130 0.85 8.85 BPI N/A 770 1.43 19 CU Determined by Administrator PDD Determined by Administrator  
* Density maximum calculated based on existing (2007) developments in the City of College Station. 
  
Table 3
Trip Generation: Retired Land UsesZoning
Classification Maximum
Units/Acre* ITE Land
Use Code Trip Rate /
KSF Trip Rate /
Acre R-4 20.0 220 0.62 12.4 R-6 30.0 220 0.62 18.6 C-3 11,000 sf 820 3.75 40 R&D N/A 760 N/A 16.8 M-1 N/A 110 N/A 7.5 M-2 N/A 120 N/A 2.2  
2.  Design Year . 
The design year is the point in time upon which assumptions pertaining to land use, population, employment, and transportation facilities are based. All TIAs shall use a design year based on the expected date of project occupancy, and shall include consideration of nearby development that has been approved and will contribute traffic volume to the proposed project's study area. 
3.  Peak Periods . 
Peak periods relate to times of day experiencing the greatest hourly traffic flow rates. Two (2) "peaks" are to be addressed by a TIA: The morning and afternoon peak hours (or projected peak hours) of existing (or planned) roadways serving the proposed land development. Typically roadway peak periods are between 7:00 and 9:00 a.m. and between 4:00 and 6:00 p.m. 
4.  Base Volumes . 
Base volumes shall be based on current traffic counts adjusted to the expected date of project occupancy plus volumes generated by nearby future development (all phases) that has been approved by the City. When available, base data will be supplied by the City Traffic Engineer. In all cases where traffic counts are needed and are not available, the developer or his agent shall be required to collect such data according to guidelines approved by the Administrator. 
5.  Level of Service (LOS) . 
Level of Service is a measure of the extent of congestion experienced on roadways. It is measured through analysis of traffic operating conditions on roadway links and at intersections, using techniques presented in the latest edition of the Transportation Research Board's Highway Capacity Manual. 
C.  Applicability . 
1.  Zoning TIA. 
Any zoning request, except for certain "redevelopment" areas as designated on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use and Character Map, which is expected to generate at least one hundred fifty (150) vehicle trips during any peak hour period requires a TIA. Where the Comprehensive Plan designates a property as "Redevelopment" a TIA is required if the zoning request is expected to generate at least one hundred fifty (150) vehicle trips during any peak hour period more than those generated by the currently approved use(s) on the property. A zoning request involving multiple zoning districts is required to have a TIA based on the total traffic generated for all the proposed districts. A TIA may be required for a zoning request that generates less than one hundred fifty (150) trips in the peak hour, where the peaking characteristics could have a detrimental impact on the transportation system as determined by the Administrator. 
A TIA shall be required unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Administrator that a TIA is not necessary for the proposed rezoning request. In cases where a TIA is required, the rezoning application will be considered incomplete until the TIA is submitted 
2.  Preliminary Plan TIA . 
Any proposed development requiring preliminary plan approval, which is expected to generate at least one hundred fifty (150) trips in any peak hour period requires a TIA. A TIA may be required for preliminary plans that generate less than one hundred fifty (150) trips in any peak hour period where the peaking characteristics could have a detrimental impact on the area's vehicular transportation system as determined by the Administrator. 
A TIA shall be required unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Administrator that a TIA is not necessary for the proposed project. In cases where a TIA is required, the preliminary plan application must be accompanied by the TIA 
3.  Site Plan TIA. 
Any proposed development requiring site plan approval, excluding developments located in the zoning classifications of NG-1, NG-2, or NG-3, which is expected to generate at least one hundred fifty (150) trips in any peak hour period requires a TIA. A TIA may be required for site plans that generate less than one hundred fifty (150) trips in any peak hour period where the peaking characteristics could have a detrimental impact on the area's vehicular transportation system as determined by the Administrator. 
A TIA shall be required unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Administrator that a TIA is not necessary for the proposed site project. In cases where a TIA is required, the site plan application must be accompanied by the TIA. 
D.  Methodology . 
1.  Professional Engineer to perform TIA . 
All required TIAs shall be performed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas qualified to perform such analysis. Qualifications may include, but are not limited to, certification as a Professional Traffic Operations Engineer or Professional Transportation Planner by the Institute of Transportation Engineers or certification by the Texas Department of Transportation to conduct traffic engineering studies. 
2.  Pre-Submittal Meeting . 
A pre-submission consultation with the Administrator is required at the time of the Pre-Application Conference to discuss whether a TIA is required and, if so, the relevant aspects thereof. The study area will be defined to include nearby land developments (existing or approved), the street network to be examined (the "study network"), and the minimum extent of analysis. In addition, details of the procedures, assumptions, data collection, and analysis methodology(ies) will be determined at this meeting. Traffic from other nearby developments that have been approved but not yet constructed will be accounted for in the TIA as determined by the Administrator. The Administrator may require other specific assumptions such as the percent of trucks to match local conditions. The City may require analysis of peak fifteen (15) minute intervals for certain types of land uses that generate major traffic surges such as, but not limited to, stadiums, movie theaters, arenas, and schools. 
3.  Zoning TIA Content . 
a.  Study Area . 
A map(s) will delineate the TIA study area, including land areas to be considered and all existing/planned streets therein, and the "study network" (those streets and intersections requiring specific analysis). The study area shall be determined based on the geographical area most affected by the proposed zoning request as determined by the Administrator after conferring with the applicant's traffic engineer. 
b.  Existing Zoning . 
A description by zoning classification of the existing zoning in the area proposed for rezoning. 
c.  Proposed Zoning . 
A description of the proposed zoning including land area by zoning classification. 
d.  Roadway Network . 
A description of the existing and proposed/planned roadways of all classifications and traffic volumes on the study network within the study area. 
e.  Impact Determination . 
An assessment of projected traffic volumes is to be made for all study network roadways, comparing those with allowable volume limits on roadways classed as collector and local, and providing a description of the volume/capacity (V/C) ratio for all roadways in the study network. In addition delay projections for signalized and unsignalized intersections in the study network will be determined. Where V/C ratios and intersection delay are the measures of effectiveness Level of Service D or better must be maintained. The analysis shall contain the following minimum information: 
1.  Proposed Trip Generation . 
Show in tabular form trip generation rates (see Table 1, 2, or 3 as applicable) and the total trips generated based on proposed zoning. 
2.  Existing Trip Generation . 
Show in tabular form trip generation rates (see Table 1, 2, or 3 as applicable) and the total trips generated based on existing zoning. 
3.  Net Increased Trip Distribution and Assignment. 
Show proposed trip generation minus existing trips and the calculation of new trips generated. The net increase in trips generated by the zoning request is to be added to the base volumes projected by design year. Twenty-four-hour and peak hour volumes must be calculated. Distribution and assignment calculations must be provided. 
4.  Level of Service Analysis . 
Show in tabular form peak hour Level of Service for existing and proposed zoning. Calculations shall include all thoroughfare links and intersections. Calculate level of service and percentage change (when compared to base volumes) for each link and intersection. 
5.  Neighborhood Traffic Analysis . 
If a proposed rezoning is projected to increase the traffic on an existing or proposed/planned minor collector or local residential roadway (street) at least ten (10) percent, a neighborhood traffic analysis shall be performed. This analysis will include an evaluation of existing and projected traffic on the affected roadways. Where the projected traffic exceeds the limits indicated in the BCS Design Guidelines, street network layout must be adjusted to lower this traffic volume. 
6.  Conclusions . 
Summarize points of conflict and congestion, identify all thoroughfare links and intersections not achieving Level of Service D or better, and the percentage change resulting from the proposed zoning change. The results of examining collector and local residential roadways, including the findings of any neighborhood traffic analysis must also be summarized. 
f.  Mitigation . 
A description of the mitigation measures proposed for achieving acceptable service thresholds shall be shown. Analysis of the study network as adjusted by the proposed measures must be documented. Traffic produced by the proposed zoning request plus traffic levels projected by the time of project occupancy should result in Level of Service D or better. Locations not meeting Level of Service D where the proposed zoning contributes five (5) percent or more of the peak hour traffic must be mitigated by the applicant. Acceptable methods of mitigating negative traffic impacts include any one (1), or a combination of, the measures listed below but is not limited to those listed. 
1)  Modifying the zoning request so that resulting traffic volumes yield Level of Service D or better throughout the study network. 
2)  Modify any street network proposed as part of the development project in terms of size, layout, connectivity, intersection layouts, or location of termini with thoroughfares, or any combination of such changes. 
3)  Limit development densities/intensities within one (1) or more zoning classifications or land parcels to result in acceptable traffic volumes. 
4)  Making minor thoroughfare or intersection improvements, such as adding/extending or relocating turn lanes, adding/extending acceleration and/or deceleration lanes, adding non-traversable medians, relocating median openings, using special directional median openings, or using special features to facilitate safe U-turn maneuvers. 
Amendments to the City's Thoroughfare Plan shall not be accepted as a means of mitigating negative impacts, unless the proposed amendment(s) can be shown to enhance capacity and safety and will be constructed as part of the proposed land development project. 
g.  Planning and Zoning Commission Report. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a report to the City Council on all TIAs it considers in conjunction with requests for rezoning. The Planning and Zoning Commission may make a recommendation for approval, modification, or denial of the zoning case based on other planning factors in addition to its review of the TIA. 
Where the identified impacts of the proposed zoning cannot be adequately mitigated, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend to the City Council one (1) or more of the following actions: 
1.  Denial of the zoning case in total or in part. 
2.  Other action(s) deemed appropriate by a study made, or endorsed by, a qualified traffic engineer to mitigate negative traffic impacts. 
4.  Preliminary Plan TIA Content . 
Submittals of TIAs for preliminary plan projects shall include the following: 
a.  Study Area . 
A map(s) delineating the TIA study area, including land areas to be considered and all existing/planned roadways therein, and the "study network" (those roadways and intersections requiring specific analysis). The study area will be determined by identifying the geographical area most affected by the proposed development as determined by the Administrator after conferring with the applicant. In general the study area will cover all intersections through which at least ten (10) percent of the proposed development's site traffic passes, and shall extend to and include at least the first traffic signal in all directions if within one (1) mile of any portion of the site. Existing roadway and intersection capacities shall be shown. 
b.  Existing Zoning . 
A description of existing zoning in the area included in the preliminary plan. 
c.  Thoroughfare Network . 
A description of existing thoroughfares, signals, signal phasing and traffic volumes within the study area; 
d.  Proposed Development . 
A description of the proposed development including land area (gross and net), square footage, density, dwelling units, etc. Also a description of anticipated roadway conditions expected by the date of completion of the proposed development shall be included. 
e.  Proposed Roadway Network . 
Identification of the proposed roadway network for the preliminary plan. This shall include the location of access points, location and number of lanes of proposed roadways or public ways, and proposed traffic controls. It must also include any proposed modifications to adjacent roadways. 
f.  Impact Determination. 
A determination of the Level of Service for all roadways and intersections in the study area shall be included, as shall an evaluation of pedestrian, bicycle, and motor vehicle safety conditions within the preliminary plan. The analysis shall contain the following minimum information: 
1.  Proposed Trip Generation . 
A calculation of the total trip generation by use within the study area assuming full development and occupancy, including both peak hour and twenty-four-hour information show any reductions attributed to passers-by, mixed use, etc. show trip generation by use in tabular form with land use trip generation rates and trips generated. 
2.  Trip Distribution and Assignment. 
A calculation of trips generated by the proposed development as added to the base volumes projected for the design year. Peak hour volumes must be calculated. Distribution assumptions (and the bases therefore) and assignment calculations must be provided. 
3.  Level of Service Analysis . 
A depiction shown in tabular form, twenty-four-hour and peak hour volume/capacity ratios for links and intersections within the study area. This analysis should be done for the following traffic conditions: existing traffic, existing traffic plus projected traffic. 
4.  Neighborhood Traffic Analysis . 
If the TIA calculations show that a proposed preliminary plan increases traffic on a minor collector or local residential roadway (street) by at least ten (10) percent, a neighborhood traffic analysis shall be performed. This analysis will include an evaluation of existing and projected traffic on the affected roadways. Where the projected traffic exceeds the limits indicated in the BCS Design Guidelines mitigation to lower this traffic may be required. 
5.  Conclusions . 
A summary of findings must be reported. It must show all adjacent roadways and intersections noting those that fail to provide Level of Service D or better, and the percent increase in total traffic produced by the proposed project. In addition the report must demonstrate that the proposed roadway network will provide safe and adequate access to the development. It also must identify any safety and operational problems (e.g., driveways, sight distances, median openings, and signalization) within the study area. 
g.  Mitigation . 
A description of the mitigation measures proposed for meeting acceptable traffic service thresholds shall be shown. Where the development is contributing five (5) percent or more of the traffic at locations failing to meet Level of Service D or better the total trips should be mitigated by the applicant to low enough levels to achieve the required standard (or to pre-development levels, if pre-development level is less than Level of Service D). Acceptable measures for mitigating negative traffic impacts include any one (1), or a combination of, those listed below. 
1)  Modifying the density or intensity of land use, such as a reduction in square footage or the percentage of commercial use to result in traffic levels meeting Level of Service D or better; 
2)  Phasing approval and construction of a project until additional roadway capacity becomes available; 
3)  Modifying the proposed street network in terms of size, layout, connectivity, intersection layouts, or location of termini with thoroughfares or any combination of such changes; 
4)  Making off-site improvements including the construction of additional lanes, increases in storage lane capacities, or modification/installation of signalization, to list some examples. 
h.  Costs of Mitigation . 
Mitigation improvements which are attributable to the proposed development shall be funded at the developer's expense. Any other improvements shown which are consistent with the Thoroughfare Plan may be repaid by the City in accordance with its cost sharing policies. 
5.  Site Plan TIA Content . 
Submittals of TIAs for site plan projects shall include the following: 
a.  Study Area . 
A map(s) delineating the TIA study area, including land areas to be considered and all existing/planned roadways therein, and the "study network" (those roadways and intersections requiring specific analysis). The study area will be determined by identifying the geographical area most affected by the proposed development as determined by the Administrator after conferring with the applicant. In general the study area will cover all intersections through which at least ten (10) percent of the proposed development's site traffic passes, and shall extend to and include at least the first traffic signal in all directions if within one (1) mile of any portion of the site. Existing roadway and intersection capacities shall be shown. 
b.  Existing Zoning and Development . 
A description of existing zoning including land area (gross and net) by zoning classification, square footage, density of hotel rooms, dwelling units, etc. Also, a description of development currently within the proposed site plan, including showing how it will be affected by the new development proposal; 
c.  Thoroughfare Network . 
A description of existing thoroughfares, signals, signal phasing and traffic volumes within the study area; 
d.  Proposed Development . 
A description of the proposed development including land area (gross and net), square footage, density of hotel rooms, dwelling units, etc. Also a description of anticipated roadway conditions expected by the date of occupancy of the proposed development shall be included. 
e.  Proposed Access . 
Identification of the proposed access driveways for the site. This shall include the location and number of lanes, proposed traffic controls, and relationship to on-site circulation features for each proposed point of access. It must also include any proposed modifications to adjacent roadways. Once the TIA and an access plan has been approved, the final location and design of all access points shall meet or exceed the current access management and roadway design policies of the entity responsible for the condition of that portion of adjacent roadway. 
f.  Impact Determination . 
A determination of the Level of Service for all roadways and intersections in the study area shall be included, as shall an evaluation of pedestrian, bicycle, and motor vehicle safety conditions along all the roadway frontage of the site. The analysis shall contain the following minimum information: 
1.  Proposed Trip Generation . 
A calculation of the total trip generation by use within the study area assuming full development and occupancy, including both peak hour and twenty-four-hour information show any reductions attributed to passers-by, mixed use, etc. show trip generation by use in tabular form with land use trip generation rates and trips generated. 
2.  Trip Distribution and Assignment . 
A calculation of trips generated by the proposed development as added to the base volumes projected for the design year. Peak hour volumes must be calculated. Distribution assumptions (and the bases therefore) and assignment calculations must be provided. 
3.  Level of Service Analysis . 
A depiction shown in tabular form, twenty-four-hour and peak hour volume/capacity ratios for links and intersections within the study area. This analysis should be done for the following traffic conditions: existing traffic, existing traffic plus projected traffic. Capacity analyzes must be shown for all points of ingress and egress, median breaks, and turn lanes associated with the proposed site. 
4.  Neighborhood Traffic Analysis . 
If the TIA calculations show that a proposed site project increases traffic on a minor collector or local residential roadway (street) by at least ten (10) percent, a neighborhood traffic analysis shall be performed. This analysis will include an evaluation of existing and projected traffic on the affected roadways. Where the projected traffic exceeds the limits indicated in the BCS Design Guidelines mitigation to lower this traffic may be required. 
5.  Conclusions . 
A summary of findings must be reported. It must show all adjacent roadways and intersections noting those that fail to provide Level of Service D or better, and the percent increase in total traffic produced by the proposed site project. In addition the report must demonstrate that the proposed access design will provide safe and adequate access to the project site. It also must identify any safety and operational problems (e.g., driveways, sight distances, median openings, and signalization) within the study. 
g.  Mitigation . 
A description of the mitigation measures proposed for meeting acceptable traffic service thresholds shall be shown. Where the development is contributing five (5) percent or more of the traffic at locations failing to meet Level of Service D or better the total trips should be mitigated by the applicant to low enough levels to achieve the required standard (or to pre-development levels, if pre-development level is less than Level of Service D). Acceptable measures for mitigating negative traffic impacts include any one (1), or a combination of, those listed below. 
1)  Modifying the density or intensity of land use, such as a reduction in square footage or the percentage of commercial use to result in traffic levels meeting Level of Service D or better; 
2)  Phasing approval and construction of a project until additional roadway capacity becomes available; 
3)  Improving the access plan by dealing with features such as overall site arrangement, the placement and design features of access points, provision of additional access points to roadways not immediately adjacent to the property, provision of alternate controls, or adjustments in the site circulation system; 
4)  Making off-site improvements including the construction of additional lanes, increases in storage lane capacities, or modification of signalization, to list some examples. 
h.  Costs of Mitigation . 
Mitigation improvements which are attributable to the proposed development shall be funded at the developer's expense. Any other improvements shown which are consistent with the Thoroughfare Plan may be repaid by the City in accordance with its cost sharing policies. 
E.  Criteria for Approval . 
The City shall consider the following standards in determining whether a proposed rezoning or submitted site plan project meets an acceptable Level of Service: 
1.  Design Requirement . 
The proposed rezoning or site plan project is consistent with the City's adopted access management and design requirements and is consistent with the design requirements of the Texas Department of Transportation on roadways maintained by such agency. 
2.  Level of Service D . 
The desirable minimum Level of Service for the City of College Station is a Level of Service D as that term is described in the Transportation Research Board's Highway Capacity Manual. 
3.  Determination of Adequate Mitigation . 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the appropriate Administrator and the appropriate reviewing body, where required, shall, based on recommendations by a qualified traffic engineer, determine whether adequate mitigation has occurred to meet an acceptable level of service utilizing the requirements set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. I), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. L), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2016-3796 , PT. 1(Exh. A), 8-11-2016) 
Sec. 7.14. - Drainage and Stormwater Management. 
A.  General. 
1.  Purpose and intent. 
This section establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal stormwater drainage system and establishes legal authority for the City to carry out all inspections, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with the MS4 permit for industrial and construction activity. 
2.  Compatibility with other regulations. 
a.  This section is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this section imposes restriction of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
b.  Any reference to this section shall also apply to Section 7.13 of this Code of Ordinances, and both Sections shall be interpreted and enforced in conjunction with each other, where applicable. 
3.  Definitions. 
In this section: 
Best management practices (BMP) means schedules of activities, practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of the municipal stormwater drainage system and waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
Construction activity or construction activities include clearing, grading, and excavating that are subject to TPDES General Construction Permits. It does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, and original purpose of a ditch, channel, or other similar storm water conveyance. Additionally, it does not include the routine grading of existing dirt roads, asphalt overlays of existing roads, the routine clearing of existing rights-of-way, and similar maintenance activities. 
Construction site means any construction site required by the Clean Water Act to operate within the limits of a TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with construction activity. 
Construction site notice (CSN) means a written submission to the MS4 operator from an applicant stating that a small construction activity will be commencing and will operate under the provisions of the TCEQ General Permit TXR150000. 
Facility means any facility, industrial facility or construction site, required by the Clean Water Act to have a permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity. 
Final Stabilization means that: 
a.  All soil disturbing activities at the Site have been completed and either of the two (2) following criteria are met: 
1)  A uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of seventy (70) percent of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures; or 
2)  Equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed. 
b.  When background native vegetation or other appropriate vegetation will cover less than one hundred (100) percent of the ground (e.g., arid areas, beaches), the seventy (70) percent coverage criteria is adjusted as follows: if the native vegetation or other appropriate vegetation covers fifty (50) percent of the ground, seventy (70) percent of fifty (50) percent (0.70  0.50 = 0.35) would require thirty-five (35) percent total cover for final stabilization. On a beach with no natural vegetation, no stabilization is required. 
c.  For individual lots in residential construction, final stabilization means that either: 
1)  The homebuilder has completed final stabilization as specified above; or 
2)  The homebuilder has established temporary stabilization including perimeter controls for an individual lot prior to occupation of the home by the homeowner and informing the homeowner of the need for, and benefits of, final stabilization. 
d.  For construction Projects on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g., pipelines across crop or range land, staging areas for highway construction, etc.), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to "Surface Waters of the State," and areas which are not being returned to their preconstruction agricultural use must meet the final stabilization criteria (a) or (b) or (c) above. 
Industrial facility means any facility required by the Clean Water Act to have a permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity subject to TPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
Notice of change (NOC) means the notification of changes to SWP3 that is required by the TPDES Stormwater Permits. 
Notice of intent (NOI) means the advance notification that is required by the TPDES Stormwater Permits prior to commencement of work. 
Notice of termination (NOT) means the notification that is required by the TPDES Stormwater Permits upon completion of work. 
Regulated activity means an activity occurring at an industrial facility or construction site, which qualifies the facility or site to acquire a permit to discharge stormwater under the Clean Water Act. 
Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the municipal stormwater drainage system, the water of the state, the waters of the United States. 
Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity means the discharge from any conveyance which is used for collecting and conveying stormwater and which is directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage areas at an industrial facility. The following categories of facilities are considered to be engaging in "industrial activity": 
a.  Facilities subject to stormwater effluent limitations guidelines, new source performance standards, or toxic pollutant effluent standards under 40 CFR. subchapter N (except facilities with toxic pollutant effluent standards which are exempted under category (k) of this definition); 
b.  Facilities classified as Standard Industrial Classifications 24 (except 2434), 26 (except 265 and 267), 28 (except 283), 29, 311, 32 (except 323), 33, 3441, 373; 
c.  Facilities classified as Standard Industrial Classifications 10 through 14 (mineral industry) including active or inactive mining operations (except for areas of coal mining operations no longer meeting the definition of a reclamation area under 40 CFR  434.11(1) because the performance bond issued to the facility by the appropriate federal Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) authority has been released, or except for areas of noncoal mining operations which have been released from applicable state or federal reclamation requirements after December 17, 1990 and oil and gas exploration, production, processing, or treatment operations, or transmission facilities that discharge stormwater contaminated by contact with or that has come into contact with, any overburden, raw material, intermediate products, finished products, byproducts or waste products located on the site of such operations; 
d.  Hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal facilities, including those that are operating under interim status or a permit under subtitle C of the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); 
e.  Landfills, land application sites, and open dumps that receive or have received any industrial wastes (waste that is received from any of the facilities described under this subsection) including those that are subject to regulation under subtitle D of RCRA; 
f.  Facilities involved in the recycling of materials, including metal scrap yards, battery reclaimers, salvage yards, and automobile junkyards, including but limited to those classified as Standard Industrial Classification 5015 and 5093; 
g.  Steam electric power generating facilities, including coal handling sites; 
h.  Transportation facilities classified as Standard Industrial Classifications 40, 41, 42 (except 422125), 43, 44, 45, and 5171 which have vehicle maintenance shops, equipment cleaning operations, or airport deicing operations. Only those portions of the facility that are either involved in vehicle maintenance, equipment cleaning operations, airport deicing operations, or which are otherwise identified under paragraphs (a)-(g) or (i)-(k) of this definition are associated with industrial activity; 
i.  Treatment works treating domestic sewage or any other sewage sludge or wastewater treatment device or system, used in the storage treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal or domestic sewage, including land dedicated to the disposal of sewage sludge that are located within the confines of the Facility, with a design flow of one (1.0) mgd or more, or required to have an approved pretreatment program under 40 CFR part 403. Not included are farm lands, domestic gardens or lands used for sludge management where sludge is beneficially reused and which are not physically located in the confines of the facility, or areas that are in compliance with section 405 of the Clean Water Act; 
j.  Construction activity including clearing, grading and excavation activities except: operations that result in the disturbance of less than one (1) acre of total land area which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale; 
k.  Facilities under Standard Industrial Classifications (SIC Code) 20, 21, 22, 23, 2434, 25, 265, 267, 27, 283, 285, 30, 31 (except 311), 323, 34 (except 3441), 35, 36, 37 (except 373), 38, 39, 422125, (and which are not otherwise included within categories (b)-(j) of this definition); 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3) means a plan required by a TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity or construction activity and which describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges from industrial facilities and construction sites. 
Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) means the regulatory program delegated to the State of Texas by the EPA pursuant to 33 USC  1342(b). 
TPDES Permit means a permit issued by the TCEQ under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC  1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the state, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
B.  Prohibitions. 
1.  Unpermitted discharges prohibited. 
It is an offense for an operator or responsible party of a facility to: 
a.  Discharge, or cause to be discharged, stormwater associated with industrial or construction site activity without first having obtained a TPDES permit from the TCEQ. 
b.  Operate a facility that is discharging stormwater associated with a construction site activity without having submitted a copy of the NOI or construction site notice to the City. 
c.  Introduce sediment, concrete, asphalt or any other construction debris into the MS4 from a construction activity. The Administrator will provide the operator a reasonable amount of time, to remove any pollutants or debris from the MS4 conveyances. 
C.  Facility Inspection for Stormwater Discharges. 
1.  Applicability for industrial and construction activity. 
a.  This section applies to all facilities located within the City limits that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity or construction site activity. State regulations require that subject facilities apply for and obtain general permits for industrial facilities (TPDES TXR050000) and construction sites (TXR150000) that have been determined to contribute or have the potential to contribute substantial pollutant loads to the MS4 or waters of the state. The general permits require that the permittee develop, implement, and maintain a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWP3) and submit a NOI notifying the TCEQ and the MS4 operator (City of College Station). 
b.  The MS4 permit issued to the City by the TCEQ mandates the City to "Carry out all inspections, surveillance, and monitoring procedures necessary to determine compliance with permit conditions" (Part III (E)(6)) and to implement a program that shall include "Inspection of construction sites and enforcement of control measure requirements" (Part III (A)(9)(b)). To meet these requirements the City must enter onto the premises of industrial and construction sites to inspect, monitor, and conduct surveillance of requirements mandated by the TCEQ. These requirements include, but are not limited to: 
1)  Review of the facilities' SWP3 with onsite conditions; 
2)  Evaluation of BMP to effectively prohibit the discharge of nonstormwater to the MS4; 
3)  Inspection for illicit connections and illicit discharges; 
4)  Self inspection compliance; and 
5)  Compliance with the City's MS4 permit and the facilities subject general permit (TXR150000 or TXR050000). 
2.  Access to industrial facilities and construction sites. 
a.  The intent of facility inspections shall be to determine compliance with the conditions of the City's TPDES permit, any TPDES general permit the facility is currently obligated to for industrial and construction activities, and this section. Facility owners and operators will allow the Administrator ready access to applicable sections of public and private premises for the sole purpose of inspection, surveillance, and monitoring for the presence of illegal discharges to the MS4, illicit connections to the MS4, and assessment of any portions of a regulated facility influenced by stormwater runoff that may adversely affect the MS4 or waters of the United States. 
b.  Admittance to the facility shall be requested at a reasonable time during the facilities normal working hours unless it is determined by the Administrator that imminent and substantial danger exists. 
c.  The owner or operator shall make all necessary arrangements to allow access to the Administrator. 
d.  If the owner or operator refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the City is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. 
e.  The Administrator retains the authority to collect samples and photographs from stormwater outfalls or other components of the MS4 as may be deemed appropriate in the administration and enforcement of this section. 
f.  The Administrator has the authority to establish on subject facilities devices as are necessary in the opinion of the Administrator to conduct monitoring of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
g.  The Administrator or the designated inspector must present appropriate credentials to the facility officials at the time of entry to a facility. 
3.  Review and modification of stormwater pollution prevention plans. 
a.  The Administrator has the authority to request to review any documents or plans (stormwater pollution prevention plan, spill prevention control plans, hazardous material plans, waste management documentation, etc.) from a regulated facility that the Administrator deems may affect stormwater discharges to the MS4. 
b.  The Administrator may require an operator of a regulated facility to modify its stormwater pollution prevention plan if the stormwater pollution prevention plan does not comply with the requirements of the facility's TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity. 
c.  The deficiencies in a facility's stormwater pollution prevention plan will be communicated in writing, and the Administrator will provide the operator a reasonable amount of time to make the necessary changes in the stormwater pollution prevention plan. 
4.  Review and modifications of best management practices. 
a.  Any person engaged in activities or operation, or owning facilities or property, which will or may result in pollutants entering the MS4 or waters of the United States, shall implement BMPs to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. The owner or operator of a regulated facility shall prove reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or waters of the United States. Practices implemented to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's expense. 
b.  The City does not maintain a list of required or approved BMPs for regulated facilities. The Administrator may request facilities to demonstrate the effectiveness of implemented BMPs. Suggested BMPs and a list of prohibited BMPs will be maintained in the B/CS Drainage Design Guidelines. 
c.  The Administrator may require an operator of a regulated facility to modify its BMP if the BMPs do not provide effective protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes from entering into the MS4 or waters of the United States. 
d.  The deficiencies in a facility's BMP will be communicated in writing, and the Administrator will provide the operator a reasonable amount of time to make the necessary changes in the BMPs. 
5.  Compliance with permit. 
a.  A facility shall be operated in strict compliance with the requirements of the TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial or construction site activity. 
b.  A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility in violation of a requirement of the facility's TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial or construction site activity. 
D.  Stormwater Discharges Associated with Industrial Activity. 
1.  Applicability. 
This subsection applies to all facilities located within the City limits that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity. 
2.  Industrial and high risk runoff monitoring. 
a.  All hazardous waste treatment and storage facilities, active municipal landfills, facilities subject to section 313 of Title III of the Superfund Amendment and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA), and any other industrial discharger the City determines is contributing a substantial pollutant load to the MS4 shall submit self-monitoring data to the City on an annual basis. Submittal date of self-monitoring data is to be determined by the Administrator. 
b.  The City's MS4 permit requires that all industrial facilities listed in (a) be subject to site inspections of no less than once per permit term (five (5) years). However, the Administrator has the authority to inspect these industrial facilities as often as deemed necessary to assure permit compliance and safety of the MS4 and waters of the United States. 
c.  An unreasonable delay or refusal to submit self-monitoring data to the Administrator is a violation of this section. A person who is the operator of an industrial facility with a TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the Administrator reasonable access to a facility's self-monitoring data for the purpose of review required by this section. 
d.  An industrial facility may submit a "no exposure" certification to the City in lieu of self-monitoring; however, any facility operating under a "no exposure" certification is subject to periodic facility inspections (not less than once per permit term-five (5) years) to verify the facility's "no exposure" exemption. 
e.  The City may waive monitoring requirements for industrial facilities determined to be in compliance with the TPDES Multi-Sector General Permit Number TXR050000. 
f.  The Administrator has the authority to conduct inspections on any industrial facility subject to the TCEQ's TPDES Multi-Sector General Permit or has been deemed to be, or has potential to be, contributing a substantial pollutant load to the MS4 to determine compliance and safety of the MS4 and waters of the United States. 
E.  Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction Activity. 
1.  Applicability. 
This subsection applies to all facilities located within the City limits that have stormwater discharges associated with construction activity. 
2.  Submission of notice of intent, notice of change, notice of termination or construction site notice to municipal stormwater drainage system operator. 
a.  The operator of a construction site required to have a TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with construction activity shall submit a copy of the above notices to the Administrator at the same time the operator submits the original notice to the TCEQ. 
b.  The operator of a construction site which does not require a NOI is required to submit, per TCEQ's TPDES general permit for construction sites, a construction site notice to the Administrator. 
c.  Copies of all notices may be delivered to the Administrator either in person or by mail. 
F.  Enforcement. 
Any person found guilty of violating a provision of this section may be punished as provided for in Section 10.6 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3431 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 7-12-2012) 
Article 8. - Subdivision Design and Improvements 

Sec. 8.1. - Purpose. 
The subdivision of land is a major factor in the process of sound community growth and ultimately becomes a public responsibility in that the streets and other infrastructure must be maintained and various public services customary to urban areas must be provided. These regulations seek to protect the interests of public and private parties by granting certain rights and privileges and requiring certain obligations in association with the subdivision and development of land. The welfare of the entire community is affected in many important respects. Therefore, it is in the interest of the public, the developer, and the future landowners that the subdivisions and developments be conceived, designed, and developed in accordance with sound rules and proper minimum standards. These regulations encourage the growth of the City of College Station in an orderly manner. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
Sec. 8.2. - Applicability. 
With the exception of Section 8.8, "Requirements for Park Land Dedication," the provisions of this article shall not apply to property zoned BioCorridor Planned Development District. Section 8.8, "Requirements for Park Land Dedication," shall apply to property zoned BioCorridor Planned Development District. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. L), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 8.3. - General Requirements and Minimum Standards of Design for Subdivisions within the City Limits. 
A.  Suitability of Lands. 
The Commission shall approve the subdivision of land if, from adequate investigations conducted by all public agencies concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of the public, the site is suitable for platting and development purposes of the kind proposed. 
B.  Zoning and Other Regulations. 
No plat of land within the force and effect of an existing zoning ordinance shall be approved unless it conforms to such zoning and other pertinent regulations. 
C.  Reserved Strips and Tracts Prohibited. 
A plat shall not provide reserved strips or tracts of land. In addition, the effect of phasing of a plat, provision of common area or other land or easement shall not unnecessarily restrict access to land, right-of-way, or easements dedicated or intended to be dedicated to the public by the subject plat or adjacent developments. 
D.  Technical Standards. 
All public infrastructure shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Bryan/College Station Unified Technical Specifications, Bryan/College Station Unified Construction Details and all other applicable local, state, and federal requirements. Hereafter, these documents shall be referred to collectively as the "B/CS Unified Design Guidelines." Where there is a conflict of standards, the more stringent standard shall apply, as determined by the City Engineer. The City shall accept for public use only streets, alleys, water, waste water, drainage, and other public infrastructure that comply with these standards for construction. 
E.  Streets. 
1.  Streets on the Thoroughfare Plan. 
Where a subdivision encompasses or is adjacent to a thoroughfare, as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan of the City, the thoroughfare shall be constructed and included in the subdivision plat to maintain continuity in the approximate location as shown, and of the type indicated. 
2.  Relation to Adjoining Street System. 
a.  Where there is an existing street adjacent to or through the area to be subdivided, the necessary street intersections to the existing street shall be constructed. 
b.  Existing and planned streets and Public Ways in adjacent or adjoining areas shall be continued in alignment therewith. 
c.  When land is subdivided into larger parcels rather than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of future streets and logical further subdivisions. 
3.  Street Projections. 
a.  When a public street is provided internal to the platting property and adjoining areas are not platted, the platting subdivision shall provide street projections to such areas by projecting a public street at intervals no fewer than the maximum block length along the perimeter boundary of the subdivision. 
b.  Where abutting properties are landlocked, a street connection or street frontage shall be provided through the platting property. 
c.  In lieu of a public street, a Public Way may satisfy a required street projection when the Public Way is projected to future non-residential or multi-family development and can be continued through that development to a public street. 
4.  Adequate Street Access. 
a.  One (1) external street connection is required for a street serving as roadway access for thirty (30) or fewer lots. 
b.  When there are more than thirty (30) lots to be served by external street connections, a minimum of two (2) street connections to external paved public streets shall be required. The Commission may allow a Remote Emergency Access where development phasing or constraints of the land prevent the provision of a second street connection. Notwithstanding the foregoing, two (2) street connections to external paved public streets shall be required when one hundred (100) or more lots are served. 
c.  Three (3) street connections to external paved public streets may be required by the Commission when two hundred (200) or more lots are served. 
d.  Where more than one (1) external street connection is required, at least one (1) external street connection shall not be located over a potential hazard such as a high-pressure gas line or a creek where the one hundred-year floodplain overtops the street, regardless of its classification. 
5.  Intersections. 
In addition to the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines, proposed street and alley intersections shall meet the minimum spacing and requirements of the Access Management and Circulation section in Article 7 General Development Standards of this UDO. 
6.  Dead-End Streets. 
Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except short stubs to permit future extension. Temporary turnarounds shall be required for stubs in length of more than one hundred (100) feet or the depth of one (1) lot, whichever is less. 
7.  Culs-de-Sac. 
a.  The maximum length of a cul-de-sac is based on the designation on the Thoroughfare Plan Functional Classification and Context Class Map in the adopted Comprehensive Plan in which the cul-de-sac is located. The length of a cul-de-sac is measured along the centerline of the cul-de-sac street from the center of the bulb to the edge of the nearest intersecting through street right-of-way. Culs-de-sac shall not exceed the following lengths: 
1)  Four hundred fifty (450) feet in General Urban Context Zones; 
2)  One thousand two hundred (1,200) feet in Suburban Context Zones; and 
3)  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet in Rural Context Zones. 
b.  Culs-de-sac are not permitted in the Urban Core Context Zones unless the proposed subdivision is surrounded by platted property and where a through street is not possible. 
c.  Regardless of length, culs-de-sac shall have no more than thirty (30) lots. 
8.  Geometric Standards, Street Design Criteria. 
a.  Streets and alleys shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines. 
b.  Rural Residential subdivision streets may be constructed to either rural street standards or urban curb and gutter standards except that thoroughfares that continue beyond the boundary of a Rural Residential subdivision to an urban one shall be constructed to urban curb and gutter standards. 
9.  Existing Substandard Street Right-of-Way. 
a.  Whenever an existing right-of-way is within or adjacent to a proposed subdivision and such right-of-way width is substandard, the additional width for the street shall be dedicated. For development occurring on only one (1) side of such a roadway, the amount dedicated shall generally equal one-half (1/2) of the deficiency in width based on the classification and type of street, as measured from the existing centerline of the right-of-way. If the parcel(s) on the opposite side of the right-of-way previously dedicated a portion, the proposed plat shall dedicate the remaining width. If the opposite side of the right-of-way has a permanent constraint such as a railroad right-of-way or conservation easement, the full width of the deficiency may be required. 
b.  The Administrator may reduce, increase, or eliminate the amount of right-of-way dedication based on design considerations, existing land uses, existing development on adjacent properties, and dimensions of the proposed subdivision or plat. 
c.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, additional right-of-way dedication is not required for Amending Plats. 
10.  Street Names and Addresses. 
a.  Proposed streets that are extensions of existing streets shall bear the name of the existing street, unless otherwise recommended by the Administrator. 
b.  New streets shall be named to prevent conflict or confusion with identical or similar names in the City, Brazos County 911 district, or the City's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). 
c.  Streets shall not be named after any living person. 
d.  A proposed street name may be disapproved if it too closely approximates phonetically the name of an existing street, is too difficult to pronounce, or carries undesirable meanings or connotations. 
e.  Street addresses shall be assigned by the Administrator. 
F.  Alleys. 
1.  Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots intended to be used for business purposes and residential lots fronting a thoroughfare. 
2.  Alleys shall generally be parallel to the street that the lot it serves fronts. 
3.  Where two (2) alleys intersect, or where an alley turns, additional width may be required to allow turning of vehicles or guying of utility poles. 
4.  Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted, except where the alley is one hundred (100) feet or less in length or the width of one (1) lot, whichever is less. 
5.  Residential lots served by an alley shall only have driveway access via the alley. 
6.  Public alleys are prohibited in Rural Residential subdivisions. 
7.  Private alleys shall be constructed to public alley standards except that it shall be located within a common area or private access easement. The City reserves the right to not provide sanitation and fire service along private alleys. 
G.  Blocks. 
1.  Blocks for single-family, duplex, and townhouse lots shall be platted to provide two (2) tiers of lots with a utility easement or alley between them. A single tier of lots may be used if the lots back up to a thoroughfare, railroad, or floodplain. 
2.  In order to provide a public street network that is complimentary to the Thoroughfare Plan and that ensures uniform access and circulation to areas intended for similar land use contexts, block length shall not exceed the following dimensions based on the designation on the Thoroughfare Plan Functional Classification and Context Class Map in the adopted Comprehensive Plan along which the block is located: 
a.  Six hundred sixty (660) feet in Urban Core Context Zones; 
b.  Nine hundred (900) feet in General Urban Context Zones; 
c.  One thousand two hundred (1,200) feet in Suburban Context Zones; and 
d.  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet in Rural Context Zones. 
3.  If a plat is not bounded by a public through street or other qualifying break to block length then the block length measurement shall continue to extend each way beyond the plat along the public through street until the nearest intersecting through street or qualifying break to the block is reached. 
4.  Reserved. 
5.  In lieu of a public street, non-residential and multi-family developments may opt to construct a Public Way to satisfy block length requirements when the Public Way connects two (2) public streets. The plat shall dedicate a public access easement that covers the entire width of the private drive and sidewalks for the Public Way. The private drive and sidewalks may be constructed with the development of the property. A Public Way shall not substitute for a thoroughfare identified on the City's Thoroughfare Plan. 
6.  Block length shall not require a new street, Public Way, or Access Way to enter the face of a block when: 
a.  The surrounding area of the block is subdivided so that a through movement is not possible or a new block cannot be created. 
b.  The development is zoned for single family uses and is being platted through a Development Plat or Minor Plat. 
H.  Lots. 
1.  General Requirements. 
a.  Lots shall be identified in numerical order within a block. 
b.  Lot size and setback lines shall be in accordance with the applicable zoning requirements. 
c.  Lots established for special purposes such as common area, open space, parkland, floodplain, drainage, utilities, or other similar facilities shall be uniquely named and are not required to meet the minimum dimensional standards for the applicable zoning district. 
d.  Side lot lines shall be substantially right angle to straight right-of-way or radial to the curved right-of-way. 
e.  Land located within the FEMA designated floodway shall not be included within a lot intended for residential occupancy. 
f.  Lots shall be laid out so as not to cross municipal, county, school district, or utility service area boundaries. 
g.  A subdivision shall not cause an existing structure to encroach into the setback of a proposed lot line. 
h.  Single-family, duplex, and townhouse lots shall have frontage on a public street or a private street constructed to public standard. Lots intended for other uses that do not have frontage on a public street shall provide access via a Public Way or a private access easement containing a drive that meets City fire lane standards. The construction of the private drive may be delayed until the time of site development. 
i.  No single-family dwelling, townhouse, or duplex lot shall have direct access to an arterial or collector thoroughfare; however, these lots may face toward a thoroughfare if driveway access is provided via a public alley. Notwithstanding the foregoing, single-family detached lots that are at least one hundred (100) feet in width may have direct access with the recommendation of the Administrator and approval of the Commission. Access restrictions and determinations shall be noted on the plat. 
2.  Platting and Replatting within Older Residential Subdivisions. 
a.  This section applies to a subdivision in which any portion of the proposed subdivision meets all of the following criteria: 
1)  Such portion of the subdivision is currently zoned or developed for single-family detached residential uses as of January 1, 2002 with the exception of NG-1, NG-2, NG-3, NPO, and NCO zoning districts; 
2)  Such portion of the subdivision is part of a lot or building plot that was located within the City limits when it was created on or prior to July 15, 1970. This also includes lots that may have been vacated or replatted after July 15, 1970 but where the original plat predates July 15, 1970; and, 
3)  Such portion of the subdivision is designated as Neighborhood Conservation in the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use and Character Map. 
b.  In addition to the other provisions of this UDO, no plat or replat intended to provide for the resubdivision of an existing lot or lots in a residential subdivision which meets the above criteria may be approved unless: 
1)  The plat does not create an additional lot or building plot; or 
2)  For a proposed plat which does create an additional lot or lots, the lot(s) must meet or exceed the average width of the lots along the street frontage for all of the lots in the block, including the subject lot(s)and contain at least eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet of space for each dwelling unit. 
For the purpose of determining the average lot width, a lot shall be defined to include the lot, lots and/or portions of lots that have been combined and used as a residential plot or building plot, as of July 15, 1970. The Administrator may include the lots on the opposing blockface when calculating the average lot width if the lots are similar in character and the Administrator may exclude lots to the rear when said lots are part of another subdivision or dissimilar in character. 
c.  It is the applicant's responsibility to provide documentation during the application process regarding the original plat in which the lot was created and/or the configuration and ownership documentation of the properties since July 15, 1970. 
3.  Zero Lot Line Development. 
The following requirements apply to all proposed subdivisions with single-family residential lot line construction. 
a.  Description. 
Zero lot line developments require planning for all house locations to be done at the same time. Restrictions that assure the minimum distance between houses and any required easements must be recorded on the plats of the applicable lots. 
b.  Setbacks. 
The side building setback shall be zero on one (1) side of the house. This reduction does not apply to the street side setback or to the interior side setback adjacent to lots that are not part of the zero lot line portion of the plat. The minimum distance between all buildings within the lot line development must be fifteen (15) feet. 
c.  Eaves. 
Eaves may project a maximum of eighteen (18) inches, excluding non-combustible gutters, over the adjacent property line. 
d.  Maintenance Easement. 
A maintenance easement shall be dedicated between the two (2) property owners to allow for maintenance or repair of the house built on the lot line. The easement shall be unobstructed, located on the adjacent property abutting the side wall and must be a minimum of seven and one-half (7.5) feet in width. Required maintenance easements shall be shown on the recorded plat. 
e.  Privacy. 
Windows or other openings that allow for visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot are not allowed. Windows that do not allow visibility into the side yard of the adjacent lot, such as a clerestory window or a translucent window, are allowed. All materials within three (3) feet of the property line shall be fire-rated to meet building code requirements. 
4.  Cluster Development. 
a.  General Purpose. 
A cluster development is intended to provide open space, preserve unique environmental features, or protect the character of rural areas. It is a residential subdivision in which the lots are allowed to be smaller (in area and width) than otherwise required for the underlying, base zoning district, but in which the overall density of all the lots collectively do not exceed the maximum density limit for the underlying zoning district. Through the cluster development option, a subdivision can contain no more lots than would otherwise be allowed for a conventional subdivision in the zoning district, though the individual lots within the development can be smaller than required in a conventional subdivision. The average lot size in a cluster development must be less than the minimum lot size of the base zoning district. Smaller lot sizes within a cluster development are required to be offset by the provision of open space as set forth below. 
b.  Conflict with Other Regulations. 
If there is a conflict between the cluster development standards of this Section and any other requirement of this UDO, the standards of this Section control. Where no conflict exists, a cluster development is subject to all other applicable requirements of this UDO. 
c.  Where Allowed. 
Cluster developments are allowed in residential WE Wellborn Estate, E Estate, RS Restricted Suburban, WRS Wellborn Restricted Suburban, and GS General Suburban zoning districts. 
d.  Approval Procedure. 
Cluster Developments are subject to the subdivision procedures set forth in this UDO. A note shall be provided on the plat that states the subdivision is a cluster development with additional descriptions as necessary. 
e.  Specific District Standards. 
1.  Wellborn Estate - 
a.  Lot Size . The minimum lot size is one (1) acre as long as individual lot sizes are adequate to meet all other required density, district, and development standards. There is no set minimum lot width or depth requirement within a cluster development, except as noted below. Subdivisions with all lots over one acre and lot widths of one hundred (100) feet may use rural character roads. 
b.  Setbacks and Building Separations . The minimum setback standards of the base zoning district apply along the perimeter of a cluster development. All detached structures within a cluster development must be separated by a minimum distance of ten (10) feet. 
2.  Estate - 
a.  Lot Size . The minimum average lot size is twenty thousand (20,000) square feet with an absolute minimum lot size of ten thousand (10,000) square feet as long as individual lot sizes are adequate to meet all other required density, district, and development standards. There is no set minimum lot width or depth requirement within a cluster development, except as noted below. Subdivisions with all lots over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and lot widths of one hundred (100) feet may use rural character roads. Subdivisions containing any lots below twenty thousand (20,000) square feet must use urban street standards. 
b.  Setbacks and Building Separations . The minimum setback standards of the base zoning district apply along the perimeter of a cluster development. All detached structures within a cluster development must be separated by a minimum distance of ten (10) feet. 
c.  In the Wellborn Community Plan area, the cluster option may be used only in the area designated Wellborn Preserve-Open on the Comprehensive Plan Land Use and Character Map. 
3.  Wellborn Restricted Suburban 
a.  Lot Size . The minimum average lot size is eight thousand (8,000) square feet as long as individual lot sizes are adequate to meet all other required density, district, and development standards. There is no set minimum lot width or depth requirement within a cluster development. 
b.  Setbacks and Building Separations . The minimum setback standards of the base zoning district apply along the perimeter of a cluster development. All detached structures within a cluster development must be separated by a minimum distance of ten (10) feet. 
4.  Restricted Suburban - 
a.  Lot Size . The minimum average lot size is eight thousand (8,000) square feet with an absolute minimum lot size of six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet as long as individual lot sizes are adequate to meet all other required density, district, and development standards. There is no set minimum lot width or depth requirement within a cluster development. 
b.  Setbacks and Building Separations . The minimum setback standards of the base zoning district apply along the perimeter of a cluster development. All detached structures within a cluster development must be separated by a minimum distance of ten (10) feet. 
5.  General Suburban - 
a.  Lot Size . The minimum lot size is three thousand seven hundred fifty (3,750) square feet as long as individual lot sizes are adequate to meet all other required density, district, and development standards. There is no set minimum lot width or depth requirement within a cluster development. 
b.  Setbacks and Building Separations . 
The minimum setback standards of the base zoning district apply along the perimeter of a cluster development. All detached structures within a cluster development must be separated by a minimum distance of ten (10) feet. 
c.  In the Wellborn Community Plan area as designated on the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use and Character Map, the cluster option is not permitted. 
f.  Open Space. 
1.  Description of Open Space. 
Any parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water within a development site provided and made legally available for the use and enjoyment of all residents of a proposed project. Open space may include amenities such as private outdoor recreation facilities, natural areas, trails, agricultural lands, or stormwater management facilities designed as a neighborhood amenity. Areas encumbered by right-of-way, easements, or utilized as parking may not be counted towards the Open space requirements. Open spaces must be privately owned and maintained by a Home Owners Association (HOA). 
Common open space must be set aside and designated as an area where no development will occur, other than project-related recreational amenities or passive open space areas. The Commission may require that up to fifty (50) percent of required common open space be useable recreational space, if deemed necessary by the Commission to ensure adequate recreational amenities for residents of the development. 
2.  Common Open Space Required for Cluster Developments. 
a.  Minimum Requirement. 
1.  Common open space is required within a cluster development to ensure that the overall density within the development does not exceed the maximum density allowed by the underlying zoning district. 
2.  Common open space must be provided in an amount of at least ten (10) percent of the gross area of the development, or fifteen (15) percent of the gross area if the development is located in a Growth Area. 
3.  All proposed lots shall have direct access to the common open space, via access easement, sidewalk, or street. Common open space may be located at the rear of lots only when the space is designed for active recreation or a design concept is submitted to staff for approval. Examples of active recreation areas may include amenities such as sports fields, hike or bike trails, parks, amenity centers, and golf courses. 
4.  All open space areas shall be part of a larger continuous and integrated open space system within the parcel being developed. The required common open space must be arranged to provide at least thirty (30) percent of the space in at least one (1) contiguous area. The minimum dimensions of such space must be twenty-five (25) feet by twenty-five (25) feet. The remaining required common usable open space may be distributed throughout the building site and need not be in one (1) such area; provided, however, no area containing less than one thousand (1,000) square feet will be considered common usable open space. 
5.  The minimum common open space area must be at least equal to the difference between: 
a.  The actual, average lot area per dwelling unit within the cluster development; and 
b.  The required lot area per dwelling unit for conventional development within the underlying base zoning district. 
6.  The common open space requirement shall not be credited toward the parkland dedication requirements specified in the City subdivision ordinance. 
I.  Easements. 
1.  Drainage Easements and Rights-of-Way. 
a.  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, natural channel or stream, a drainage easement or right-of-way may be required in accordance with the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines. 
b.  No construction, including fences, shall impede, constrict, or block the flow of water. 
c.  A drainage easement or right-of-way shall not be considered a part of the lot area for purposes of minimum lot size requirements of this UDO. 
d.  When feasible, utilities may be located within drainage easements and rights-of-way. Likewise, enclosed storm drains may be contained in utility easements. In such instances, the utility easement width must be adequate to provide space for storm drains, utilities, and maintenance access. 
2.  Utility Easements. 
a.  Minimum Utility Easements. 
1)  General Subdivisions. 
Except as expressly provided for otherwise in this UDO, each block that does not contain an alley shall have a utility easement at the rear of all lots. The rear utility easements shall be twenty (20) feet in width, taken ten (10) feet from each lot where the rear of the lots abut each other, and shall be continuous for the entire length of a block. These easements shall be parallel as closely as possible to the street line frontage of the block. 
2)  Rural Residential Subdivisions. 
For Rural Residential subdivisions, utility easements not less than sixteen (16) feet in width shall be provided along the front of all lots on each side of a street. Where the front easement is impractical on one (1) side of the street, a utility easement no less than twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided on the other side of the street as determined by the City. Additionally, utility easements ten (10) feet in width shall be required along the side and rear of all lots. 
b.  Additional Utility Easements. 
Additional utility easements or additional easement width other than as described above may be required by the City Engineer or B/CS Unified Design Guidelines based on the number, size, configuration or depth of existing, proposed or anticipated utilities. Where the proposed subdivision adjoins an unplatted area or future phase of the subdivision, the City Engineer may require twenty-foot width of easement along the rear of lots adjoining the unplatted area and/or an additional ten (10) feet in width along the boundary of the subdivision or subdivision phase. 
c.  Improvements in Easements. 
Buildings, signs, masonry walls, and other vertical structures that require a building permit are not permitted within utility easements. Landowners may place a fence in utility easements if unlocked gates are provided to allow free movement of excavating machines, maintenance equipment, and personnel throughout the full length of the easement. 
3.  Access Easements. 
a.  A private access easement shall be required to provide access to property that does not have direct frontage to a public right-of-way or a Public Way. Private access easements may also be required when shared driveway access is necessary to meet driveway spacing requirements along a public street or Public Way. Driveways in required private access easements shall be constructed to City fire lane standards and their installation may be delayed until the time of site development. When private access easements are provided, construction and maintenance responsibilities shall be assigned and noted on the plat or the recorded volume and page of the access instrument shall be referenced on the plat. 
b.  A public access easement shall be provided for a Public Way, for public sidewalks on private property, and when serving as an Access Way. Fences, gates, parking, or other obstructions that restrict or block access are prohibited. 
4.  Off-Site Easements. 
All easements outside the boundaries of a plat that are necessary for the installation of public infrastructure to serve the subdivision or development plat shall be acquired by the applicant and conveyed by an instrument approved by the City Attorney. 
5.  Non-Public Easements. 
Except as set forth herein, dedication of rights-of-way, easements, and public infrastructure shall not be encumbered by private easements that have pre-existing rights. Minor crossings are allowed. 
J.  Access Ways. 
1.  Existing and planned Access Ways in adjacent or adjoining areas shall be continued in alignment therewith. 
2.  In Blockfaces over nine hundred (900) feet in length, an Access Way shall extend across the width of the block near the center of the block. 
3.  To provide additional pedestrian and bicycle circulation, an Access Way shall be required on a cul-de-sac street to connect to existing or planned facilities in the vicinity such as schools, parks, transit stops, and multi-use paths. 
4.  An Access Way may be required to provide additional pedestrian and bicycle circulation within a subdivision, between subdivisions, between culs-de-sac, or to provide access to schools, parks, shopping centers, multi-use paths, transportation, and other community facilities in the vicinity. 
5.  If an Access Way is greater than three hundred (300) feet in length then an additional access point to the Access Way shall be provided. 
K.  Sidewalks . 
1.  Policy . 
Sidewalks should be located and constructed so as to provide a safe and effective means of transportation for non-vehicular traffic. 
2.  Required Sidewalks . 
a.  Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all streets except as follows or as provided elsewhere in this UDO. 
b.  Where a multi-use path is shown along a street on the Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Master Plan, the sidewalk may be incorporated as part of the multi-use path. 
3.  Sidewalk Exceptions . 
Sidewalks are not required: 
a.  Around the bulb of a cul-de-sac unless an access way is provided through the cul-de-sac; 
b.  Along a street classified on the thoroughfare plan as a freeway/expressway; 
c.  Along streets identified on the thoroughfare plan with an estate/rural context; 
d.  Along new or existing streets within a Rural Residential subdivision constructed to the rural section; or 
e.  Along existing local/residential streets unless sidewalks have been identified in the Bicycle, Pedestrian, and Greenways Master Plan or in the applicable neighborhood, district, or corridor plan. 
4.  Standards . 
Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the following criteria: 
a.  The B/CS Unified Design Guidelines and all applicable state and federal requirements; 
b.  Consistent with the minimum standards necessary to meet the projected non-vehicular traffic demand in the area; 
c.  Sidewalks shall maintain a minimum clear width as set forth in the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines ; and 
d.  All sidewalks shall terminate into streets or driveways with ambulatory ramps. 
5.  Timing of Construction . 
Except as set forth below, all required sidewalks must be constructed concurrently with the street, or if the street is already constructed prior to acceptance of all public improvements. 
a.  Residential Subdivisions . 
At the time of final plat application, the subdivider may opt to defer the construction of sidewalks on residential streets along single-family, duplex, or townhouse lots for up to one (1) year from approval of the final plat when the subdivider provides a bond or surety in accordance with Section 8.7 Construction, Guarantee of Performance, and Acceptance of Public Infrastructure. The subdivider shall provide a sidewalk plan with the final plat construction documents and installation of the sidewalks shall comply with this plan. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this provision does not allow the deferment of the construction of sidewalks along thoroughfares, sidewalk ramps at all street intersections, and sidewalks along residential streets that are not adjacent to a residential lot such as along a common area, creek crossing, or park. Other pedestrian facilities such as access ways and multi-use paths shall be constructed at the same time as the public infrastructure of the plat. 
b.  Fee in Lieu of Construction . 
1)  Fee in Lieu . 
Except for development located within the Northgate zoning districts, a developer may request to pay a fee in lieu of constructing the required sidewalk(s) or multi-use path upon approval by the Administrator as set forth below. 
2)  Amount of Fee . 
The amount of fee in lieu of sidewalk construction shall be a unit cost determined by the City Engineer based upon current estimated costs. The unit cost fee shall be kept on file in the Office of Planning and Development Services and made available to the public upon request. The unit cost fee calculation shall be reviewed at least annually by the City Engineer and adjusted as necessary. 
3)  Criteria to Allow Fee in Lieu . 
The Administrator may authorize a fee in lieu of sidewalk or multi-use path construction when it is determined that one (1) or more of the following conditions exists: 
(a)  An alternative pedestrian way or multi-use path has been or will be provided; 
(b)  The presence of unique or unusual topographic, vegetative, or other natural conditions exist so that strict adherence to the sidewalk requirements contained herein is not physically feasible or is not in keeping with the purposes and goals of this UDO or the City's Comprehensive Plan; 
(c)  A capital improvement project is imminent that will include construction of the required sidewalk. Imminent shall mean the project is funded or projected to commence within twelve (12) months; 
(d)  Existing streets constructed to rural section that are not identified on the Thoroughfare Plan with an Estate/Rural context; 
(e)  When a sidewalk is required along a street where a multi-use path is shown on the Bicycle, Pedestrian, Greenways Master Plan; 
(f)  The proposed development is within an older residential subdivision meeting the criteria in Section 8.3.H.2 Platting and Replatting within Older Residential Subdivisions of this UDO; or 
(g)  The proposed development contains frontage on a freeway/expressway as designated by Map 6.6, Thoroughfare Plan-Functional Classification, in the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
4)  Use of Fee . 
The City Council hereby establishes sidewalk zones as show in the map attached as Figure 1 of this section and which map shall be kept in the Office of Planning and Development Services and made available to the public upon request. Fees collected in lieu of sidewalk or multi-use path construction shall be expended in the sidewalk zone within which the proposed development is located. Fees collected in lieu of sidewalk construction shall be used only for construction, reconstruction, or land acquisition costs associated with sidewalks, multi-use paths, and other non-vehicular ways. 

Figure 1 - Sidewalk Zone Map
5)  Reimbursement . 
The City may, from time-to-time, acquire land for sidewalks or make sidewalk improvements related to actual or potential development. If this occurs, the City may require subsequent sidewalk obligations to be a fee rather than construction in order to reimburse the City for the cost associated with acquisitions or construction. 
6)  Fee Due . 
Fees paid pursuant to this section shall be remitted to the City when the guarantee of construction of public improvements for the proposed development is due or upon commencement of construction, whichever occurs first. 
7)  Special Fund; Right to Refund . 
All fees received by the City in lieu of sidewalk or multi-use path construction shall be deposited in a fund referenced to the sidewalk zone to which it relates. The City shall account for all fees in lieu of sidewalk construction paid under this section with reference to the individual development involved. Any fee paid for such purposes must be expended by the City within seven (7) years from the date received by the City. Such funds shall be considered to be spent on a first-in, first-out basis. If not so expended, the landowners of the property on the expiration of such period shall be entitled to a prorated refund of such sum. The owners of such property must request a refund within one (1) year of entitlement, in writing, or such refund will be barred. 
L.  Bicycle Facilities. 
1.  General. 
Bicycle facilities are planned and located to provide connectivity to the existing street network, parks, schools, greenways, neighborhoods, and other key destinations; increase safety; and promote health and wellness. 
2.  Timing. 
Bicycle facilities shall be required in accordance with the Bicycle, Pedestrian and Greenways Master Plan and the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines and constructed along with other public infrastructure required pursuant to this UDO. 
3.  Types of Bicycle Facilities. 
There are at least three (3) types of bicycle facilities that may be required. These types include the following: 
a.  Multi-Use Path: a facility completely separated from auto traffic and within an independent right-of-way or within the right-of-way of another public facility; 
b.  Bike Lane: a facility where part of the roadway or shoulder is striped, signed, and marked for exclusive or preferential bicycle use and where vehicular parking is not permitted, unless otherwise specified; and 
c.  Bike Route: a facility designated by signing and sometimes pavement markings to help make motorists aware of the presence of bicycles which share the same area with motor vehicles. 
4.  Geometric Design Criteria. 
All facilities shall be designed to meet or exceed standards set forth in the "Guide for Development of Bicycle Facilities" published by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) and the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines. Signing and pavement markings for such facilities shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). Geometric design criteria for each type of bikeway facility are as follows: 
a.  Bike Routes. 
Bike routes shall be indicated as follows: 
1)  The placement of bike route signing and shared lane pavement markings identifies bicycle-compatible streets that will serve as bike routes; 
2)  A minimum of sixteen-foot of the outer lane of streets measured from the outer lane line to the back of curb shall be required for bike routes. A typical bicycle route street is shown in Figure 1; and 
3)  Bike route signing should not end at a barrier. Information directing the bicyclist around the barrier should be provided. 
Figure 1: Bike Route/Bicycle Compatible Street

b.  Bike Lanes. 
Bike lanes shall be as follows: 
1)  The bike lane is located within the vehicular roadway in the outside lane and is intended for the exclusive use of bicycles. Bike lanes in the City of College Station must be developed as one-way facilities and carry traffic in the same direction as adjacent motor vehicle traffic; and 
2)  In general, parking in bike lanes is prohibited. However, parking may be permitted in a bike lane in specific areas during specified times. Where parking in a bike lane is permitted, signs shall be installed to provide notice to bicyclists of when parking is allowed. Parking in a bike lane shall be limited primarily to spillover parking for public uses or events, but parking for non-public uses may also be considered. 
c.  Multi-Use Paths. 
The criteria for multi-use paths is as follows: 
1)  Multi-use paths should be located primarily in greenways, parks, or occasionally within street rights-of-way. If a multi-use path is to be located in the right-of-way of a street, there should be a minimum of five (5) feet separating the multi-use path from the roadway; 
2)  The standard width for a two-way multi-use path shall be ten (10) feet. In areas with projected high volumes of use, multi-use paths shall be twelve (12) feet wide; 
3)  The minimum width of a one-directional bicycle path is five (5) feet. It should be recognized, however, that one-way bicycle paths often will be used as two-way facilities unless effective measures are taken to assure one-way operation. Without such enforcement, it should be assumed that bicycle paths will be used as two-way facilities and designed accordingly; 
4)  A minimum of three-foot width graded area shall be maintained adjacent to both sides of the multi-use path to provide clearance from trees, poles, walls, fences, guard rails, or other lateral obstructions; and 
5)  Multi-use paths shall be located in a public access easement of a minimum twenty (20) feet in width. 
M.  Water Facilities. 
1.  All subdivisions shall have access to water supply and distribution systems for adequate fire protection and domestic use. All water mains, distribution and service lines shall be provided to each lot and constructed in accordance with the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines and all applicable state and federal requirements. Where there is a conflict of standards, the more stringent standard shall apply, as determined by the City Engineer. The City shall accept for public use only water mains, distribution and service lines that comply with these standards for construction. 
2.  Water mains within the City of College Station Certificate of Convenience and Necessity (CCN) areas shall be extended in accordance with Chapter 11, Utilities, of the College Station Code of Ordinances. 
3.  Where a subdivision contains a water line as shown on the Comprehensive Plan of the City, such water line shall be designed and installed to maintain continuity in the approximate location as shown, and of the size indicated. 
4.  Water distribution lines shall be extended from the nearest City approved point of connection to the furthest boundary line of the platted subdivision. 
5.  For water systems that are not part of the City of College Station's water utility, the subdivider shall provide a letter with the construction documents from the non-City utility that the non-City utility is able to properly serve the proposed subdivision. Construction of all water facilities within a subdivision must comply with the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines. Plans for such systems will be subject to City review and inspection. City involvement with such water system ends at the sanitization of the line. 
N.  Waste Water Facilities. 
1.  All subdivisions shall have access to waste water facilities. All collection mains and service lines shall be provided to each lot and constructed in accordance with B/CS Unified Design Guidelines and all applicable state and federal requirements. Where there is a conflict of standards, the more stringent standard shall apply, as determined by the City Engineer. The City shall accept for public use only waste water facilities that comply with these standards for construction. 
2.  Waste water mains within the City of College Station Certificate of Convenience and Necessity (CCN) areas shall be extended in accordance with Chapter 11, Utilities, of the College Station Code of Ordinances. 
3.  Where a subdivision contains a waste water line as shown on the Comprehensive Plan of the City, such waste water line shall be designed and installed to maintain continuity in the approximate location as shown, and of the size indicated. 
4.  For waste water systems that are not part of the City of College Station's waste water utility, the subdivider shall provide a letter with the construction documents from the non-City utility that the non-City utility is able to properly serve the proposed subdivision. Construction of all waste water facilities within a subdivision must comply with the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines. Plans for such systems will be subject to City review and inspection. Waste water lines for these systems that are outside the subdivision are not required to meet City standards. 
5.  Alternate Waste Water Facilities. 
a.  If waste water main extension is exempted as per Chapter 11, Utilities, of the College Station Code of Ordinances or if the subdivision is located outside of the City of College Station CCN or otherwise not served by the City, the subdivider may provide temporary alternative waste water disposal as follows and as may be conditioned by Chapter 11, Utilities, of the College Station Code of Ordinances or otherwise: 
1)  Organized Waste Water Collection and Treatment System. 
A subdivider may have a proposed subdivision served by a non-City organized waste water collection and treatment system. Such system must be permitted to dispose of wastes by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) in accordance with 30 TAC Chapter 305 and obtain approval of engineering, planning and materials for such systems under 30 TAC Chapter 317 from the TCEQ prior to approval of the final plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
2)  On-Site Sewage Facilities. 
A subdivider may have a proposed subdivision served by on-site sewage facilities as set forth below: 
(a)  On-site facilities which serve single-family or multi-family residential dwellings with anticipated waste water generation of no greater than five thousand (5,000) gallons per day must comply with 30 TAC Chapter 285 and other applicable law; 
(b)  Proposals for sewerage facilities for the disposal of sewage in the amount of five thousand (5,000) gallons per day or greater must comply with 30 TAC Chapter 317 and other applicable law; 
(c)  The Brazos County Health Department shall review proposals for on-site sewage disposal systems and make inspection of such systems as necessary to assure that the system is in compliance with the Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter 366 and rule in 30 TAC Chapter 285, and in particular  285.4, 285.5, and 285.30-285.39 and any other applicable rules or regulations within the purview of such department; and 
(d)  In addition to the unsatisfactory on-site disposal systems listed in 30 TAC  285.3(i), pit privies and portable toilets are not acceptable waste disposal systems for lots platted under these rules. 
b.  Sanitary Sewer Master Plan. 
A Gravity Sanitary Sewer Master Plan shall be designed for subdivisions that contain lots that are two (2) acres and smaller and that utilize alternative waste water disposal methods. This Master Plan is required to assure that all lots, at some future date, can be connected by gravity service line to the future sewer collection system. Adequately sized sewer lines shall be provided within the subdivision's sewer master plan such that they conform to the City's Utility Master Plan. All lines designed within this Master Plan shall meet the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines and all applicable state and federal regulations. This Master Plan shall consist of: verbiage explaining all design assumptions, plan and profile layouts of all future gravity lines to be constructed within the subdivision, and a minimum finished floor elevation established for each lot to assure a connection to the future gravity sewer collection system. All minimum finished floors established by this master plan shall be placed on the respective lots on the final plat. 
O.  Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
All development encroaching into a FEMA special flood hazard area shall be in accordance with the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines, Chapter 13 Flood Hazard Protection Ordinance, and all applicable local, state and federal requirements. Where there is a conflict of standards, the more stringent standard shall apply, as determined by the City Engineer. The City shall only accept improvements for public use that comply with these standards for construction. 
P.  Drainage. 
1.  All drainage shall be in accordance with the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines, Chapter 13 Flood Hazard Protection Ordinance, and all applicable local, state and federal requirements. Where there is a conflict of standards, the more stringent standard shall apply, as determined by the City Engineer. The City shall only accept improvements for public use that comply with these standards for construction. 
2.  Rapid conveyance, the phasing of development, the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or the construction of off-site drainage improvements as means of mitigation, as provided in the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines and as may be required and approved by the City. 
3.  No construction shall impede, constrict, or block, the flow of water in any drainage pathway. 
4.  Lot Grading. 
a.  Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings. Individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid the concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent developable lots. A subdivision grading plan shall be provided with the construction documents. A general drainage pattern that meets all applicable rules and regulations shall be provided for each proposed block and lot. Subsequent permits for each lot shall comply with the approved grading plan. 
b.  All single-family residential lots must be graded to meet the elevation of adjoining property with positive drainage. Multi-family and non-residential lots shall be graded to match elevations at adjoining properties to provide good access and to minimize the use of retaining walls. 
Q.  Gas or Oil Lines. 
1.  Identification. 
High pressure flammable gas or fuel lines are defined as those which are operated or may be expected in the future to operate at a pressure of over sixty (60) pounds per square inch. High pressure flammable gas or fuel lines, installed on public property, shall be buried with a minimum cover of thirty (30) inches, and shall be marked by an all-weather typed sign, installed at each crossing and at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet. The signs shall be installed by the utility company, state that the line is high pressure, identify the utility company name, provide an emergency phone number, and state the type of product or products transported therein. 
2.  Notification to Utility Company. 
The subdivider shall provide written notification to the utility company regarding any proposed construction over an existing facility or within a utility's easement and provide proof of such notification to the City Engineer. 
R.  Street Lights. 
1.  General Standards. 
a.  Street lights shall be designed and installed according to the utility standards in effect at the time of subdivision construction or addition thereto. 
b.  The quantity, size, and type of street light pole and fixture shall be selected by the subdivider from the approved City of College Station street light standards. 
c.  The subdivider shall furnish public utility easements for the installation of street lights, with said easements to normally be five (5) feet in width. 
d.  Where underground electric service is provided, all street lighting and site lighting equipment shall be placed underground except for the poles on which the lights are to be affixed. Where overhead electric service is provided, street lighting and site lighting equipment may be placed overhead or underground. 
2.  Street Light Locations. 
a.  Street lights shall normally be required at all street intersections and Access Ways, in culs-de-sac, and at approximately three hundred-foot intervals along tangent streets. 
b.  In Rural Residential subdivisions, street lights are only required at street intersections and at the end of culs-de-sac greater than three hundred (300) feet in length. The subdivider may request additional street lights at other locations within the subdivision, provided the frequency does not exceed the general subdivision location standards recited above. 
3.  Installation and Maintenance. 
a.  The subdivider or his authorized construction representative shall be responsible for furnishing and installing all street light facilities in accordance with the electric utility's design and specifications and this UDO. All conduit installations shall be inspected prior to acceptance for conformance with the utility specifications. 
b.  Street lights shall be owned and maintained by electric utility provider with Certificate of Convenience and Necessity (CCN) for that area. 
c.  The electric utility provider shall not be responsible for the installation or maintenance of street lights on alleys, private streets or drives. 
S.  Electric Facilities. 
1.  All subdividers shall ascertain which electric utility is certificated to serve the proposed subdivision. The electric utility design and facilities must meet all applicable City ordinances. 
2.  The electric utility will design the electrical system to all lots within a subdivision. 
3.  All electric utility service shall be installed underground in all subdivisions. All lateral electric lines and service lines supplying electric utility service shall be placed underground except Rural Residential subdivisions may have lateral electric lines and service lines supplying electric utility service placed overhead. 
4.  Overhead feeder lines may be placed in the following locations: 
a.  Along the perimeter of a platted subdivision; 
b.  Adjacent to or within the right-of-way of thoroughfares identified on the current Thoroughfare Plan of the City of College Station and approved for the location of overhead utilities; and 
c.  Within alleys or dedicated easements identified for the location of aerial utility feeder lines on the approved subdivision plat. 
5.  The subdivider shall dedicate public utility easements upon forms approved by City for the installation of electric utilities. All liens and other ownership interests shall be subordinated to the easement use. 
6.  Where electric service is placed underground, all auxiliary equipment for such service, including but not limited to transformers, junction enclosures and switching devices, shall be pad-mounted on grade or shall be placed underground. 
7.  Where the electric service is placed underground, all street lighting and site lighting equipment shall be placed underground except for the poles on which the lights are to be affixed. The City or the electric utility shall not be responsible for the installation or maintenance of street lights on alleys, private streets or drives. 
8.  The subdivider shall be responsible for the costs and installation of all conduit needed for underground feeder, lateral, and service lines utilized to provide electric utility service to the subdivision. The developer of a platted lot shall be responsible for the costs and installation for the service conduit for such platted lot. The specifications for the conduit shall be provided by the electric utility prior to installation. All conduit installations shall be inspected prior to acceptance for conformance to utility specifications. 
9.  Temporary utility service may be provided via overhead line extension. 
10.  The subdivider shall contact the appropriate electric utility provider to determine any additional requirements. 
T.  Monuments and Corner Markers. 
1.  All block corners, angle points and points of curves, and all corners of boundary lines of subdivisions shall be marked with a one-half-inch steel rod, two (2) feet in length, set in the center of a concrete monument six (6) inches in diameter and thirty (30) inches deep, with the top flush with the finished ground surface. 
2.  Where, due to topographic conditions, permanent structures or other conditions, the view is obstructed between any two (2) adjacent monuments, intermediate monuments shall be set as to assure a clear view between adjacent monuments. 
3.  Corner markers, consisting of a one-half-inch steel rod or three-fourths-inch pipe, two (2) feet in length, shall be driven flush with the ground surface to mark the corners of all lots. 
U.  Owners Associations for Common Areas and Facilities. 
1.  A Homeowners Association or Property Owners Association ("Owners Association") shall be established with direct responsibility to, and controlled by, the property owners involved to provide for operation, repair and maintenance of all common areas, fences, walls, gate equipment, landscaping, and all other common facilities, including private streets and sidewalks, which are part of the subdivision (the "Common Facilities"). 
2.  The Owners Association shall prepare and file for record a legal instrument establishing a plan for the use and permanent repair and maintenance of the Common Facilities and demonstrating that the association is self-perpetuating and adequately funded to accomplish its purpose and shall provide that the Owners Association hereby unconditionally and irrevocably agrees to indemnify, defend and hold the City and the City's officials, agents, employees and contractors harmless, from and against any loss, liability, demand damage, judgment, suite, claim deficiency, interests, fee, charge, cost or expense (including, without limitation, interest, court cost and penalties, attorney's fees and disbursement and amounts paid in settlement, or liabilities resulting from any charge in federal, state or local law or regulation or interpretation hereof) of whatever nature, even when caused in whole or in part by the City's negligence or the joint or concurring negligence of the City and any other person or entity, which may result or to which the City and/or any of the City's officials, agents, employees and contractors may sustain, suffer, incur or become subject to in connection with or arising in any way whatsoever out of the maintenance, repair use or occupation of the Common Facilities, or any other activity of whatever nature in connection therewith, or arising out of or by reason of any investigation, litigation or other proceedings brought or threatened, arising out of or based upon the operation, management, maintenance, repair and use of the Common Facilities, or any other activity in the subdivision. 
3.  The budget for the Owners Association shall include a fund reserved for the repair and maintenance of Common Facilities in the amount approved by the City staff. 
V.  Private Streets and Gating of Roadways. 
1.  General Requirements. 
The following applies to platting of roadways: 
a.  Gating of a public roadway is prohibited. 
b.  Streets required to meet block length or street projection requirements shall not be private or gated. 
c.  Private driveways are considered public roadways for the purpose of gating requirements herein. 
d.  Vehicular access shall be provided on all private and public roadways at all times for police, fire, City inspection, mail delivery, garbage pickup, dial-a-rides, utility, school buses, and other health and safety related vehicles. Access must not require drivers to exit their vehicle. 
e.  A private street may not cross an existing or proposed public thoroughfare as shown on the City's Thoroughfare Plan. A private street may not disrupt or cross an existing or proposed public park or pedestrian pathway as shown on the Bicycle, Pedestrian and Greenways Master Plan. 
f.  The gate design and implementation shall be such that it does not pose a threat to public health, safety and welfare as determined by the City. 
g.  Private streets must meet the requirements listed in Single-Family Residential Parking Requirements for Platting. 
2.  Owners Association Requirements. 
a.  All property owners within an existing residential area that is proposed to be gated or have private streets shall agree to become members of an operative Owners Association. 
b.  The legal instrument establishing the Owners Association must provide for a street maintenance agreement and reserve fund as well as written permission for the City's access to the subdivision all of which must be submitted for approval by the City Attorney prior to the submission of the final plat. 
c.  The City must have access to private roadways at any time without liability when on official business. This includes permission to remove obstructions including any gate and guard (house) upon non-compliance by the Owners Association of any terms of this ordinance or as necessary for the emergency vehicle access. In the event the City must remove obstructions to access the development, the Owners Association will be assessed all costs substantially associated therewith. 
d.  In the event the City deems that substantial repairs to private street(s) within a gated community are necessary in order to ensure safe access and passage for emergency service vehicles, the City will notify the Owners Association and a public hearing before the City Council will be set for input on the projected repairs. Should the Owners Association fail to provide the satisfactory repairs deemed necessary in a time frame set by the City at the public hearing, then the City will make the necessary repairs and assess the Owners Association all costs borne by the City in repair of the private street(s). Should the Owners Association fail to reimburse the City within ninety (90) days, the Owners Association shall be subject to lien and possibly foreclosure of all assets including but not limited to the maintenance reserve fund. 
3.  Geometric Design Guidelines. 
The following applies to the design of private roadways: 
a.  Private streets shall be constructed to public street standards but located within a common area, private right-of-way, or private access easement. 
b.  The gate(s) may not be placed on a public right-of-way or easement. 
c.  All gate mechanical or manual operating functions shall meet Fire Department requirements and provide passage with unobstructed vertical clearance. 
d.  The throat depth for a gated entry way shall meet the following requirements (Ref. Figures 1 & 2): 
1)  A minimum of twenty (20) feet for one (1) residential single-family lot. 
2)  A minimum of sixty (60) feet for up to twenty-five (25) single-family lots. 
3)  A minimum of one hundred (100) feet for twenty-six (26) single-family lots or greater. 
e.  Gated entry ways shall provide adequate access for pedestrians and bicycles. 
f.  Gated entry ways to subdivisions shall provide adequate turnaround areas for vehicles that are denied access in order to prevent backing into a public street. (Ref. Figures 1 & 2) 
g.  The gated entry way driveway pavement widths to subdivisions, for both egress and ingress, shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet per driveway and are required to provide a minimum four (4) feet center median. (Ref. Figures 1 & 2) 
h.  The gated area shall provide a minimum unobstructed vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet and six (6) inches from finished roadway surface over the entire width of the entry roadway. 
i.  Public safety elements and signing shall be included in the gate entry way design. 
4.  Converting Private Streets to Public Streets. 
The following is required when converting private streets to public streets: 
a.  Upon a written request signed by duly authorized Owners Association officers and submitted to the City Council of the City of College Station, dedication of private streets to the public may be accomplished providing the private streets are brought up to City standards for public streets and the City Council has agreed to accept the streets. 
b.  The written request by the Owners Association officers will be accompanied by a petition containing the signatures of the owners of one hundred (100) percent of the existing lots in the subdivision, except when in the public interest. 
c.  All repairs or reconstruction of private streets to City standards must be accepted by the City prior to conversion. All conversion dedication costs will be paid by the Owners Association. 
5.  Existing Gates. 
Any gate as defined by this Section existing at the time of adoption of these provisions (Ordinance #2280) which has received an approval from either the City or the County is deemed exempt from the requirements of this Section except when the City must remove such gates in order to ensure the access for the immediate health, safety, and welfare of the public. The Owners Association responsible for such gate assumes all costs associated therewith. 

Figure 1

Figure 2
W.  Single-Family Residential Parking Requirements for Platting. 
1.  Purpose. 
The purpose of this Section is to establish requirements for new single-family and townhouse parking to aid in reducing neighborhood parking problems and maintain certainty of access for emergency vehicles on local streets. 
2.  General Requirements. 
This Section applies to all new single-family and townhouse subdivisions. 
a.  Each phase of a multi-phase project shall comply with this Section. 
b.  Subdivisions may utilize multiple Residential Parking Options so long as each phase meets requirements and all options are listed on the plat. 
c.  Replats, Amending Plats, Vacating Plats, and Development Plats are exempt from this section unless new streets are proposed with the subdivision. 
d.  All "No Parking" areas shall be depicted on the Preliminary Plan. 
e.  All "No Parking" signs shall be placed along the street to ensure adequate emergency access. The developer shall provide and install, at no cost to the City, all "No Parking" signs and associated poles and hardware to the City's specifications. 
f.  Parking only may be removed on one or both sides of a street upon the City Council approving an ordinance removing parking from the street. 
g.  Where on-street or alley parking is utilized in a townhouse subdivision, driveways shall be designed to allow a minimum of one (1) on-street or alley parking space per four (4) dwelling units. Driveway layouts shall be provided with the final plat. 
3.  Residential Parking Options. 
In order to provide adequate access for emergency vehicles, new single-family and townhouse subdivisions shall provide one option from the following: 
a.  Wide Streets 
1)  Pavement width shall be a minimum of thirty-two (32) feet, up to a maximum of thirty-eight (38) feet. 
2)  In addition to the right-of-way specified for the Residential Street Section in the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines, additional right-of-width shall be dedicated equivalent to the increase in pavement width over twenty-seven (27) feet. 
3)  In order to minimize adverse traffic impacts on residential neighborhoods, bulb-outs shall be provided at intersections of local streets. Bulb-outs shall not be required where a local street intersects a street classified as a collector or greater. 
4)  As determined by the Development Engineer, engineering judgment shall override the requirement for bulb-outs set forth in this section if warranted by specific traffic conditions. 
b.  Narrow Streets 
1)  Pavement width shall be a minimum of twenty-two (22) feet, up to a maximum of twenty-four (24) feet. 
2)  No parking is allowed on Narrow Streets, so as to ensure emergency vehicle access. Narrow Streets must meet fire service standards as described in the City of College Station Site Design Standards. 
3)  To provide adequate parking in residential neighborhoods, subdivisions choosing to incorporate narrow streets shall incorporate additional parking spaces through either the provisions of visitor alley-fed parking areas or visitor parking areas. (See additional requirements for visitor alley-fed off-street parking and visitor parking areas below). 
c.  Standard Streets 
1)  Standard Streets shall be designed in accordance with the Residential Street Section in the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines. 
2)  Parking shall be removed from one (1) or both sides of Standard Streets. 
3)  To provide adequate parking in residential neighborhoods, subdivisions choosing to remove parking from both sides of a Standard Street shall incorporate additional parking spaces through the provisions of Visitor Alley-Fed Off-Street parking or Visitor Parking Areas. Visitor Alley-Fed Off-Street Parking and Visitor Parking Areas have additional requirements, as specified below. 
d.  Wide Lot Frontages 
1)  All lot widths shall be a minimum of seventy (70) feet, as measured at the front setback. 
e.  Visitor Alley-Fed Off-Street Parking 
1)  Visitor Alley-Fed Off-Street Parking spaces shall be provided at a rate of one (1) parking space per four (4) dwelling units. Visitor Alley-Fed Off-Street Parking is in addition to minimum off-street parking requirements. The Off-Street Parking Standards Section of this UDO lists additional requirements. 
2)  Off-street parking spaces shall be located in an access easement or private common area. 
f.  Visitor Parking Areas 
1)  Visitor parking shall: 
a)  be provided at a rate of one (1) parking space per four (4) dwelling units, 
b)  meet requirements of Off-Street Parking Standards and Access Management and Circulation sections, except requirements of Alternative Parking Plans, and except as specifically exempted below; 
c)  be developed at the same time as public infrastructure, 
d)  be located no farther than five hundred (500) feet from the lot it is meant to serve. This distance shall be measured by a walkable route, 
e)  be located in a common area and maintained by a Homeowners Association, 
f)  be designed to prohibit backing maneuvers onto public streets, with the exception that two (2) or fewer parking spaces constructed to single-family driveway and parking standards are permitted backing maneuvers when accessing a local street. 
g)  not be counted towards common open space requirements for Cluster Developments. 
2)  Visitor parking areas adjacent to a right-of-way shall be screened from the right-of-way. Screening is required along one hundred (100) percent of the street frontage (such as ten (10) shrubs for every thirty (30) linear feet of frontage), with the exception of areas within the visibility triangle. Screening may be accomplished using plantings, berms, structural elements, or combinations thereof, and must be a minimum of three (3) feet above the parking lot pavement elevation. Walls and planting strips shall be located at least two (2) feet from any parking area. Where the street and the adjacent site are at different elevations, the Administrator may alter the height of the screening to ensure adequate screening. Fifty (50) percent of all shrubs used for screening shall be evergreen. Two (2) or fewer parking spaces constructed to single-family driveway and parking standards are not required to be screened from the adjacent right-of-way. 
3)  Visitor parking areas may be constructed of permeable surfaces as allowed in the Off-Street Parking Standards. 
4.  Private parking constructed for the use of subdivision amenities, such as a community pool, may be counted toward Visitor Parking, if it meets all other requirements listed above and does not use permeable materials for private parking area surfaces. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
(Ord. No. 2012-3435 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-9-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. K), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3458 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 11-8-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3518 , Pt 1(Exh. A), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. M), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2013-3522 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2016-3792 , Pt. 1(Exh. F), 7-28-2016; Ord. No. 2015-3699 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 9-21-2015; Ord. No. 2017-3886 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 5-11-2017; Ord. No. 2018-4034 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-23-2018; Ord. No. 2019-4078 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-14-2019; Ord. No. 2019-4086 , Pt. 1(Exh. A, Exh. B, Exh. C), 3-28-2019) 
Sec. 8.4. - General Requirements and Minimum Standards of Design for Subdivisions within the City of College Station Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. 
The following sets forth standards of design for subdivisions situated within the City of College Station Extraterritorial Jurisdiction: 
A.  Reserved Strips and Tracts Prohibited. 
A plat shall not provide reserved strips or tracts of land. In addition, the effect of phasing of a plat, provision of common area or other land or easement shall not unnecessarily restrict access to land, right-of-way, or easements dedicated or intended to be dedicated to the public by the subject plat or adjacent developments. 
B.  Technical Standards. 
All public infrastructure shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Bryan/College Station Unified Technical Specifications, Bryan/College Station Unified Construction Details and all other applicable local, state, and federal requirements. Hereafter, these documents shall be referred to collectively as the "B/CS Unified Design Guidelines." Where there is a conflict of standards, the more stringent standard shall apply, as determined by the City Engineer. 
C.  Streets. 
1.  Streets on the Thoroughfare Plan. 
Where a subdivision encompasses or is adjacent to a thoroughfare, as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan of the City, the thoroughfare shall be constructed and included in the subdivision plat to maintain continuity in the approximate location as shown. 
2.  Relation to Adjoining Street System. 
a.  Where there is an existing street adjacent to or through the area to be subdivided, the necessary street intersections to the existing street shall be constructed. 
b.  Existing and planned streets in adjacent or adjoining areas shall be continued in alignment therewith. 
c.  When land is subdivided into larger parcels rather than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of future streets and logical further subdivisions. 
3.  Street Projections. 
a.  When an public street is provided internal to the platting property and adjoining areas are not platted, the platting subdivision shall provide street projections to such areas by projecting a public street at intervals no fewer than the maximum block length along the perimeter boundary of the subdivision. 
b.  Where abutting properties are land locked, a street connection or street frontage shall be provided through the platting property. 
4.  Adequate Street Access. 
a.  One (1) external street connection is required for a street serving as roadway access for thirty (30) or fewer lots. 
b.  When there are more than thirty (30) lots to be served by external street connections, a minimum of two (2) street connections to external paved public streets shall be required. The Commission may allow a Remote Emergency Access where development phasing or constraints of the land prevent the provision of a second street connection. Notwithstanding the foregoing, two (2) street connections to external paved public streets shall be required when one hundred (100) or more lots are served. 
c.  Three (3) street connections to external paved public streets may be required by the Commission when two hundred (200) or more lots are served. 
d.  Where more than one (1) external street connection is required, at least one (1) external street connection shall not be located over a potential hazard such as a high-pressure gas line or a creek where the one-hundred-year floodplain overtops the street, regardless of its classification. 
5.  Intersections. 
In addition to the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines, proposed street intersections shall meet the minimum spacing and requirements of the Access Management and Circulation section in Article 7 General Development Standards of this UDO. 
6.  Dead-End Streets. 
Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except short stubs to permit future extension. Temporary turnarounds shall be required for stubs in length of more than one hundred (100) feet or the depth of one (1) lot, whichever is less. 
7.  Culs-de-sac. 
Culs-de-sac shall not exceed seven hundred fifty (750) feet in length. The length of a cul-de-sac is measured along the centerline of the cul-de-sac street from the center of the bulb to the edge of the nearest intersecting through street right-of-way. 
8.  Geometric Standards, Street Design Criteria. 
Streets shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines with the following modifications: 
a.  Local streets shall be constructed to the rural residential street standards with a minimum right-of-way width of seventy (70) feet; and 
b.  All thoroughfares, regardless of classification, shall be constructed to the rural collector standard with a minimum right-of-way width of one hundred (100) feet or larger if the thoroughfare classification requires additional right-of-way width. 
9.  Existing Substandard Street Right-of-Way. 
a.  Whenever an existing right-of-way is within or adjacent to a proposed subdivision and such right-of-way width is substandard, the additional width for the street shall be dedicated. For development occurring on only one (1) side of such a roadway, the amount dedicated shall generally equal one-half (1/2) of the deficiency in width based on the classification and type of street, as measured from the existing centerline of the right-of-way. If the parcel(s) on the opposite side of the right-of-way previously dedicated a portion, the proposed plat shall dedicate the remaining width. If the opposite side of the right-of-way has a permanent constraint such as a railroad right-of-way or conservation easement, the full width of the deficiency may be required. 
b.  The Administrator may reduce, increase, or eliminate the amount of right-of-way dedication based on design considerations, existing development on adjacent properties, and dimensions of the proposed subdivision or plat. 
c.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, additional right-of-way dedication is not required for Amending Plats. 
10.  Street Names and Addresses. 
a.  Proposed streets that are extensions of existing streets shall bear the name of the existing street, unless otherwise recommended by the Administrator. 
b.  New streets shall be named to prevent conflict or confusion with identical or similar names in the City, Brazos County 911 District, or the City's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). 
c.  Streets shall not be named after any living person. 
d.  A proposed street name may be disapproved if it too closely approximates phonetically the name of an existing street, is too difficult to pronounce, or carries undesirable meanings or connotations. 
D.  Alleys. 
Public alleys are prohibited in the extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
E.  Blocks. 
1.  In order to provide a public street network that is complimentary to the Thoroughfare Plan and that ensures uniform access and circulation, block length shall not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet. 
2.  If a plat is not bounded by a public through street or other qualifying break to block length then the block length measurement shall continue to extend each way beyond the plat along the public through street until the nearest intersecting through street or qualifying break to the block is reached. 
3.  Block length shall not require a new street to enter the face of a block when the surrounding area of the block is subdivided so that a through movement is not possible or a new block cannot be created. 
F.  Lots. 
1.  Lots shall be identified in numerical order within a block. 
2.  Lots shall be a minimum of one (1) acre in size. 
3.  Lots shall be at least one hundred (100) feet in width as measured at the street; except for lots around the bulb of a cul-de-sac shall be at least seventy-five (75) feet in width. 
4.  Lots established for special purposes such as common area, open space, parkland, floodplain, drainage, utilities, or other similar facilities shall be uniquely named and are not required to meet the minimum lot size or lot width. 
5.  Side lot lines shall be substantially right angle to straight right-of-way or radial to the curved right-of-way. 
6.  Lots shall be laid out so as not to cross municipal, county, school district, or utility service area boundaries. 
G.  Easements. 
1.  Utility Easements. 
a.  Minimum Utility Easements. 
Utility easements not less than sixteen (16) feet in width shall be provided along the front of all lots on each side of a street. Where the front easement is impractical on one (1) side of the street, a utility easement no less than twenty (20) feet in width shall be provided on the other side of the street. Utility easements ten (10) feet in width shall be required along the side and rear of all lots. 
b.  Additional Utility Easements. 
Additional utility easements or additional easement width other than as described above may be required by the City Engineer or B/CS Unified Design Guidelines based on the number, size, configuration or depth of existing, proposed or anticipated utilities. Where the proposed subdivision adjoins an unplatted area or future phase of the subdivision, the City Engineer may require twenty-foot width of easement along the rear of lots adjoining the unplatted area or ten (10) feet in width along the boundary of the subdivision or subdivision phase. 
2.  Off-Site Easements. 
All easements outside the boundaries of a plat that are necessary for the installation of public infrastructure to serve the subdivision or development plat shall be acquired by the applicant and conveyed by an instrument approved by the City Attorney. 
H.  Access Ways. 
Public Access Ways are prohibited in the extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
I.  Sidewalks. 
Public sidewalks are prohibited in the extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
J.  Bicycle Facilities. 
Public bicycle facilities are prohibited in the extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
K.  Water Facilities. 
1.  All subdivisions shall have access to water supply and distribution systems for adequate fire protection and domestic use. All water mains, distribution and service lines shall be provided to each lot and constructed in accordance with the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines and all applicable state and federal requirements. Where there is a conflict of standards, the more stringent standard shall apply, as determined by the City Engineer. 
2.  Water mains within the City of College Station Certificate of Convenience and Necessity (CCN) areas shall be extended in accordance with Chapter 11, Utilities, of the College Station Code of Ordinances. 
3.  Where a subdivision contains a water line as shown on the Comprehensive Plan of the City, such water line shall be designed and installed to maintain continuity in the approximate location as shown, and of the size indicated. 
4.  Water distribution lines shall be extended from the nearest City approved point of connection to the furthest boundary line of the platted subdivision. 
5.  For water systems that are not part of the City of College Station's water utility, the subdivider shall provide a letter with the construction documents from the non-City utility that the non-City utility is able to properly serve the proposed subdivision. Construction of all water lines within a subdivision must comply with the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines. Water lines for these systems that are outside the subdivision are not required to meet City standards. 
L.  Waste Water Facilities. 
1.  Private Septic Systems. 
On-site sewage disposal systems (private septic systems) shall be designed to and meet all requirements of the County Health Department. These systems shall be licensed through the same agency and the license shall be kept current. A note shall be provided on the plat indicated such as above. 
2.  Gravity Sanitary Sewer System. 
Gravity Sanitary Sewer Systems shall be in accordance with the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines and all applicable state and federal requirements. 
M.  Special Flood Hazard Areas. 
All FEMA special floodplain hazard areas shall be according to the requirements, jurisdiction, and enforcement of the applicable county regulations. 
N.  Drainage. 
1.  All drainage shall be in accordance with the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines and all applicable local, state and federal requirements. Where there is a conflict of standards, the more stringent standard shall apply, as determined by the City Engineer. 
2.  Rapid conveyance, the phasing of development, the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or the construction of off-site drainage improvements as means of mitigation, as provided in the B/CS Unified Design Guidelines and as may be required and approved by the City. 
3.  No construction shall impede, constrict, or block, the flow of water in any drainage pathway. 
4.  Lot Grading. 
Individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid the concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent developable lots. A subdivision grading plan shall be provided with the construction documents. A general drainage pattern that meets all applicable rules and regulations shall be provided for each proposed block and lot. 
O.  Gas or Oil Lines. 
1.  Identification. 
High pressure flammable gas or fuel lines are defined as those which are operated or may be expected in the future to operate at a pressure of over sixty (60) pounds per square inch. High pressure flammable gas or fuel lines, installed on public property, shall be buried with a minimum cover of thirty (30) inches, and shall be marked by an all-weather typed sign, installed at each crossing and at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet. The signs shall be installed by the utility company, state that the line is high pressure, identify the utility company name, provide an emergency phone number, and state the type of product or products transported therein. 
2.  Notification to Utility Company. 
The subdivider shall provide written notification to the utility company regarding any proposed construction over an existing facility or within a utility's easement and provide proof of such notification to the City Engineer. 
P.  Street Lights. 
Public street lights are prohibited in the extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
Q.  Electric Facilities. 
1.  All subdividers shall ascertain which electric utility is certificated to serve the proposed subdivision. 
2.  Electric utility facilities may be installed underground or overhead. 
3.  The subdivider is responsible for contacting the appropriate electric utility provider to determine any additional requirements. 
R.  Monuments and Corner Markers. 
1.  All block corners, angle points and points of curves, and all corners of boundary lines of subdivisions shall be marked with a one-half-inch steel rod, two (2) feet in length, set in the center of a concrete monument six (6) inches in diameter and thirty (30) inches deep, with the top flush with the finished ground surface. 
2.  Where, due to topographic conditions, permanent structures or other conditions, the view is obstructed between any two (2) adjacent monuments, intermediate monuments shall be set as to assure a clear view between adjacent monuments. 
3.  Corner markers, consisting of a one-half-inch steel rod or three-fourths-inch pipe, two (2) feet in length, shall be driven flush with the ground surface to mark the corners of all lots. 
S.  Owners Associations for Common Areas and Facilities. 
1.  A Homeowners Association or Property Owners Association ("Owners Association") shall be established with direct responsibility to, and controlled by, the property owners involved to provide for operation, repair and maintenance of all common areas, fences, walls, gate equipment, landscaping, and all other common facilities, including private streets and sidewalks, which are part of the subdivision (the "Common Facilities"). 
2.  The Owners Association shall prepare and file for record a legal instrument establishing a plan for the use and permanent repair and maintenance of the Common Facilities and demonstrating that the association is self-perpetuating and adequately funded to accomplish its purpose. 
T.  Private Streets and Gating of Roadways. 
1.  Gating of a public roadway is prohibited. 
2.  Streets required to meet block length or street projection requirements shall not be private or gated. 
3.  A private street may not cross an existing or proposed public thoroughfare as shown on the City's Thoroughfare Plan. A private street subdivision will not disrupt or cross an existing or proposed public park or pedestrian pathway as shown on the Bicycle, Pedestrian and Greenways Master Plan. 
4.  Private streets shall be constructed to public street standards but located within a common area, private right-of-way, or private access easement. 
5.  All other private or gated street requirements shall be according to applicable county regulations. 
U.  City Participation. 
The City will not participate in the cost of the subdivision or utilities outside the City limits, including garbage collection and street maintenance except for utilities dedicated to the City of College Station with a Development Agreement. Such utility service shall be in accordance with City Council Resolution #2-9-2006-13.04 (as amended) Regarding the Extension of Water and Sewer Utility Services to Properties within the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. K), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2019-4086 , Pt. 1(Exh. D), 3-28-2019) 
Sec. 8.5. - Waiver of Subdivision Standards. 
A.  The Commission may authorize a waiver from the regulation when, in their opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a waiver, the Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems not prejudicial to the public interest. In making the findings hereinbefore required, the Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, the possibility that a nuisance will be created, and the probable effect of such waiver upon traffic conditions and upon public health, convenience, and welfare of the vicinity. No waiver shall be granted unless the Commission finds: 
1.  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that strict application of the provisions of this chapter will deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; 
2.  That the waiver is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; 
3.  That the granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area, or to the City in administering this chapter; and 
4.  That the granting of the waiver will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this UDO. 
B.  Such findings of the Commission shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the meetings at which such waiver is granted. Waivers may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this UDO so that public health, safety, and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. 
C.  Waiver from Water Flow Requirements. 
A waiver to fire flow provisions set out in the Water Facilities standards contained in this UDO is prohibited. 
D.  Waiver from Lot Size. 
With the exception of lots located within a City-authorized Municipal Utility District, a waiver to the minimum lot size provisions set out in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Standards contained in this UDO is prohibited. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. K), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2015-3640 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 2-26-2015) 
Sec. 8.6. - Responsibility for Payment for Installation Costs. 
A.  Developer Responsibilities. 
The developer shall be responsible for the designing and installing of all public improvements which primarily serve the subdivision. This includes being responsible for the costs associated therewith that are shown on the plat or that may be off-site but needed to ensure adequacy of public facilities and services for the subdivision; and subject to participation by the City or other third parties as may be allowed or required by applicable law, such as participation by the City for costs associated with oversizing of public improvements beyond that which is necessary to serve the subdivision. Facilities required by this UDO and City Code of Ordinances shall be considered as primarily serving the subdivision unless otherwise determined by the City. 
B.  Street Lights. 
The developer shall pay the entire cost of the subdivision street light installation, including the cost of service lines to supply electricity to the street lights, and all engineering design costs. Once satisfactorily installed, approved, and accepted, the maintenance of the street lights and the furnishing of electric energy to the street lights shall be provided by the City. 
C.  Street Signs. 
The developer will provide and install, at no cost to the City, all street name signs and associated poles, and hardware. 
D.  Engineering Inspection and Testing. 
1.  The City will charge for engineering inspection during construction and for final inspection as established by Council resolution from time to time; however, it is to be understood that the City will do no layout work or daily inspection. 
2.  The City requires testing by an independent laboratory acceptable to the City of College Station to ensure compliance with the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines and the Bryan/College Station Unified Technical Specifications and approved plans and specifications of the construction of the infrastructure before final inspection and approval of that infrastructure. Charges for such testing shall be paid by the project owner/developer. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. K), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 8.7. - Construction, Guarantee of Performance, and Acceptance of Public Infrastructure. 
Construction of private improvements is prohibited until the requirements for constructing or guaranteeing construction of public infrastructure are met as set forth herein. 
A.  Construction. 
1.  Development Permit. 
Upon approval of the construction documents by the City Engineer and upon issuance of a Development Permit, the subdivider may proceed with the construction of public infrastructure. Neither the developer nor the contractor nor the subcontractor shall make a connection to or tap into the City water distribution system, electric system, or sanitary sewer system until this requirement is met. The developer shall furnish all necessary materials to make the final tap or connection. 
2.  Letter of Completion and Acceptance. 
When the developer constructs the required public infrastructure, all such construction shall be inspected while in progress, by the City, and must be approved upon completion by the City Engineer. A Letter of Completion will be issued by the City Engineer when: 
a.  The construction conforms to the approved plans and the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines and the Bryan/College Station Unified Technical Specifications and all applicable City, state and federal regulations; 
b.  The developer provides construction red-lined record drawings signed by the contractor acceptable to the City Engineer that contain the following attestation: 
"I, ___________ General Contractor for ___________ development, certify that the improvements shown on this sheet were actually built, and that said improvements are shown substantially hereon. I hereby certify that to the best of my knowledge, that the materials of construction and sizes of manufactured items, if any are stated correctly hereon." 
___________ 
General Contractor 
c.  The developer and his agent/contractor, if applicable, signs the Letter of Completion which furnishes the City a written guarantee that all workmanship and materials shall be free of defects for a period of one (1) year from the date of acceptance by the City Engineer; and 
d.  Off-site easements relating to the public infrastructure have been recorded, or are presented to the City and acceptable to be recorded. 
3.  Upon completion by the developer, and formal acceptance by the City of the public infrastructure required to be completed by the developer, they shall become the property of the City of College Station, Texas. 
B.  Guarantee of Performance. 
1.  In lieu of the obligation to construct public infrastructure as set forth above, the developer may elect to file security guaranteeing construction of the same in order to obtain final plat approval and to commerce construction of private improvements. This may be accomplished in one (1) of the following two (2) ways: 
a.  Performance Bond. 
The developer may file with the City Engineer a bond executed by a surety company holding a license to do business in the State of Texas, in an amount acceptable to the City Engineer of the City of College Station, and in a form approved by the City Attorney. The developer shall state in writing a timeframe acceptable to the City by when such public improvements will be complete; or 
b.  Letter of Credit. 
The developer has filed with the City Engineer an irrevocable letter of credit, in a form approved by the City, signed by a principal officer of a local bank, local savings and loan association, or other financial institution, acceptable to the City, agreeing to pay to the City of College Station, on demand, a stipulated sum of money to apply to the estimated cost of installation of all improvements for which the developer is responsible under this Section. The guaranteed payment sum shall be the estimated costs and scheduling as prepared by the developer's engineer and approved by the City Engineer. The letter shall state the name of the subdivision and shall list the improvements which the developer is required to provide. 
2.  If one (1) of the two (2) types of security is filed by the developer and accepted by the City as described above, the City Engineer shall inspect and approve the construction of public improvements in accordance with the requirements of this UDO when same occurs. If the developer fails to properly construct some or all required public improvements, the City Attorney shall, on direction of the City Council, proceed to enforce the guarantees provided in this Section. 
3.  The City Engineer may extend the period of time by when completion of public improvements is to occur regardless of time periods that may be iterated elsewhere in this UDO. Such extension of time shall be granted upon a showing of good cause and shall be reported to the Commission and recorded in the minutes. No such extension shall be granted unless security, as provided herein, has been provided by the developer covering the extended period of time and provided that such extension does not jeopardize the general public health, safety, and welfare. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. K), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 8.8. - Requirements for Park Land Dedication. 
A.  Purpose. 
This Section is adopted to provide recreational areas in the form of neighborhood park facilities as well as community park facilities as a function of subdivision and site development in the City of College Station and its Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). This Section is enacted in accordance with the home rule powers of the City of College Station granted under the Texas Constitution, and the statutes of the State of Texas, including, but not by way of limitation, Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212 as may be amended from time to time. 
It is hereby declared by the City Council that recreational areas in the form of neighborhood parks and community parks are necessary and in the public welfare, and that the only adequate procedure to provide for neighborhood parks and community parks is by integrating such requirements into the procedure for planning and developing property or subdivisions in the City and its ETJ, whether such development consists of new construction on vacant land or rebuilding and remodeling of structures on existing residential property. 
Neighborhood parks are those parks providing for a variety of outdoor recreational opportunities and located within convenient distances from a majority of the residences to be served thereby located within park zones established by the City. The park zones established by the College Station Parks and Recreation Department and shown on the official Parks and Recreation map for the City of College Station shall be prima facie proof that any park located therein is within such a convenient distance from any residence located therein. The primary cost of purchasing, developing or improving neighborhood parks should be borne by the landowners of residential property who, by reason of the proximity of their property to such parks, shall be the primary beneficiaries of such facilities. Typically, the landowner of a proposed residential development is the developer. 
A typical community park in College Station is designed to serve the needs of residents from several neighborhoods located within one-half- to three-mile radius. Community parks provide amenities that should complement neighborhood parks. Together, neighborhood parks and community parks can meet more of the recreational needs of residents. 
Community parks are generally twenty-five (25) to seventy (70) acres in size. However, larger and smaller community parks may be purchased, developed and/or improved to meet specific requirements of a particular area of town. 
Community parks, by their nature, serve both active and passive leisure needs of residents, and use by organizations and individuals from surrounding areas larger than for neighborhood parks. The acquisition, development, and improvement of the "basic" infrastructure and facilities for the usage of these community parks should be based upon the demand from the area residents it is intended to serve. 
Therefore, the following requirements are adopted to affect the purposes stated above. 
B.  Applicability. 
This Section applies to a landowner who develops land for residential use located within the City or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
C.  Requirements. 
1.  General. 
The City Manager or his designee shall administer this Section with certain review, recommendation and approval authorities being assigned to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and various City departments as specified herein. 
Generally, the developer of residential property must address the following requirements pursuant to this Section: dedication of land for neighborhood park use or payment of a fee in lieu thereof, dedication of land for community parks or payment of a fee in lieu thereof, payment of a development fee for neighborhood parks or construction of the neighborhood park improvements to which such fee relates, and payment of a development fee for community parks or construction of the community parks improvements to which such fee relates. Requirements herein are based on actual dwelling units for an entire development. Increases or decreases in final unit count may require an adjustment in fees paid or land dedicated. If the actual number of dwelling units exceeds the original estimate, additional park land and additional park development fees may required in accordance with the requirements in this Section. 
The schedule of fees and required land dedications is attached hereto as Appendix I and incorporated and made a part of this Section for all purposes. The identification of park zones for neighborhood parks is as shown on City's Recreation, Park and Open Space Master Plan referenced herein and incorporated by reference. 
2.  Land Dedication. 
a.  The amount of land to be dedicated for neighborhood park land purposes and for community park purposes shall be as set forth in Appendix I. 
The total amount of land dedicated for the development shall be dedicated to the City in fee simple: 
1)  Prior to the issuance of any building permits for multi-family development, 
2)  Concurrently with the final plat for a single phase development, 
3)  For a phased development the entire park shall be either platted concurrently with the plat of the first phase of the development or 
4)  The developer may provide the City with financial security against the future dedication by providing a bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other alternative financial guarantee such as a cash deposit in the amount equal to the number of acres park land required and in a form acceptable to the City. The amount of the financial guarantee shall be the amount of fee in lieu of land dedication as set forth in Appendix I. The financial guarantee will be released to the developer, without interest, upon the filing of the final plat for the subsequent phase that dedicates the required park land. 
b.  For development located within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City, the dedication requirements of this Section may be met through the creation of private parkland in the same amount required as set forth in Appendix I provided the developer enters into a written agreement that all such private parkland be dedicated to the City at the time of full purpose annexation into the City and provided that any plat related to such development, is inscribed with a notation regarding same. 
3.  Fee in Lieu of Land. 
In lieu of dedicating park land for neighborhood parks and for community parks, a developer may request to meet some or all of the neighborhood park land dedication requirements, and some or all of the community park land dedication requirements through payment of a fee in lieu thereof in the amounts set forth in Appendix I. Such fees shall be due at the same time as fees are due for final platting or for issuance of a building permit, whichever occurs first. 
4.  City Final Approval. 
The City shall have the final authority in determining how much, if any, land or fee may be accepted in lieu of required land dedication. The City may, from time to time, require that a fee be submitted in lieu of land dedication in amounts as set forth in Appendix I for either, both, some or all of neighborhood park land or community park land dedication. Likewise, the City may, from time to time, require that land be dedicated in amounts as set forth in Appendix I and that no fee in lieu of land will be accepted. 
5.  Approval Process for Park Land Dedication. 
a.  Land Dedications equal or exceeding five (5) acres, and Dedications of Floodplains and Greenways: 
For any proposed required neighborhood park land dedication equaling or exceeding five (5) acres of land or equaling or exceeding payment of a fee in lieu thereof, for any proposed required community park land dedication equaling or exceeding five (5) acres of land or equaling or exceeding the payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or for any proposed land dedication containing floodplain or greenway, the landowner must: 
1)  Obtain a recommendation from the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, and 
2)  Obtain approval from the Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to the Plat Review Section in Article 3 of this UDO. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the recommendation from the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board but may make a decision contrary to its recommendation by majority vote. 
b.  Dedications of less than five (5) acres not including floodplains or greenways: 
For any proposed neighborhood park land dedication less than five (5) acre of land or the payment of a fee in lieu thereof, for any proposed required community park land dedication less than five (5) acres of land or the payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or for any proposed land dedication containing floodplain or greenway, the City Manager or his designee is authorized to accept and approve same if the following criteria are met: 
1)  The proposed dedication or fee provides a sufficient amount of neighborhood park land existing in the park zone of the proposed development for required neighborhood park land dedication, or the proposal provides a sufficient amount of community park land existing for the proposed development for required community park land dedication requirements, whichever applies; 
2)  Where the proposed dedication is insufficient for a neighborhood park site or for a community park site under existing park design standards, some or all of the dedication requirements may be in the form of a fee in amounts as set forth in Appendix I; 
3)  Determination of acceptability of a proposed neighborhood park land dedication and for a proposed community park land dedication is based upon the City of College Station's Recreation, Park and Open Space Master Plan, as may be amended from time to time; and 
4)  The proposed development of the neighborhood park or community park is consistent with College Station's Recreation, Park and Open Space Master Plan, as may be amended from time to time. 
In making his decision, the City Manager or his designee may choose to submit such application to the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board for its recommendation. In such event, the City Manager shall consider such recommendation but may make a decision contrary in accordance with the criteria set forth herein. 
6.  Park Development Fee. 
In addition to the land dedication requirements for neighborhood parks and for community parks, there are also park development fees established herein sufficient to develop neighborhood parks and community parks in ways that meet the City of College Station's Manual of Park Improvements Standards. The amount of development fees assessed to a developer subject to this Section for neighborhood and community parks is as shown in Appendix I. The process for the approval and collection of development fees shall be the same as for the park land dedication requirements to which the development relates, and shall be processed simultaneously with the park land dedication requirements. 
7.  Construction of Park Improvements in Lieu of Development Fee. 
A developer may elect to construct required neighborhood park improvements and/or community park improvements in lieu of paying the associated development fees as set forth herein. In such event: 
a.  A park site plan, developed in cooperation with the Parks and Recreation Department staff, must be submitted and approved by the Director of Parks and Recreation Department or his designee and the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board upon submission of final plat or upon application for a building permit, whichever is applicable. 
b.  Detailed plans and specifications for park improvements hereunder shall be due and processed in accordance with the procedures and requirements pertaining to public improvements for final plats and for building permits issuance, whichever is applicable. 
c.  All plans and specifications shall meet or exceed the City's Manual of Park Improvement Standards in effect at the time of the submission. 
d.  If the improvements are constructed on land that has already been dedicated to and/or is owned by the City, then the Developer must post payment and performance bonds to guarantee the payment to subcontractors and suppliers and to guarantee the developer completes the work in accordance with the approved plans, specifications, ordinances, other applicable laws. 
e.  The construction of all improvements must be completed in accordance with the requirements relating to the construction of public improvements for final plats and issuance of building permits, whichever is applicable. This includes the guaranteeing performance in lieu of completing the park improvements prior to final plat approval. Notwithstanding any other applicable ordinances, park improvements should be completed within two (2) years from the date of the approval. 
f.  Completion and Acceptance. 
Park development will be considered complete and a Certificate of Completion will be issued after the following requirements are met: 
1)  Improvements have been constructed in accordance with the approved plans, 
2)  All park land upon which the improvements have been constructed has been dedicated as required under this Section; and 
3)  All manufacturers' warranties have been provided for any equipment installed in the park as part of these improvements. 
g.  Upon issuance of a Certificate of Completion, the developer warrants the improvements for a period of one (1) year as set forth in the requirements in the City of College Station's Manual of Park Improvements Standards. 
h.  The developer shall be liable for any costs required to complete park development if: 
1)  Developer fails to complete the improvements in accordance with the approved plans; or 
2)  Developer fails to complete any warranty work. 
8.  Submitting Fee. 
Any fees required to be paid pursuant to this Section shall be remitted: 
a.  Prior to the issuance of any building permits for multi-family development; or 
b.  Upon the submission of each final plat for single-family, duplex or townhouse development 
9.  Use of Fees. 
Fees may be used only for the acquisition, development, and/or improvement of park facilities to which they relate. For fees in lieu of neighborhood park land dedication, fees may only be used for purchase, development and/or improvement of neighborhood parks located within the same zone as the development. For fees in lieu of community park land dedication, fees may only be used for the purchase, development, and/or improvement of community parks. 
10.  Reimbursement for City Acquired Park Land. 
The City may from time to time acquire land for parks in or near an area of actual or potential development. If the City does acquire park land in a park zone for a neighborhood park or acquires park land for a community park, the City may require subsequent dedications to be in fee-in lieu-of-land only. This will be to reimburse the City for the cost(s) of acquisition. 
D.  Prior Dedication or Absence of Prior Dedication. 
If a dedication requirement arose prior to enactment or amendment of this Section, subsequent development for the subject tract to which the dedication requirements applies may be subject to vesting as set forth in Chapter 245 Texas Local Government Code. Depending on the circumstances, additional dedication may be required for the increase in dwelling units from what was originally proposed. 
E.  Comprehensive Plan Considerations. 
The City's Recreation, Park and Open Space Master Plan is intended to provide the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board with a guide upon which to base its recommendations. Because of the need to consider specific characteristics in the site selection process, the park locations indicated on the Plan are general. The actual locations, sizes, and number of parks will be determined when development occurs or when sites are acquired by the City, including by donations. 
Park zones for neighborhood parks are established by the City's Recreation, Park and Open Space Master Plan as a component of the City's Comprehensive Plan, and indicate service areas for neighborhood parks. Zone boundaries typically follow key topographic features such as major thoroughfares, streams, City limit and ETJ boundary lines. New park zones may be created or existing zones amended pursuant to procedures for amending the City's Recreation, Park and Open Space Master Plan as land acquisitions or other circumstances dictate. 
F.  Special Fund; Right to Refund. 
1.  All neighborhood park land dedication fees will be deposited in a fund referenced to the park zone to which it relates. Community park land dedication fees will be deposited in a fund referenced to community parks. 
2.  The City shall account for all fees in lieu of land and all development fees paid under this Section with reference to the individual plat(s) involved. Any fees paid for such purposes must be encumbered or expended by the City within ten (10) years from the date received by the City for acquisition, development, and/or improvement of a neighborhood park or a community park as required herein. Such funds shall be considered to be spent on a first-in, first-out basis. If not so encumbered by contract or purchase order or expended, the landowners of the property on the expiration of such period shall be refunded a prorated refund of such sum, computed on a square footage of area basis by the City. 
G.  Park Land Guidelines and Requirements. 
Parks should be easy to access and open to public view so as to benefit area development, enhance the visual character of the City, protect public safety and minimize conflict with adjacent land uses. The following guidelines and requirements shall be used in designing parks and adjacent development. 
1.  Any land dedicated to the City under this Section must be suitable for park and recreation uses. The dedication shall be free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances that interfere with its use for park purposes. The City Manager or his designee shall determine whether any encumbrances interfere with park use. Minerals may be reserved from the conveyance provided that there is a complete waiver of the surface use by all mineral owners and lessees. A current title report must be provided with the land dedication. The property owner shall pay all taxes or assessments owed on the property up to the date of acceptance of the dedication by the City. A tax certificate from the Brazos County Tax Assessor shall be submitted with the dedication or plat. 
2.  Consideration will be given to land that is in the floodplain or may be considered "floodable" even though not in a federally regulated floodplain as long as, due to its elevation, it is suitable for park improvements. Sites should not be severely sloping or have unusual topography which would render the land unusable for recreational activities. 
3.  Land in floodplains or designated greenways will be considered on a three (3) for one (1) basis. Three (3) acres of floodplain or greenway will be equal to one (1) acre of park land. 
4.  Where feasible, park sites should be located adjacent to greenways and/or schools in order to encourage shared facilities and joint development of new sites. 
5.  Neighborhood park sites should be adjacent to residential areas in a manner that serves the greatest number of users and should be located to minimize users having to cross arterial roadways to access them. 
6.  Where appropriate, sites with existing trees or other scenic elements are preferred. 
7.  Detention/retention areas may not be to meet dedication requirements, but may be accepted in addition to the required dedication. If accepted as part of the park, the detention/retention area design must meet specific parks specifications in the City's Manual of Park Improvements Standards. 
8.  Where park sites are adjacent to greenways, schools, or existing or proposed subdivisions, access ways may be required to facilitate public access to provide public access to parks. 
9.  It is desirable that fifty (50) percent of the perimeter of a park should abut a public street. 
10.  Community Parks should be accessible for major arterial streets so as to be accessible by large groups of people from large surrounding areas. 
H.  Warranty Required. 
1.  All materials and equipment provided to the City shall be new unless otherwise approved in advance by the City Manager or his designee and that all work will be of good quality, free from faults and defects, and in conformance with the designs, plans, specifications, and drawings, and recognized industry standards. This warranty, any other warranties express or implied, and any other consumer rights, shall inure to the benefit of the City only and are not made for the benefit of any party other than the City. 
2.  All work by the developer or landowner not conforming to these requirements, including but not limited to unapproved substitutions, may be considered defective. 
3.  This warranty is in addition to any rights or warranties expressed or implied by law. 
4.  Where more than a one (1) year warranty is specified in the applicable plans, specifications, or submittals for individual products, work, or materials, the longer warranty shall govern. 
5.  This warranty obligation may be covered by any performance or payment bonds tendered in compliance with this Ordinance. 
6.  If any of the work performed by the developer or landowner is found or determined to be either defective, including obvious defects, or otherwise not in accordance with this ordinance, the designs, plans, drawings or specifications within one (1) year after the date of the issuance of a certificate of Final Completion of the work or a designated portion thereof, whichever is longer, or within one (1) year after acceptance by the City of designated equipment, or within such longer period of time as may be prescribed by law or by the terms of any applicable special warranty required by this ordinance, developer shall promptly correct the defective work at no cost to the City. 
7.  During the applicable warranty period and after receipt of written notice from the City to begin corrective work, developer shall promptly begin the corrective work. The obligation to correct any defective work shall be enforceable under this Code of Ordinances. The guarantee to correct the defective work shall not constitute the exclusive remedy of the City, nor shall other remedies be limited to the terms of either the warranty or the guarantee. 
8.  If within twenty (20) calendar days after the City has notified developer of a defect, failure, or abnormality in the work, developer has not started to make the necessary corrections or adjustments, the City is hereby authorized to make the corrections or adjustments, or to order the work to be done by a third party. The cost of the work shall be paid by developer. 
9.  The cost of all materials, parts, labor, transportation, supervision, special instruments, and supplies required for the replacement or repair of parts and for correction of defects shall be paid by Developer, its contractors, or subcontractors or by the surety. 
10.  The guarantee shall be extended to cover all repairs and replacements furnished, and the term of the guarantee for each repair or replacement shall be one (1) year after the installation or completion. The one-year warranty shall cover all work, equipment, and materials that are part of the improvements made under this Section of the ordinance. 
APPENDIX I. 
PARK LAND DEDICATION AND DEVELOPMENT FEES 
I.  Neighborhood and Community Parks. 
A.  Dedication Requirements for Neighborhood Parks. 
1.  Land dedication. 
Single-Family: One (1) acre per 117 Dwelling Units (DU) 
Multi-Family: One (1) acre per 49 bedrooms (BR) 
2.  Fee in lieu of land dedication. 
Single-Family: $274.00 per Dwelling Unit (DU) 
Multi-Family: $115.00 per Bedroom (BR) 
3.  Park development fee. 
Single-Family: $362.00 per Dwelling Unit (DU) 
Multi-Family: $152.00 per Bedroom (BR) 
4.  Total neighborhood park fees. 
Single-Family: $636.00 per Dwelling Unit (DU) 
Multi-Family: $267.00 per Bedroom (BR) 
B.  Dedication Requirements for Community Parks. 
1.  Land dedication. 
Single-Family: One (1) acre per 128 Dwelling Units (DU) 
Multi-Family: One (1) acre per 53 Bedrooms (BR) 
2.  Fee in lieu of land dedication. 
Single-Family: $250.00 per Dwelling Unit (DU) 
Multi-Family: $105.00 per Bedroom (BR) 
3.  Park development fee. 
Single-Family: $375.00 per Dwelling Unit (DU) 
Multi-Family: $315.00 per Bedroom (BR) 
4.  Total community park fees. 
Single-Family: $625.00 per Dwelling Unit (DU) 
Multi-Family: $420.00 per Bedroom (BR) 
(Ord. No. 2012-3434 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 8-9-2012; Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. K), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2015-3728 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 12-10-2015; Ord. No. 2017-3953 , Pt. 1(Exhs. A-C), 10-26-2017) 
Sec. 8.9. - Certifications. 
CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION 
STATE OF TEXAS ) 
COUNTY OF BRAZOS ) 
I (we) ___________, owner(s) and developer(s) of the land shown on this plat, and designated herein as the ___________ Subdivision to the City of College Station, Texas, and whose name(s) is/are subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, greenways, infrastructure, easements, and public places thereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein expressed. All such dedications shall be in fee simple unless expressly provided otherwise. 
___________ 
___________ 
Owner(s) 
STATE OF TEXAS ) 
COUNTY OF BRAZOS ) 
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ___________ known to me to be the person(s) whose name(s) is/are subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he/they executed the same for the purpose and consideration therein stated. 
Given under my hand and seal on this ___ day of _______, 20 ___. 
___________ 
Notary Public, Brazos County, Texas 
(Seal) 
      
CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYOR AND/OR ENGINEER 
STATE OF TEXAS ) 
COUNTY OF BRAZOS ) 
I, ___________, Registered Public Surveyor (Engineer), No. _______, in the State of Texas, hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property and that property markers and monuments were placed under my supervision on the ground. 
___________ 
CERTIFICATE OF CITY ENGINEER 
I, ___________, City Engineer of the City of College Station, Texas, hereby certify that this Subdivision Plat conforms to the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of College Station. 
___________ 
City Engineer 
City of College Station 
      
CERTIFICATE OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 
I, ___________, Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of College Station, hereby certify that the attached plat was duly approved by the Commission on the ___ day of _______, 20 ___. 
___________ 
Chairman(s) 
      
CERTIFICATE OF THE COUNTY CLERK 
STATE OF TEXAS  
COUNTY OF BRAZOS ) 
I, ___________, County Clerk, in and for said county, do hereby certify that this plat together with its certificates of authentication was filed for record in my office the ___ day of, 20___, in the Deed Records of Brazos County, Texas, in Volume _______ Page _______. 
WITNESS my hand and official Seal, at my office in Bryan, Texas. 
___________ 
County Clerk 
Brazos County, Texas 
(SEAL) 
CERTIFICATE OF CITY PLANNER (for Amending or Minor Plats) 
I, ___________, City Planner of the City of College Station, Texas, hereby certify that this Subdivision Plat conforms to the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of the City of College Station. 
___________ 
City Planner 
City of College Station 
      
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL (for ETJ Plats) 
This subdivision plat was duly approved by the Commissioners Court of Brazos County, Texas as the Final Plat of such subdivision on ___ day of _______, 20___. Signed this the ___ day of _______, 20___. 
___________ 
County Judge, 
Brazos County, Texas 
      
CERTIFICATE OF NO ACTION TAKEN 
I, ___________, Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission, hereby certify that the plat was filed with the Planning and Development Services Department on the ___ day of _______, and that the Planning and Zoning Commission failed to act on the plat within 30 days after the plat was filed. 
___________ 
Chairman 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. K), 9-27-2012) 
Article 9. - Nonconformities 

Sec. 9.1. - General. 
Except as specified in this Article, any use, building, structure, or sign existing at the time of enactment of this UDO or classification amendment applicable to its use, may be continued even though such use, building, structure, or sign may not conform with the provisions of this UDO for the district in which it is located; provided, however, that this Article shall not apply to any use, building, structure, or sign established in violation of this UDO or ordinance previously in effect in College Station. 
Sec. 9.2. - Nonconforming Uses. 
A.  Continuance . 
An existing use that is not in compliance with this UDO or subsequent amendments applicable to the use shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered unless the use is brought into compliance with this UDO, except as follows: 
1.  Expansion . 
a.  For properties designated as Neighborhood Conservation in the Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use and Character Map: When authorized by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions of this Article, enlargement or completion of a building devoted to a nonconforming use may be made upon the lot occupied by such building, where such extension is necessary and incidental to the existing use of such building and does not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the original area of nonconformity. 
b.  For properties in all other areas: Buildings and structures devoted to nonconforming uses may be enlarged, extended, or structurally altered provided such enlargement, extension, or structural alteration is incidental to the existing use of existing buildings and does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the original area of nonconformity. Enlargements greater than fifty (50) percent of the original area of nonconformity shall require approval of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
2.  Conditional Use . 
A use existing on the effective date of this UDO, or subsequent amendment applicable to its use, which would only be permitted as a conditional use, shall be a lawful nonconforming use until altered pursuant to the Conditional Use Permit section of this UDO. In the event of issuance of a conditional use permit, such use becomes a permitted and lawful use. 
B.  Termination . 
The City Council shall have the authority to initiate, on its motion, action to bring about the discontinuance of a nonconforming use under any plan whereby full value of the structure can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the area and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this UDO. 
C.  Abandonment . 
Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued and changed to a conforming use, or whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued or abandoned for more than three (3) months, a presumption of intent to abandon said use shall have been established and the right to continue the former nonconforming use shall no longer exist. Subsequent operation as a nonconforming use shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 2011-3355 ,  1(Exh. A), 6-23-2011; Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. M), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2018-3970 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 1-11-2018) 
Sec. 9.3. - Nonconforming Structures. 
A.  Enlargement, Alteration . 
1.  A structure (including parking lots, parking structures, and parking areas), which is nonconforming by physical design may be enlarged or structurally altered as long as such enlargement or alteration otherwise complies with the terms of this UDO with the following exceptions: 
a.  Parking Requirements: The Administrator may make exceptions to the requirement of following the UDO for parking requirements for non-residential properties where there are physical limitations and a demonstrated inability to meet all standards of this UDO but may not waive more than 50% of the required number of parking spaces. 
b.  Landscaping Requirements: The Administrator may make exceptions to the requirement of following the UDO for landscaping requirements for non-residential properties where there are physical limitations and a demonstrated inability to meet all standards of this UDO but may not waive more than 50% of required landscaping points. 
c.  Buffer Requirements: The Administrator may reduce required buffer yard widths and plantings where there are existing structures being retained in the required buffer area or where there are other physical limitations and a demonstrated inability to meet all standards of this UDO so long as such reductions do not increase the existing degree of nonconformity. 
2.  In NG-1, NG-2, and NG-3, the whole building plot must come into compliance with the requirements of this UDO when more than fifty (50) percent of a building(s) on the site is enlarged or altered. 
B.  Termination . 
The City Council shall have the authority to initiate on its motion, or cause to be presented by interested property owner, action to bring about the discontinuance of a nonconforming structure under any plan whereby full value of the structure can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this UDO. 
C.  Abandonment . 
Whenever a nonconforming structure has been discontinued or abandoned for more than three (3) months, a presumption of intent to abandon said structure shall have been established and the right to continue the former nonconforming structure shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 2018-3970 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 1-11-2018) 
Sec. 9.4. - Nonconforming Lots of Record. 
A.  Authority to Utilize for Single-Family Residence. 
In any district in which single-family dwellings are a permitted use, notwithstanding the regulations imposed by any other provisions of this Section, a single-family detached dwelling that complies with the restrictions below may be erected on a nonconforming lot that is not less than thirty (30) feet in width, consisting entirely of one (1) tract of land of not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet, and that: 
1.  Has less than the prescribed minimum lot area, width, and/or depth; 
2.  Is shown by a recorded plat or deed to have been a lot of record owned separately and individually from adjoining tracts of land at a time when the creation of a lot of such size, depth, and width at such location would not have been prohibited by any zoning or other ordinance; and 
3.  Has remained in separate and individual ownership from adjoining tracts of land continuously during the entire time that the creation of such lot has been prohibited by the applicable zoning ordinance or other ordinances. 
B.  Regulations for Single-Family Use of Nonconforming Lots. 
A nonconforming lot authorized to be used pursuant to this Section may be used for a single-family dwelling and no other structure except for a garage or carport. Construction of such single-family dwelling shall comply with all the regulations (except lot area, width, and depth) applicable to single-family dwellings in the zoning district in which the lot in question is located, except that the following side yard requirements shall apply in place of the side yard requirements otherwise applicable: 
1.  The dwelling shall be placed on the lot so as to provide a yard on each side of the dwelling. 
2.  The sum of the widths of the two (2) side yards on such lot shall be not less than the smaller of: 
a.  Twenty-five (25) percent of the width of the lot; or 
b.  The minimum total for both side yards prescribed by the bulk regulations for said zoning district; and 
3.  No side yard shall be less than three (3) feet wide. 
C.  Regulations for Certain Nonconforming Lots Zoned R Rural. 
1.  A single-family dwelling and accessory structure(s) in areas zoned R Rural, may be erected or structurally altered on a nonconforming lot of record, that is not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area and not more than one (1) acre in area, so long as the structure or the addition to the structure complies with the setbacks established by the GS General Suburban zoning district. 
2.  A single-family dwelling or accessory structure located on property within the area annexed by Ordinance No. 3331, adopted by the City Council on April 14, 2011, may be erected or structurally altered on a nonconforming lot of record provided the proposed construction complies with the setback requirements established by the GS General Suburban zoning district. 
D.  Other Uses of Nonconforming Lots: Site Plan Required. 
In any district in which single-family dwellings are not permitted, a nonconforming lot of record which meets the requirements above may be used for any use permitted in the district in which it is located if, but only if, a site plan for such use has been approved in accordance with the provisions of the Site Plan Review section of this UDO. 
E.  Lots Made Nonconforming by Right-of-Way Acquisition. 
Any lot made nonconforming solely by means of area dedicated, condemned, sold or otherwise conveyed for public right-of-way shall be allowed to pursue any allowed use as if such area were a part of the remaining lot, except that all applicable setbacks shall be adhered to. 
(Ord. No. 2011-3355 ,  1(Exh. B), 6-23-2011; Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. M), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. N), 9-12-2013) 
Sec. 9.5. - Nonconforming Tracts. 
Unplatted properties made nonconforming by the zoning applied at the time of annexation shall be allowed to plat, provided that the resulting lot contains the entire tract. 
Sec. 9.6. - Nonconforming Signs. 
A.  Continuation Allowed. 
A lawfully nonconforming sign may continue in use except as otherwise provided in or authorized by this Section. A change in the information on the face of an existing nonconforming sign is allowed if the change does not increase the area of the sign face and involves no structural alteration. 
B.  Alteration, Expansion, Moving. 
No nonconforming sign, by voluntary act of the owner, shall be: 
1.  Changed or altered in any manner which would increase the degree of its nonconformity; 
2.  Expanded (sign face); or 
3.  Moved in whole or in part to any other location where it would remain nonconforming. 
C.  Signs Required to be Moved by the City. 
Any nonconforming sign required to be moved or removed by the City shall be removed or relocated in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Local Government Code. 
D.  Regulations for Certain Nonconforming Properties Zoned R Rural . 
Attached signs may either be erected or structurally altered on a nonconforming nonresidential structure located on property within the area annexed by Ordinance No. 3331, dated April 14, 2011, provided the proposed sign or alteration complies with Section 7.5.I. "Attached Signs" of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 2015-3643 , Pt. 1(Exh. A), 3-12-2015) 
Article 10. - Enforcement 

Sec. 10.1. - Enforcement by Administrator. 
The Administrator, or his designee, shall have the authority to issue citations for the violation of the provisions of this UDO. In the event that an individual signs a copy of the citation given to him or her, he thereby acknowledges receipt of same and promises to contact the Municipal Court and arrange for the entry of a plea and a hearing where necessary, within ten (10) days of the date of the citation. If the defendant shall not sign a citation, the Administrator shall proceed to prepare and file a formal complaint with the Municipal Court, and shall seek the issuance of a warrant, delivering same to the appropriate law enforcement officer for the resulting arrest of the defendant. 
A person who knowingly violates a written promise to appear in court, as provided above, commits a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge on which the ticket is issued. 
Sec. 10.2. - Penalties for Violation. 
Any person who violates or fails to comply with the requirements of this UDO, or who builds or alters any building or structure in violation of any plan or statement submitted and approved hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be liable to a fine pursuant to the General Penalty set out in Section 1-5, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of College Station. 
Sec. 10.3. - Penal Provisions. 
A.  Within Corporate Limits. 
Any person violating any provision of this UDO, within the corporate limits of the City of College Station, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be fined pursuant to the General Penalty set out in Section 1-5, of the Code of Ordinances. Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any other relief for violations of this UDO. 
B.  Outside Corporate Limits. 
Any person violating any provision of this UDO, outside the corporate limits of the City, but within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall not be considered as committing a misdemeanor, nor shall any fine provided in Section A above be applicable; however, the City shall have the right to institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the violation of any provision of this UDO. 
Sec. 10.4. - Specific Enforcement and Penalties for Flood Hazard Protection. 
A.  Notification of Noncompliance. 
If at any time development takes place for which an approved Development Permit has not been issued, or development occurs which does not conform to the plans and specifications upon which the issued Development Permit was based, the Administrator or his designee shall issue a written Notice of Noncompliance to the owner. The Notice shall give a specific time allowance to the owner during which he must take one (1) of the following steps to bring the development into compliance with this UDO: 
1.  An acceptable application for a Development Permit must be filed with the office of the Development Engineer for the entire scope of development taking place or proposed for the site; 
2.  The item or items which are not in compliance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of this UDO shall be corrected, added, or improved until they are in compliance with this chapter, at which time the owner shall request, in writing, a re-inspection by the Development Engineer; 
3.  Modified construction plans shall be submitted to the Development Engineer which detail, in an acceptable manner, the remedial, additional, or corrective measures which must be taken to bring the development within the provisions and requirements of this UDO; or 
4.  An acceptable variance request, subject to the provisions of this UDO, shall be submitted to the Administrator which shall have the effect, if granted, of removing the requirements for which the development was determined to be in noncompliance. 
The time allotment for these actions shall be reasonable, and shall be determined according to the number, nature, and severity of the non-complying items. In no case shall that time period exceed thirty (30) calendar days from the date of notification. If, in the opinion of the Development Engineer, a condition exists which is hazardous to the immediate safety of the public, he may seek remedies outside the scope of this Section. 
B.  Revocation or Suspension of Development Permit. 
Upon expiration of the time allotment for remedial or corrective measures, the Development Engineer shall take one (1) of the following courses of action: 
1.  If, in the opinion of the Development Engineer, the owner has made, or is making, a good faith effort to remedy the offending situation, the Development Engineer may extend the time allotment previously granted if such extension is requested by the owner; or 
2.  Where an approved Development Permit has been issued for the development, the Development Engineer shall suspend the development permit. Written notice of said suspension, along with the terms and requirements for reinstating the Development Permit, shall be delivered to the owner. 
3.  Upon suspension of a Development Permit, all portions of the work being done on the property that are regulated by this UDO shall cease. These activities include, but are not limited to, grading, excavation, fill, berming, stripping, clearing, paving, placement of any storm sewer, drainage structure, inlet or appurtenance thereto; any work within a defined Area of Special Flood Hazard, or placement of any structure, temporary or permanent, or any obstruction within the Area of Special Flood Hazard. 
4.  Upon finding that no approved Development Permit exists for the work or property in question or suspending an existing approved development permit, the Development Engineer shall issue a stop work order for all items of work on the subject property covered by this or other ordinances, any work permitted, licensed, or otherwise regulated by the City, or any work subject to inspection or approval by the City. The Development Engineer may enter property to inspect and verify that the requirements of this UDO are being met. 
5.  All notices required by this Section shall be served upon the parties concerned either personally or by certified mail, addressed to the individual contracting parties or permit holder, at the address given on the permit application. 
C.  Penalty Imposed. 
Upon the finding of a violation of this UDO regarding Flood Hazard Protection, the Development Engineer may file a complaint in the Municipal Court of the City of College Station against any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity. In the event that the judge finds any person, firm, corporation, or other legal entity to be in violation of the terms, conditions, or requirements of this UDO, or provisions or conditions pursuant thereto, he shall find said person firm, corporation, or other legal entity guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon conviction shall impose a fine pursuant to the General Penalty set out in Section 1-5, of the Code of Ordinances. Prosecution under this provision shall not be a bar to any other relief for violation of this UDO. 
D.  Fine Not Exclusive Penalty. 
In addition to a fine, the City may institute appropriate actions or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of the provisions of this UDO, or to correct violations thereof, and, if applicable, appropriate actions or proceedings at law or equity against any surety company, escrow holder, or any third party who has affirmatively acted as surety or guarantor for the faithful performance of the permit holder's work. 
Sec. 10.5. - Specific Penalties for Certificates of Appropriateness and Certificates of Demolition. 
A person is criminally responsible for a violation of the Certificate of Appropriateness and Certificate of Demolition sections of this UDO if: 
1.  The person owns part or all of the property where the violation occurs, 
2.  The person is the agent of the owner of the property and is in control of the property, or 
3.  The person commits the violation or assists in the commission of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3449 , Pt. 1(Exh. M), 9-27-2012) 
Sec. 10.6. - Specific Enforcement and Penalties for Drainage and Stormwater Management. 
A.  Enforcement Responsibility. 
The Administrator or his designee has the responsibility for enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. The duties include not only the issuance of permits as required by this ordinance, but also the responsibility of ensuring that all facilities conform with this subpart and with any other applicable state and federal laws, requirements and regulations of this Code of Ordinances or of the City. The Administrator has the authority to adopt policies and procedures not inconsistent with the terms of this ordinance necessary to implement the provisions of this division. 
B.  Violations. 
1.  Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each violation shall be deemed a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance is committed or continued. Any person found guilty of violating a provision of this ordinance may be punished as provided for in Section 1-7 of this Code of Ordinances. 
2.  The owner or operator of any facility, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
3.  A violation of this section is also declared a nuisance and may be enforced five thousand (5,000) feet outside the City Limits. 
C.  Notice of Violations. 
If the Administrator determines that there is a violation of this ordinance, notice will be sent to the property owner or operator of record by registered or certified mail, unless deemed an emergency pursuant to Section 7-13, Subsection C of this Code of Ordinances. The notice will specify the measures required to come into full compliance with this ordinance and shall specify the time within which the measures must be completed. Failure to comply within the time specified is a violation of this ordinance and subject to additional penalties outlined herein. 
D.  Voluntary Compliance. 
The Administrator has the authority to instruct an operator of a facility that commits any acts prohibited by this ordinance to achieve voluntary compliance as determined by the Administrator. The Administrator will provide a reasonable amount of time, specific to the occurrence, to remedy the violation. 
E.  Stop Orders. 
The Administrator has the authority to issue stop work orders for any facility that commits any acts prohibited by this ordinance. 
F.  Appeals, Interpretation, and Variances. 
Where applicable, any appeals, interpretations or variances of the Administrator's designee shall first be to the Administrator, then to a court of competent jurisdiction. Any appeals, interpretations or variances of the Administrator shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction directly." 
(Ord. No. 2012-3431 , Pt. 2(Exh. B), 7-12-2012) 
Article 11. - Definitions 

Sec. 11.1. - General. 
A.  For the purpose of this UDO, certain words shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  Words in the present tense include the future tense. 
2.  Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural number include the singular, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. 
3.  The word "person" includes a firm, association, corporation, trust, and company, as well as an individual. 
4.  The word "structure" shall include the word "building." 
5.  The word "lot" shall include the words, "plot," "parcel," or "tract." 
6.  The words "will" and "shall" are always mandatory and not merely directory. 
B.  Words not specifically defined in Section 11.2 shall take their common dictionary meaning, except as modified by use as terms of art in planning or engineering. 
Sec. 11.2. - Defined Terms. 
Accessory Use or Structure, or Building : 
(1)  A building, structure, or use which is subordinate to and serves a primary use or principal structure; 
(2)  A building, structure, or use which is subordinate in area, extent, or purpose to the primary use served; 
(3)  A building, structure, or use which contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants of the primary use served; 
(4)  A building, structure, or use which is located within the same zoning district as the primary use; and 
(5)  A building, structure, or use which in residential districts is not used for commercial purposes other than legitimate home occupations. 
Examples of accessory buildings, structures, or uses include, but are not limited to, private garages, greenhouses, living quarters, tool sheds, radio or television antennae, or bathhouses. 
Access Way: An Access Way consists of a minimum fifteen-foot wide public access easement or public right-of-way. A minimum five-foot sidewalk shall be constructed in the center of the Access Way, except where the Access Way provides connection to a multi-use path, a minimum eight-foot sidewalk shall be provided. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
Administrator: The Development Services Director, or his designee, shall serve as the Administrator. 
Adult Arcade: Any business enterprise that offers or maintains one (1) or more adult video viewing booths. 
Adult Cabaret: Any business enterprise which regularly features or offers to the public, customers, or members, performances by persons who appear nude or semi-nude, or live performances that are characterized by their emphasis on the exposure, depiction or description of specified anatomical areas, or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities. 
Adult Motel: A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas;" or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
Adult Movie Theater: Any business enterprise which regularly features or offers to the public the presentation of motion picture films, movies, or sound recordings which are characterized by their emphasis on the description or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities and which are presented to a common audience of more than five (5) persons in an enclosed common area or are presented in a common area of more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet. 
Adult Retail Store: A business enterprise which meets any of the following tests: 
(1)  Offers for sale or rental items from any two (2) of the following categories: 
(a)  Sexually-oriented materials; 
(b)  Lingerie; or 
(c)  Leather goods which are marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use in connection with specified sexual activities; 
(2)  Offers for sale sexually-oriented toys and novelties, except a business enterprise which devotes less than ten (10) percent of its stock in trade and sales and display area to sexually-oriented materials, with all sexually-oriented toys and novelties separated from other sales and display areas by an opaque wall at least eight (8) feet in height with a management-controlled system of access to ensure that only persons over the age of eighteen (18) years are allowed to enter the area; 
(3)  Devotes more than ten (10) percent of its stock in trade or sales and display area to sexually-oriented materials without having all sexually-oriented materials separated from other sales and display areas by an opaque wall at least eight (8) feet in height with a management-controlled system of access to ensure that only persons over the age of eighteen (18) years are allowed to enter the area; 
(4)  Devotes more than forty (40) percent of its stock in trade or sales and display area to sexually-oriented materials; or 
(5)  Advertises or holds itself out in signage visible from the public right-of-way as "X...," "adult," "sex," or otherwise as a sexually-oriented business. 
Adult Retail Store, Limited: Any business enterprise which offers for sale or rental sexually-oriented materials, and which devotes at least ten (10) percent and not more than forty (40) percent of its stock in trade or sales and display area to sexually-oriented materials, provided that: 
(1)  The following items are not also offered for sale: 
(a)  Lingerie; or 
(b)  Leather goods which are marketed or presented in a context to suggest their use in connection with specified sexual activities; 
(2)  All sexually-oriented materials are separated from other sales and display areas by an opaque wall at least eight (8) feet in height with a management-controlled system of access to ensure that only persons over the age of eighteen (18) years are allowed to enter the area; and 
(3)  The business enterprise does not advertise or hold itself out in signage visible from the public right-of-way as "X...," "adult," "sex" or otherwise as a sexually-oriented business. 
Adult Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity, or live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult Video Viewing Booth: Coin or slug-operated, or electronically or mechanically controlled, still or motion-picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices which present to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time visual or audio material of any kind which is characterized by its emphasis on the description or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. No part of this definition shall be construed to permit more than one (1) person to occupy an adult video viewing booth at any time. 
Alley: A minor public way which provides a secondary means of vehicular access to the abutting property otherwise served from a public street. 
Alternative Mounting Structure: Any building or structure, other than a tower, which can be used for the location of telecommunication antennas and facilities. Antennas located on these structures may include Attached WTFs or Stealth Antenna. 
Animal Care Facilities: A place where animals are boarded and/or bred, including, but not limited to, stables and kennels. 
Antenna: Any system of poles, panels, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency signals. 
(1)  Omni-Directional Antenna ("Whip" Antenna): transmits and receives radio frequency signals in a three hundred sixty-degree radial pattern. 
(2)  The Directional Antenna ("Panel" Antenna): transmits and receives radio frequency signals in a specific directional pattern of less than three hundred sixty (360) degrees. 
(3)  The Parabolic Antenna ("Dish" Antenna): is a bowl-shaped device for the reception and/or transmission of radio frequency signals in a specific directional pattern. 
Apartment Building: See "Multi-family Dwelling". 
Appeal: An appeal is a request for a review of the Administrator, or other administrative official's interpretation, of any provisions of this UDO or a request for a variance. 
Applicant: An individual seeking an action, a permit, or other approval under the provisions of this UDO. 
Area of Special Flood Hazard: The land adjacent to a clearly defined channel within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE, or V. 
Art Studio or Gallery: Where objects of art are created or displayed for the public enrichment or where said objects of art are displayed for sale (including, but not limited to, the teaching of photography, painting, sculpturing, and other similar skills) as the primary use of the structure. 
Arterial, Major/Minor: See "Street, Arterial." 
Assisted Living/Residential Care Facility: A building used or designed for the housing of the aged, and/or mentally or physically handicapped persons who are in need of assistance with activities of daily living and/or health care and/or personal care in a homelike setting and duly licensed by the State of Texas for such purpose. 
Attached Wireless Telecommunication Facility: A wireless telecommunication facility that is affixed on an existing structure that is not primarily used for the support or attachment of a wireless telecommunication facility and is not a normal component of such a facility. 
Automobile Repair and Service: See "Vehicle Repair and Service Shop." 
Automobile Sales and Rental: See "Vehicle Sales and Rental." 
Barricade Area For Existing Trees: An area extending in a radius of one (1) foot per caliper inch of tree diameter from the protected tree that prevents intrusion by construction equipment, vehicles, and people, but allows only hand clearing of underbrush. 
Base Flood: The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year ("The 100-Year Flood"). 
Bed and Breakfast Inn: A residential structure where two (2) or fewer rooms are rented to transient paying guests on an overnight basis with no more than one (1) meal served daily, where no cooking facilities are provided in the rooms and where the total number of permanent and transient occupants does not exceed four (4) at any one (1) time. 
Block: A tract or parcel of designated as such on a duly recorded plat. Blocks are surrounded by streets or a combination of streets and other physical obstructions such as a railroad or 100-year floodplain. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
Block Length: A measurement of the linear distance of land along a Blockface that is bounded on both ends by public through streets or by a combination of a public through street, Public Way, railroad, or one hundred-year floodplain. As such, gated streets, private streets, culs-de-sac, alleys, private driveways, or Access Ways do not divide land into separate Blockfaces. 

Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
Blockface: That portion of a block or tract of land facing the same side of a single street and lying between the closest intersection streets. 
Board of Adjustment: The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of College Station. 
Boarding House: See "Rooming/Boarding House." 
Body Rub Parlor: Any business enterprise where body rub services are provided in order to induce relaxation or for other purposes. 
Building: A "building" is any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, chattel or movable property of any kind and which is affixed to the land. 
Building Coverage: Building coverage refers to the area of a lot covered by buildings (principal and accessory) or roofed areas, as measured along the outside wall at ground level, and including all projections, other than open porches, fire escapes, canopies, and the first two (2) feet of a roof overhang. 
Building Height : Building height refers to the vertical distance measured from the finished grade and the height of the roof as described below. For buildings with multiple roof levels, the highest of the various roof levels must be used to determine the building height. The average height of multiple roof levels is not to be used to determine building height. 
1)  The average height level between the eaves and ridge line of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof; 

2)  The deck line of a mansard roof; 

3)  The highest point of the coping of a flat or shed roof; 

4)  The highest point of equipment located on top of a structure such as satellite dishes, heating and air conditioning units. 
Building Official: The designated "Building Official" of the City of College Station, or his designated representative. 
Building Plot or Premises: All of the land within a project, whether one (1) or more lots, developed according to a common plan or design for similar or compatible uses, that may have shared access or parking, and that singularly or in phases is treated as such for site plan review purposes. The determination of the boundaries of a building plot shall be made as the first step in the site plan or project review, unless such determination has previously been made at the time of plat approval. For development not subject to site plan review, the building plot or premises shall be the exterior boundary of any included lots, in the event that the structure sits astride two (2) or more lots. In the event that two (2) or more lots are under single ownership and the structure does not meet the required side yard setback, both lots shall be considered the building plot or premises. Demolished sites located in larger parking lots that may not have previously been considered part of a larger building plot, will be considered part of the plot if access is shared with the site. 
Bulb Out : Extension of the curb line to physically narrow a street. Allows for delineation of on-street parking and reduces distance of pedestrian crossing. 
Bulk Storage Tank: A container for the storing of chemicals, petroleum products, grains, and other materials for subsequent resale to distributors or retail dealers or outlets. 
Business Development Corporation: Shall mean the College Station Business Development Corporation, Inc. This corporation is the non-profit corporation created by the City to promote, assist, and enhance economic development in the City of College Station. 
Caliper: This shall mean the width of the trunk of a tree and shall be measured at twelve (12) inches above grade. 
Canopy Tree: See "Tree, Canopy." 
Carport: A structure which has enclosing walls for less than fifty (50) percent of its perimeter covered with a roof and constructed specifically for the storage of one (1) or more motor vehicles. 
Car Wash: A place containing facilities for washing automobiles which may include the automatic or semiautomatic application of cleaner, brushes, rinse water, and heat for drying. 
Certificate of Compliance: A letter signed by the Development Engineer indicating compliance with all plans and specifications applicable to the subject project and completion of all stormwater management and soil erosion protection measures. 
Chief of Police: The Chief of Police of the City of College Station. 
Church or Place of Religious Worship: A building in which persons regularly assemble to worship, intended primarily for purposes connected with faith or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
City: The City of College Station, Texas. 
City Attorney: The "City Attorney" of the City of College Station. 
City Council: The duly and constitutionally-elected governing body of the City of College Station, Texas. 
City Engineer: The person employed as City Engineer of the City of College Station, Texas, or his designee. 
City Manager: The "City Manager" of the City of College Station. 
Classification Amendment: An amending zoning ordinance which pertains to the rezoning of a particular parcel or parcels of land, as distinguished from a change in the provisions of the ordinance relevant and pertaining to the entire City. 
Clinic: A facility operated by one (1) or more physicians, dentists, chiropractors, or other licensed practitioners of the healing arts for the examination and treatment of persons solely on an outpatient basis. 
Cold Storage Plant: A commercial establishment where foods or other commodities are stored either in lockers, rented or leased, or in vaults in bulk for distribution to the home or other commercial businesses. No slaughtering of animals or fowl is allowed on the premises. 
Collocation: When more than one (1) wireless telecommunications provider shares a wireless telecommunications support structure. 
Commercial Garden: The retail or wholesale handling of any article, substance, or commodity related to the planting, maintenance, or harvesting of garden plants, shrubs, trees, packaged fertilizers, soils, chemicals, or other nursery goods and related products. 
Commercial Greenhouse: A structure or location where plants, vegetable, flowers, and similar materials are grown for sale. 
Commercial Amusements: Any enterprise whose main purpose is to provide the general public with an amusing or entertaining activity, where tickets are sold or fees collected at the gates of the activity. Commercial amusements include zoos, carnivals, expositions, miniature golf courses, arcades, fairs, exhibitions, athletic contests, rodeos, tent shows, Ferris wheels, children's rides, roller coasters, skating rinks, ice rinks, traveling shows, bowling alleys, indoor shooting ranges, and similar enterprises. Sexually-oriented Businesses and Nightclubs are excluded from this definition. 
Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of College Station, Texas. 
Common Open Space: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land and water within a development site provided and made legally available for the use and enjoyment of residents of a proposed project. 
Common Property: A parcel or parcels of land, together with the improvements thereon, the use and enjoyment of which are legally shared by the owners and occupants of the individual building sites in a Planned Unit. 
Community Services: See "Public Uses." 
Comprehensive Plan: The City of College Station's Comprehensive Plan supplemented by any other land use, thoroughfare or master plans as approved by City Council as adopted or amended from time-to-time. 
Concept Plan: A written and graphic plan submitted for consideration of a Planned Development District or a Planned Mixed-Use District that indicates in a conceptual form, the proposed land uses and their overall impact on the subject land and surrounding lands. 
Conditional Use: A use which may be permitted or denied in a district, on a case-by-case basis, subject to meeting certain conditions or procedures set forth in, or imposed under, this UDO. 
Conservation Study: Study of existing conditions used for a Neighborhood Conservation Overlay. The items evaluated in a Conservation Study are chosen by the Neighborhood Stakeholder Committee and reflect the individual concern of the neighborhood for additional regulation. 
Construction Plans: The construction documents required to accompany the final plat according to this UDO of the City of College Station, or the building and site plans required for the issuance of a Building Permit by the City of College Station. 
Co-op Housing: A building under joint occupancy that provides group sleeping accommodations for more than four (4) persons per household, where each unit may be equipped for food preparation and where some common facilities (e.g., living areas, bathrooms, dining areas) serve all units within that building. 
Corner Lot: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersections. 
Country Club: Land area and buildings containing golf courses or other recreational facilities, a clubhouse, and customary accessory uses, open to members and their guests. 
Cross Gable: Two (2) perpendicular gable roofs. 
Cul-de-Sac: A street having but one (1) outlet to another street and terminating on the other end in a vehicular turnaround. 
Cupola: A small dome and the shaft that supports it; sits on top of a building. (Example shown) 

Day Care - Commercial: Any facility or premises where a total of seven (7) or more children under sixteen (16) years of age, and/or elderly adults, regularly attend for purposes of custody, care, or instruction; and which children or elderly adults are not members of the immediate nuclear family of any natural person actually operating the facility or premises. 
Day Care - In-Home: Any private residence where a total of six (6) or fewer persons regularly attend for purposes of custody, care, or instruction; and which persons are not members of the immediate nuclear family living in the residence. Nothing in this definition shall conflict with the provisions of Chapter 123 of the Texas Human Resources Code. 
Density: The number of dwelling units per gross acre. 
Detention: The temporary storage and controlled release of stormwater flows. 
Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate that requires a permit or approval from any agency of the City or County, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, clearing, drilling operations, storage of materials, or the subdivision of property. Routine repair and maintenance activities are exempted. 
Development Engineer: The Senior Assistant City Engineer assigned to the City's Planning and Development Services Department and designated as the Development Engineer. 
Direct-To-Home Services: The distribution, broadcasting, or programming of services by satellite directly to the subscriber's premises without use of ground receiving or distribution equipment, except at the subscriber's premises or in the uplink process to the satellite; examples are direct broadcast satellites (DBS), multi-channel multipoint distribution (MMDS), and television broadcast stations (TVBS). 
Dormer: Projecting framed structure set vertically on the rafters of a pitched roof, with its own roof (pitched or flat), sides, and a window set vertically in the front. 
Dormitory (dorm) : A residential structure designed for the exclusive purpose of housing students of a university, college, school, church, or non-profit organization, excepting resident staff, but which does not include complete, independent living facilities, including cooking, in each dwelling unit. Common kitchen facilities and / or gathering rooms for social purposes may also be provided. 
Drainage Area: That area, measured in a horizontal plane, which contributes stormwater flows by gravity flow along natural or man-made pathways to a single designated point along a pathway. 
Drainage Easement: An interest in land granted to others for maintenance of a drainage facility, on which certain uses are prohibited; and providing for the entry and operation of machinery and vehicles for maintenance. 
Drainage Facility: Any element necessary to convey stormwater flows from its initial contact with earth to its disposition in an existing watercourse; said drainage facilities shall consist of both public and private storm sewers (closed conduits), streets, improved channels constructed in conformity with the adopted Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Technical Specifications and Standard Details, unimproved drainageways left in their natural condition, areas covered by drainage easements for the purpose of providing concentrated or overland sheet flow, and all appurtenances to the foregoing, including inlets, manholes, junction boxes, headwalls, energy dissipaters, culverts, etc. 
Drainage System, Primary: The system of natural watercourses, improved or channelized watercourses; and all closed conduits, culverts, bridges, detention facilities, and retention facilities associated with the watercourses; all of which are shown or indicated in the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines, Technical Specifications and Standard Details. 
Drainage System, Secondary: The system of conveyance of rainfall from the point that it becomes concentrated flow to the point where it reaches the primary drainage system. This system includes all swales, ditches, minor channels, streets, gutters, inlets, culverts, detention or retention facilities, or other means of conveyance of stormwater flows. 
Drip Molding: A horizontal molding placed over an exterior door or window frame to divert rainwater. 

Drive-thru: A building opening, inducing windows, doors, or mechanical devices, designed and intended to be used to provide for sales to and/or service to patrons who remain in their vehicles. 
Duplex Dwelling: A residential structure providing complete, independent living facilities for two (2) separate families, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation in each unit. 
Dwelling Unit (DU): A residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) family including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation. 
Earth Change: A manmade change in the natural cover or topography of land, including cutting or filling activities, which may result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation. 
Easement: A grant of reservation by the owner of land for the use of such land by others for a specific purpose or purposes, and which must be included in the conveyance of land affected by such easement. 
Easement, Maintenance: A private easement that is dedicated by plat specifically for zero lot line construction in a single-family residential development. Maintenance easements shall be a minimum of seven and one-half (7.5) feet in width. 
Educational Facility, Instruction Indoor: Any facility or premises regularly attended by one (1) or more persons for the purpose of instruction. All instruction and activity must be fully contained within the building. Such types of instruction include classes in acting, art, dance, music, photography, and martial arts. 
Educational Facility, Instruction Outdoor: Any facility or premises regularly attended by one (1) or more persons for the purpose of instruction. Activities are allowed outside of a building. 
Educational Facility, Primary and Secondary: Any public or private school licensed by the State which is designed, constructed, or used for education or instruction of students below the age of twenty (20). Auxiliary uses to these schools are included herein. 
Per Ordinance No. 3280 (September 9, 2010) 
Educational Facility, Tutoring: Any facility or premises regularly attended by one (1) or more persons for the purpose of instruction. All instruction and activity must be fully contained within a building. 
Educational Facility, Vocational/Trade: Any public or private secondary or higher education facility primarily teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade and meeting the state requirements as a vocational facility. All instruction and activity must be fully contained within the building. 
Educational Facility, College/University: A college or university authorized by the State to award degrees. 
Elevation: The vertical distance from a datum, usually the NGVD, to a point or object. If the elevation of point A is eight hundred two and forty-six hundredths (802.46) feet, the point is eight hundred two and forty-six hundredths (802.46) feet, above some datum. 
Encroachment: An intrusion, obstruction, or other infringement on an area reserved for a specific purpose such as an easement or floodway. 
Engineer: A person duly authorized and licensed under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, to practice the profession of engineering. 
Enhanced Paving: Earth toned (not gray) decorative pavers, stamped concrete, or dyed concrete. 
Entry Portico: Covered ambulatory consisting of a series of columns placed at regular intervals supporting a roof, normally attached as a colonnaded; porch to a building. (Example shown) 

Erosion: The process whereby the surface of the earth is broken up and carried away by the action of wind, water, gravity, ice, or a combination thereof. 
Escort: A person who, for consideration as part of a business enterprise, agrees, offers to, or models lingerie, performs a striptease, or performs nude or semi-nude for another person at a location other than a sexually-oriented business. 
Escort Agency: A person or business enterprise that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish, for consideration, escorts who perform any escort services in the City. An escort agency that advertises or holds itself out in signage visible from the public right-of-way as "X...", "adult", or "sex" shall be considered an "Adult Retail Store." 
Excavation: Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, or relocated purposely by man and shall be taken to include the conditions resulting therefrom. 
Existing Construction: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing Development: Any development as defined above which existed or was permitted prior to the date on which this UDO became effective. 
Existing Tree: Any self supporting woody plant, with one (1) or more well-defined trunks, two (2) inches in diameter or greater at one (1) foot above the ground. 
Extended Care Facility, Convalescent Home, or Nursing Home: A building, or portion thereof, used or designed for the housing of the aged, and/or mentally or physically handicapped persons who are under daily medical, psychological, or therapeutic care; provided that this definition shall not include rooms in any residential dwelling, hotel, or apartment hotel not ordinarily intended to be occupied by said persons. 
Exterior Side Yard: A yard that faces and is parallel to a side street. 
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction: Within the terms of the Texas Municipal Annexation Act, the unincorporated area, not a part of any other city, which is contiguous to the corporate limits of the City of College Station, the outer boundaries of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of the City, outward for such distances as may be stipulated in the Texas Municipal Annexation Act, in which area, within the terms of the act, the City may enjoin the violation of its subdivision control provisions. 
Faade: The exterior face of a building. 
Faade Work: The removal, or replacement, substitution or change of any material or architectural element on the exterior face of a building, which includes, but is not limited to, painting, material change, awning or canopy replacement, signage, or other permanent visible faade treatment. 
Family: A family is one (1) or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by (1) blood, (2) adoption, (3) guardianship, (4) marriage, or (5) are part of a group home for disabled persons, no such family shall contain more than four (4) persons. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA): An agency of the Federal Insurance Administration which administers the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Feeder Line: Any line, wire, or cable and appurtenances which distributes, transmits, or delivers a utility service from a source to a general area or to multiple developments, and not to a specific end user. 
Field Size: That portion of a driving range property measured from the tee boxes to the end of the driving range area of the site. 
Filed: The point at which an application has been determined to be complete and all required fees have been paid. 
Flood or Flooding: A temporary rise in the level of water that results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the areas within the boundaries of special flood hazards have been designated. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, the water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood Hazard Boundary Floodway Map. 
Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area: Any land susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Flood Protection System: Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such systems typically include hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
Floodway, Zero-Rise: The channel of a stream and that portion of the adjoining floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without any measurable increase in flood height. A measurable increase in base flood height means a calculated upward rise in the base flood elevation, equal to or greater than .01 foot, resulting from a comparison of existing conditions and changed conditions directly attributable to development in the floodplain. This definition is broader than that of the FEMA floodway, but always includes the FEMA floodway. The boundaries of the one hundred-year floodplain are considered the boundaries of the zero-rise floodway unless otherwise delineated by a sensitive area special study. 
Floodway Fringe: That part of the base floodplain outside the floodway. 
Floor Area Ratio: Floor Area Ratio (FAR) is a non-residential land use intensity measure analogous to density. It is the sum of the areas of several floors of a building compared to the total area of the site. 
Fraternity or Sorority: An organization of university students formed chiefly to promote friendship and welfare among the members. 
Fraternal Lodge: A structure where a group of people meet who are organized for a common interest, usually cultural, religious, or entertainment with regular meetings, rituals, and formal written membership. 
Garage, Commercial: Any premises or structure with enclosed work area for servicing and repair of four (4) or more standard size automobiles or light (standard size) trucks, or for one (1) or more vehicles of larger size, or where any number of vehicles are kept for remuneration, hire or sale, and where motor vehicle fuels and supplies may be sold as a secondary use. 
Gated Community: A residential area requiring mandatory membership in a Homeowners Association (HOA) and having its primary means of access controlled by an electric or manual gate administered by the HOA. 
Government Facilities: A building or structure owned, operated, or occupied by a governmental agency to provide a governmental service to the public. 
Grading: Any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled, excavated, scarified, filled, or any combination thereof. 
Greenway: A linear open space that follows natural features like the floodplains of creeks and rivers or human-made features such as utility, road, or rail corridors. 
Greenway - Rural: The least developed Greenway typically located on the periphery of the developed community. This Greenway exists mostly in a natural state with the primary functions being flood control, wildlife protection, and aesthetic value. This Greenway is defined by the entire width of the floodplain. 
Greenway - Suburban: These are the greenways located in the developing portions of the community. The primary functions served by this Greenway are flood control, recreation, transportation, and economic and aesthetic purposes. 
Greenway - Urban: The most highly developed Greenway located in fully developed areas of the community. The primary functions served by this greenway are flood control, recreation, transportation, and economic and aesthetic purposes. 
Greenways Manager: The "Greenways Manager" of the City of College Station. 
Groundcover: A spreading plant including sods and grasses less than eighteen (18) inches in height. 
Group Home: A home serving six (6) or fewer mentally or physically handicapped persons provided the home provides care on a twenty-four-hour basis and is approved or licensed by the State for that purpose. A group home shall be considered a single-family home and is defined pursuant to Chapter 123 of the Human Resources Code. 
Health Care Facility: A facility or institution, whether public or private, principally engaged in providing services for health maintenance, diagnosis or treatment of disease, pain, injury, or deformity of physical conditions. This definition does not include a medical clinic or hospital as defined herein. 
Health Club/Sports Facility: A building designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, or exercise, or other customary and usual recreational activities, operated for profit or not for profit and which is open only to members and guests of the club or facility. 
Historic Preservation Easement: An easement that protects a significant historic, archaeological, or cultural resource. It provides assurance that a property's intrinsic values will be preserved through future ownership. A building, portion of a building (such as the faade), or a bridge, dam, or any other kind of structure may qualify. A Historic Preservation Easement may also protect a historic landscape, battlefield, traditional cultural place, or archaeological site. 
Historic Preservation Overlay District definitions (applicable only in reference to Historic Preservation Overlay district): 
Association: Link of a property that contributes to a Historic Preservation Overlay District with a historic event, activity, or person. Also, the quality of integrity through which a property is linked to a particular past time and place. 
Contributing Resource: A building, site, structure or object in a Historic Preservation Overlay District that supports the District's historical significance through Location, Design, Setting, Materials, Workmanship, Feeling, or Association. 
Design: Quality of integrity applying to the elements that create the physical form, plan, space, structure, and style of a property. 
Feeling: Quality of integrity through which a property that contributes to a Historic Preservation Overlay District evokes the aesthetic or historic sense of past time and place. 
Integrity: Authenticity of a property's historic identity, evidenced by the survival of physical characteristics that existed during the property's historic or prehistoric period. 
Location: Quality of integrity retained by a property that contributes to a Historic Preservation Overlay District historic property existing in the same place as it did during the period of significance. 
Materials: Quality of integrity applying to the physical elements that were combined or deposited in a particular pattern or configuration to form a property that contributes to a Historic Preservation Overlay District. 
Non-Contributing Resource: A building, site, structure, or object in a Historic Preservation Overlay District that does not support the District's historical significance through Location, Design, Setting, Materials, Workmanship, Feeling, or Association. 
Setting: Quality of integrity applying to the physical environment of a property that contributes to a Historic Preservation Overlay District. 
Workmanship: Quality of integrity applying to the physical evidence of the crafts of a particular culture, people, or artisan. 
Home Occupation: An occupation, profession, activity, or use that is clearly a customary, incidental, and secondary use of a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood. 
Home Tour Event: Real estate events such as open houses and Parade of Homes, as well as the touring of occupied residences for the entertainment of a targeted audience such as the Women's Club Home and Garden Tour. 
Hospital or Sanitarium: A building, or portion thereof, used or designed for the medical or surgical treatment of the sick, mentally ill, or injured persons, primarily on an inpatient basis, and including as an integral part, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, or training facilities; provided that this definition shall not include rooms in any residential dwelling, hotel, or apartment hotel not ordinarily intended to be occupied by said persons. 
Hotel/Motel/Extended Stay Facility: A building, or group of buildings, used or intended to be used as living quarters for transient guests, but not excluding permanent guests, and may include a caf, drugstore, clothes pressing shop, barber shop, or other service facilities for the guests for compensation. A transient guest is any visitor or person who owns, rents, or uses a lodging or dwelling unit, or a portion thereof, for less than thirty (30) days and whose permanent address for legal purposes is not the lodging or dwelling unit occupied by the visitor. 
Impervious Surface: Impervious surface is a measure of land use intensity and is the proportion of a site occupied by impervious surfaces including, but not limited to, buildings, sidewalks, drives, and parking. 
Industrial, Light: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. 
Industrial, Heavy: A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products or parts, predominantly from extracted raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. 
Industrial, Municipal: A municipal use or structure that serves a public need and is primarily engaged in the provision, distribution, collection, transmission, or disposal of water, storm and sanitary sewage, electricity, information, and telecommunication, including structures associated with private utilities; research and laboratory activities; warehousing and distribution; bulk storage facilities operation; storage and maintenance of service vehicles; cleaning of equipment; solid waste management; municipal recycling; public works yards, container storage; or similar activity. Ordinarily these areas have low parking turn-over, few pedestrians, but a large amount of truck traffic. 
Per Ordinance No. 3236 (February 25, 2010) 
Irrigation System: A permanent, artificial watering system designed to transport and distribute water to plants. 
Land Use: A use of land which may result in an earth change, including, but not limited to, subdivision, residential, commercial, industrial, recreational, or other development, private and public highway, road and street construction, drainage construction, logging operations, agricultural practices, oil and gas exploration, exploitation, extraction and mining. 
Lateral Line: Any line, wire, or cable and appurtenances used to distribute, transmit, or deliver service from a feeder line to two (2) or more sites or end users of the utility service within a specific development. 
Levee: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee System: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practice. 
Live-Work Unit : A dwelling unit in which a significant portion of the space includes a non-residential use that is operated by the tenant. 
Location: Quality of integrity retained by a property that contributes to a Historic Preservation Overlay District historic property existing in the same place as it did during the period of significance. 
Lot: The physical and undivided tract or parcel of land as shown on a duly recorded plat. The following represent the various platted lot types: 

(1)  Corner Lot: A lot located at the intersection of and abutting upon two (2) or more streets. 
(2)  Double Frontage or Through Lot: A lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one (1) street. 
(3)  Flag Lot: A lot not fronting on or abutting a public road and where access to the public road is by a narrow, private right-of-way. 
(4)  Interior Lot: A lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot Area: The horizontal land area within lot lines, excluding any wetlands and/or drainage easements. 
Lot Coverage: A measure of intensity of land use that represents the portion of a site that is impervious. This portion includes but is not limited to all areas covered by buildings, parked structures, driveways - gravel or paved, roads, and sidewalks. 
Lot Line Construction: A development where houses on a common street frontage are shifted to one (1) side of their lot to maximize side yard area on the opposite side of the lot. Planning for all house locations are done at the same time to ensure proper building separations. 
Lot of Record: A part of a recorded subdivision or a parcel of land that exists as shown or described on a plat or deed in the records of the local registry of deeds. 
Lot Width: Lot width is measured between side lot lines along a line that is parallel to the front lot line or its chord and that is located the minimum front setback distance from the front lot line. 
Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this UDO. 
Major Recreational Equipment: For the purpose of these regulations, major recreational equipment is defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers, and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, home occupation or household purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use. 
Manufactured Home: A structure constructed after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by 24 Code of Federal Regulations, Section 3282.8(g). 
Manufactured Home Lot: A parcel of land in a manufactured home park for the placement of a single HUD-code manufactured home and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Manufactured Home Park: A parcel of land under single ownership that has been planned and improved for the placement of HUD-code manufactured homes for non-transient use. 
Manufacturing and Production: See "Industrial, Light and Heavy." 
Massage Establishment: A business enterprise offering massage conducted by persons engaged in the practice of medicine, nursing, osteopathy, physiotherapy, chiropractic, podiatry, or massage therapy for which they are licensed by the State of Texas, or persons under the direct supervision and control of such licensed persons. 
Maximum Density: This is a gross density calculation. It is the total number of dwelling units on a site or in a subdivision divided by the total land area (in acres) of the site or subdivision. 
Mean Sea Level: The National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which the base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
Median: The middle number in a set of numbers where one-half (1/2) of the numbers are less than the median number and one-half (1/2) of the numbers are greater than the median number. For example, 4 is the median number of 1, 3, 4, 8, and 9. If the set of numbers has an even number of numbers, then the median is the average of the two (2) middle numbers. For example, if the set of numbers is 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, and 9, then the median is the average of 4 and 6, or 5. 
Medical Clinic: See "Clinic." 
Micro-Industrial: a use engaged, on a limited scale, in basic processing and/or manufacturing of materials or products or parts, predominantly from extracted raw materials, entirely contained within a building and not deemed to be a public nuisance, as determined by the administrator. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3312 (January 27, 2011) 
Minimum Lot Width: Lot Width at the front setback line. 
Mixed-Use Structure : A structure containing both residential and non-residential land uses. 
Mobile Food Vendor: Any business operating more than twenty-one (21) days per calendar year which sells edible goods from a non-stationary location within the City of College Station. The term shall include, but shall not be limited to, mobile food trucks, carts, or trailers. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3322 (February 24, 2011) 
Mobile Home: A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. 
Model Home: A dwelling unit built by a builder or developer to allow potential purchasers to see what the finished product will look like. 
Multi-Family Dwelling: A residential structure providing complete, independent living facilities for three (3) or more families or households living independently of each other and including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation in each unit. Condominiums are included in this definition. 
National Flood Insurance Program: The National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) is a federal program enabling property owners to purchase flood insurance. This program is based on an agreement between local communities and the federal government that if a community will implement programs to reduce future flood damages, the federal government will make flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection against flood losses. The United States Congress established the NFIP with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 and later modified and broadened the program. The NFIP is administered by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): The nationwide reference surface for elevations throughout the United States made available to local surveyors by the National Geodetic Survey with the establishment of thousands of benchmarks throughout the continent. It was obtained through a least-squares adjustment in 1929 of all first-order leveling in the United States and Canada. The adjustment included the twenty-six (26) tide stations, and thus referenced the NGVD to mean sea level. 
Natural: The cover and topography of land before any manmade changes, or in areas where there have already been manmade modifications, the state of the area and topography of land at the date of the adoption of this UDO. 
Neighborhood: A subarea of the City in which the residents share a common identity focused around a school, park, community business center, or other feature. For the purposes of a Single-Family Overlay District, a neighborhood must contain at least thirty (30) single-family structures in a compact, contiguous area, or be an original subdivision or phase of a subdivision if the subdivision contains fewer than thirty (30) single-family structures. Boundary lines must be drawn to include blockfaces on both sides of a street, and to the logical edges of the area or subdivision, as indicated by a creek, street, subdivision line, utility easement, zoning boundary line, or other boundary. 
Neighborhood Character: The atmosphere or physical environment which is created by the combination of land use and buildings within an area. Neighborhood character is established and influenced by land-use types and intensity, traffic generation, and also by the location, size and design of structures as well as the interrelationship of all these features. 
Neighborhood Stakeholder Committee: A committee of at least six (6) property owners within a proposed Neighborhood Conservation Overlay District and the Administrator. The committee provides input from the neighborhood and assists City Staff in conducting a Conservation Study and evaluating the options for regulation as listed in Section 5.11. 
New Construction: For floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community. 
Night Club: A commercial establishment including, but not limited to, bars, coffee houses, or similar establishments where a dance floor, music, games, or other entertainment is provided and where the serving of food is not the principal business. Specifically included in this classification are establishments that derive seventy-five (75) percent or more of their gross revenue from the on-premise sale of alcoholic beverages. Sexually-oriented Businesses/Enterprises are not included in this definition. 
Non-Canopy Tree: See "Tree, Non-Canopy." 
Non-Combustible Material: As defined in Chapter Two of the International Residential Code as adopted and amended by the City of College Station City Council. 
Northgate District definitions (applicable only to development in Northgate): 
Redevelopment: The revision or replacement of an existing land use or existing site through the acquisition or consolidation, and the clearance and rebuilding of this area according to the Northgate Redevelopment Plan. 
Site Development: Any excavation, landfill or land disturbance, including new construction, reconstruction, relocation, or change of use. For the purposes of the Northgate Districts only, site development includes installation of walls, accessory structures, and other similar additions. 
Rehabilitation: The process of returning a structure to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which make possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural value. 
Faade Work: The removal, or replacement, substitution or change of any material or architectural element on the exterior face of a building, which includes, but is not limited to, painting, material change, awning or canopy replacement, signage, or other permanent visible faade treatment. 
Minor Site/Building Projects: The addition, maintenance, and/or replacement of minor building or site elements, including such actions related to storage building(s), screening, fencing, and refuse containers. This also includes requests for changes in service for dumpster and other refuse receptacles. 
Northgate High-Density Dwelling Unit : A residential structure providing complete, independent living facilities for three (3) or more households, living independently of each other and including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation in each unit. Households in a Northgate High-Density Dwelling Unit allows more than four (4) but not greater than six (6) unrelated individuals, when one (1) bedroom is provided per each unrelated individual. 
Nude: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Nude Modeling Studio: Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specific anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
Office: A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government and generally furnished with desks, tables, files, and communication equipment. 
One (1) Ownership: Property which although belonging to one (1) or more owners, has not been partitioned or subdivided so as to be owned separately by more than one (1) person, whether or not related or participating in a joint enterprise. 
Outdoor Storage: The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, junk, material or merchandise in the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours and not actively being sold. 
Outdoor Display: The placement of goods for active sale outside the building. 
Overlay: A zoning district that encompasses one (1) or more underlying zones and that imposes additional requirements above those required by the underlying zone. 
Pad Site: The portion of a building plot that is located on the periphery of the site and has at least seventy-five (75) feet of frontage on a public street classified as a collector or greater on the Thoroughfare Plan. A pad site contains a stand alone, single or multiple tenant structure and meets all site plan requirements within the pad site area. The total area of all pad sites within a defined building plot may not be more than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the total area of the building plot. 
Parking, Interior: Parking rows which are not located on the periphery of the proposed project site and further, where none of the parking spaces abut any property line associated with the proposed project site. 
Parking, Peripheral: Parking rows which abut the periphery or property lines associated with the proposed project site. 
Parking, Overflow: Parking in excess of the minimum required by this ordinance and in excess of what is utilized on a regular basis by the development. 
Parking, Row, Single: A single row of spaces for the parking of motor vehicles. 
Parking, Row, Double: Two (2) parallel rows of spaces for the parking of motor vehicles arranged so that when parked, the front end of each motor vehicle faces the front end of another motor vehicle. 
Parking, Side or Rear Yard: Required parking that is provided, in its entirety, behind a setback line of one-half (1/2) of the applicable zoning district's minimum lot depth. 
Parking Space: A space used for the parking of a motor vehicle not on the paved or regularly traveled portion of a public street or within private access easements and which meets the requirements of this UDO as to size, location, and configuration. 
Pasturage: Land used primarily for the grazing of animal stock. 
Pavement Width: The portion of the surface of the street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are used, it is the portion between the back of curbs. 
Permitted Use: A use specifically allowed in one (1) or more of the various districts without the necessity of obtaining a use permit. 
Person: Every natural person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, or other group which conducts activities regulated hereunder as a single entity, whether same be a legal entity or not, venture, or trust. 
Personal Service Shop: An establishment which provides services related to grooming, appearance, care, or repair of personal apparel; and which may sell products used or recommended for those same purposes incidental to the services provided. 
Place of Worship: A building or structure, or group of buildings or structures, that by design and construction are primarily intended for conducting organized religious services and associated accessory uses. 
Plan, Preliminary: A conceptual plan of a subdivision intended for planning purposes showing the location and boundaries of individual parcels of land subdivided into lots, with streets, alleys, easements, etc., generally drawn to scale and meeting the requirements of this UDO but not intended for final action in recordable form filed with the applicable county records. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011- 3308 (January 13, 2011) 
Planning and Zoning Commission: The duly appointed Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of College Station, Texas. 
Plat: A map of a subdivision intended to be filed for record with the applicable county records showing the location and boundaries of individual parcels of land subdivided into lots, with streets, alleys, easements, etc., drawn to scale; includes a final plat, replat, amending plat, minor plat, development plat, and vacating plat meeting the requirements of this UDO. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
Plat, Minor: As defined by Section 212.0065 of the Texas Local Government Code. A subdivision involving four (4) or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and that does not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. 
Plot Plan: See "Site Plan." 
Portable Storage: Any unit, including but not limited to a trailer, box, or other enclosed shipping container, which is used primarily as storage space whether the unit is located at a facility-owned establishment or operated by the owner at another location designated by the tenant. 
Porch: A roofed open area that projects from the main wall of a building that may be unenclosed or screened and may or may not use columns or other ground supports for structural purposes. 
Premises: An area of land planned and designed as a single comprehensive project, considered from the time the plan is first submitted to the Development Services Department either at plat stage or site plan stage. 
Project Plan: Drawings and related information illustrating a proposed project for which a use permit, site plan permit, or parking area/landscape approval is sought. 
Public, Civic and Institutional Structure: Structures used principally to serve a public need, such as places of worship, hospitals, public or private schools, libraries, museums, post offices, polices and fire stations, public utilities, governmental services, and other public services. 
Public Uses/Facilities: A use or facility belonging to or used by the public for the transaction of public or quasi-public business including, but not limited to, uses such as and similar to libraries and public parks. 
Public Way: A Public Way provides circulation and through movement similar to a public street but is a privately maintained drive, constructed to certain street standards, and granted unrestricted access via a public access easement. The drive shall be designed to the geometric design, construction standards, and driveway spacing of a Commercial Street according to the Bryan/College Station Unified Design Guidelines with the following modifications. A Public Way shall have a minimum pavement structure constructed to City's fire lane standards, a minimum drive width of twenty-four (24) feet back-to-back when no parking is provided, and a minimum horizontal curve radius of two hundred (200) feet. No head-in parking is permitted but parallel parking is allowed if the drive is widened an additional ten (10) feet for each row of parallel parking provided. Parking on the drive may count toward the minimum off-street parking requirements of this UDO. Five-foot sidewalks shall be provided on each side of the drive and placed a minimum three (3) feet from the back of curb. The public access easement shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet in width or wider to incorporate the entire width of the pavement section and sidewalks on each side. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
Quoin: Units of stone or brick used to accentuate the corners of a building. 

Recyclable Materials: Those materials specifically listed at a particular site as acceptable. Such materials may include, but are not limited to, aluminum products, clean glass containers, bimetal containers, newspapers, magazines, periodicals, plastic containers, yard waste, paper and cardboard, phone books, and scrap metal. 
Recycling: The separation, collection, processing, recovery and sale of metals, glass, paper, plastics, and other materials which would otherwise be disposed of as solid waste, which are intended for reuse, re-manufacture, or re-constitution for the purpose of using the altered form. 
Recycling Bin: A container used to collect recyclable materials, at which no fee is collected from the person depositing the materials. 
Recycling Facility, Large: A recycling facility located on an independent site, or larger than five hundred (500) square feet, where limited mechanical processing may or may not occur, depending on the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
Recycling Facility, Small: A facility that occupies no more than five hundred (500) square feet, and provides containers for collection only of source separated recyclables, with no power-driven processing equipment on site. Small collection facilities are normally located on parking lots of the host use. These may include, but are not limited to, bulk reverse vending machines, a grouping of reverse vending machines that exceed fifty (50) square feet, kiosk-type structures that may include permanent structures, and unattended recycling bins placed for the donation of recyclable materials. 
Redevelopment: The revision or replacement of an existing land use or existing site through the acquisition or consolidation, and the clearance and rebuilding of this area according to a comprehensive plan. 
Registered Professional Engineer: A person duly authorized and licensed under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act, to practice the profession of engineering. 
Rehabilitation: The process of returning a structure to a state of utility, through repair or alteration, which make possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural value. 
Related: Persons are related when they are within the first or second degree of consanguinity or affinity. Persons are not related by affinity unless lawfully married, and any asserted common law marriage must be subject to an affidavit of record under the family code, or a judicial determination. 
Religious Institution: See "Place of Worship." 
Remote Emergency Access: An emergency access consists of a semi-permanent all-weather surface according to the City of College Station Site Design Standards. An access is remote when the two (2) access points are placed a distance apart equal to not less than one-half (1/2) of the length of the maximum overall diagonal dimension of the property or area to be served, measured in a straight line between the points. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
Repair Shops: A shop exclusively for the repair of household goods and home equipment, within a building with no outdoor storage of items or equipment, and where no noise, dust, or vibration is discernible beyond the property line. 
Replat: A replat is required in cases where new lots are formed within an existing subdivision. A replat follows the procedure for a final plat and must conform with applicable zoning. 
Research Laboratory: An establishment or facility used for carrying on investigation in the natural, physical or social sciences, which may include engineering and product development. 
Residential Sales Office: See "Model Home." 
Restaurant: An establishment that serves food and beverages primarily to persons seated within the building. This includes, but is not limited to, cafs, tea rooms, and outdoor cafs. 
Restaurant, Casual Dining: A restaurant with a market segment between Fast Food and Fine Dining restaurants usually characterized by table service, a relatively fully-stocked and full-service bar, and a bill per dinner averaging ten dollars ($10.00) to thirty dollars ($30.00) for an evening meal and slightly less for lunch and does not provide drive-thru service. 
Restaurant, Fast Food: An establishment that offers quick food which is accomplished through a limited menu of items already prepared and held for service, or prepared quickly. Orders are not generally taken at a customer's table and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers. 
Restaurant, Fine Dining: A restaurant serving formal-style dinner, and services where food and drink are prepared and served. Customer turnover rates are typically one (1) hour or longer. Such establishments serve dinner but generally do not serve breakfast and may or may not serve lunch or brunch. These restaurants usually have a dress code and do not provide drive-thru service. 
Retail Sales: Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
Retail Sales, Alcohol: Establishments, except nightclubs and restaurants as defined, engaged in selling beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages for where more than seventy-five (75) percent of sales is derived from the sale of such beverages for off-premise consumption. Exempt from this definition are temporary retail sales of alcohol associated with special events, or events held on City-owned property. 
Retention: The storage of stormwater flows in a facility that has a permanent pool of water. 
Retention Facility: A facility that provides for the storage of stormwater flows by means of a permanent pool of water or permanent pool in conjunction with a temporary storage component. 
Reverse Vending Machine: An automated mechanical device which accepts at least one (1) or more types of beverage containers including, but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and which issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip. Sorting and processing occurs entirely within the machine. 
Reverse Vending Machine, Bulk: A reverse vending machine that is larger than fifty (50) square feet and is designed to accept more than one (1) container at a time and to pay by weight. For the purpose of these restrictions, bulk reverse vending machines will be considered small collection facilities. 
Reverse Vending Machine, Single Feed: A reverse vending machine that accepts materials one (1) item at a time. 
Rooming/Boarding House: A group of rooms provided for persons other than members of the occupant family (see definition of family) for compensation either in a converted single-family home or in a structure specifically designed for such purpose where there are no cooking facilities provided in individual living units and where meals may be provided daily. 
Roof Types: 
(1)  Flat Roof: A roof with only enough pitch to allow drainage. 

(2)  Gable Roof: A ridged roof having one (1) or two (2) gabled ends (gable: the portion of the end of a building that extends from the eaves to the peak or ridge of the roof). 

(3)  Gambrel Roof: A roof whose slope on each side is interrupted by an obtuse angle that forms two (2) pitches on each side, the lower slope being steeper than the upper. 

(4)  Hip Roof: A roof formed by several adjacent inclining planes, each rising from a different wall of building, and forming hips at their adjacent sloping sides. 

(5)  Mansard Roof: A roof with a double pitch on all four (4) sides, the lower level having the steeper pitch. 

(6)  Shed Roof: A roof having a single-sloping plane. 

Salvage Yard: A facility or area for storing, keeping, selling, dismantling, shredding, compressing, or salvaging material or equipment. Materials include, but are not limited to, lumber, pipes, metal, paper, rags, tires, bottles, motor vehicle parts, machinery, structural steel, equipment/vehicles, and appliances. 
Satellite Dish: A broadcast receiver that receives signals directly from a satellite rather than another broadcast system, and amplifies the signal at a focal point in front of the receiving component. 
School: A building where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education, together with playgrounds, dormitories, stadia and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith and is limited to public and private schools used for primary, secondary or college education. This includes any facility where tutoring of more than ten (10) students at one (1) time takes place on a regular basis. 
Sediment: Soils or other surficial materials transported or deposited by the action of wind, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Service Line: Any line, wire, or cable and appurtenances used to distribute, transmit, or deliver a utility service from a source of supply, feeder line, or lateral line directly to an end user. 
Service Provider: Any company, corporation, alliance, individual, or other legal entity that provides a wireless telecommunication service directly to the public for a fee or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public regardless of the facilities used; services include, but are not limited to, portable phones, car phones, pagers, digital data transmission, or radio or television communications. 
Setback Line: A line which marks the minimum distance a structure must be located from the property line, and establishes the minimum required front, side, or rear yard space of a building plot. 
Sexually-Oriented Books and Videos: Books, magazines, pamphlets, pictures, drawings, photographs, video tapes, digital video disks, motion picture films, or sound recordings, or printed, visual or audio material of any kind, which are characterized by their emphasis on the description or depiction of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
Sexually-Oriented Business: Any business whether in public, semi-public, or private premises which offers the opportunity to feel, handle, touch, paint, be in the presence of, or be entertained by the unclothed body or the unclothed portion of the body of another person, or to observe, view, or photograph any such activity. Except as provided herein, this definition is not intended to regulate: 
(1)  Any business operated by or employing licensed psychologists, licensed physical therapists, licensed athletic trainers, licensed cosmetologists, or licensed barbers performing functions authorized under the licenses held. 
(2)  Any business operated by or employing licensed physicians, licensed practical nurses, or licensed chiropractors engaged in practicing the healing arts. 
(3)  Any bookstore, movie theater, or video store, unless that business includes sexually-oriented materials. 
Sexually-oriented businesses include, but are not limited to, adult retail stores, limited adult retail stores, adult arcade, adult cabarets, adult movie theaters, adult theaters, adult motels, body rub parlors, nude modeling studios, sexual encounter centers, and escort agencies. 
Sexually-Oriented Materials: All sexually-oriented toys and novelties and sexually-oriented books and videos. 
Sexually-Oriented Toys and Novelties: Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia either designed as representations of human genital organs or female breasts, or designed or marketed primarily for use to stimulate human genital organs, except medical devices approved by the Food and Drug Administration. 
Shopping Center: A building plot developed or ultimately to be developed with two (2) or more stores, shops, or commercial enterprises, and which has shared parking facilities or access. 
Shooting Range: A facility to be utilized for discharging firearms for purpose of testing the firearm or ammunition, developing or enhancing shooter skills for recreation or other need, which is organized and equipped for safety of persons utilizing the facility and the general public. 
Shrub: A woody perennial plant differing from a perennial herb by its more woody stem and from a tree by its low stature and habit of branching from the base. 
Single-Family: A residential unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) family including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
Sign: Any written or graphic representation, decoration, form, emblem, trademark, flag, banner, or other feature or device of similar character which is used for the communication of commercial information, or communication of ideas or subjects of political significance, and which: 
(1)  Architectural Element: An element, design, or motif, that is installed, attached, painted, or applied to the exterior of a building or structure for the purpose of ornamentation or artistic expression, and not relating to a specific sign, logo, or identity of any specific business tenant. 
(2)  Apartment/Condominium/Manufactured Home Park Identification Sign: An attached sign or a freestanding monument sign with permanent foundation or moorings, designed for identification of a multi-family residential project or a manufactured home park project, and where adequate provision is made for permanent maintenance. 
(3)  Area Identification Sign: A freestanding monument or wall sign with permanent foundation or moorings, designed for identification of subdivisions of ten (10) to fifty (50) acres, or identification of a distinct area within a subdivision, and where adequate provision is made for maintenance. 
(4)  Attached Sign: A sign attached to, or applied on, and totally supported by a part of a building or mounted to site lighting poles located on private property 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3302 (January 11, 2011) 
(5)  Banner/Flag: A piece of fabric used for decoration (contains no copy or logo) or for identification (contains copy and/or logo). 
(6)  Campus/Wayfinding: A sign utilized as a traffic control device in off-street or access areas whose primary purpose is to direct traffic within planned development district (PDD) or unified development, that may include the names of tenants or businesses, but does not contain any commercial logo or graphics. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3348 (May 26, 2011) 
(7)  Commercial Banner: A sign made of cloth, canvas, or other flexible material which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or attraction sold, offered, or existing. 
(8)  Commercial Sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or attraction sold, offered, or existing. 
(9)  Development Sign: A sign announcing a proposed subdivision or a proposed building project. 
(10)  Directional Traffic Control Sign: A sign utilized as a traffic control device in off-street parking or access areas whose primary purpose is not for advertisement. 
(11)  Freestanding Commercial Sign: A sign supported by one (1) or more columns, poles or bars extended from the ground or from an object on the ground, or that is erected on the ground; the term includes all signs which are not substantially supported by a building or part thereof, or which are substantially supported by a building or part thereof, when the sole significant purpose of the building or part thereof, is to support or constitute the sign. 
(12)  Fuel Price Sign: A sign used to advertise the current price of fuel at locations where fuel is sold. 
(13)  Hanging Signs : A sign suspended from the underside of a canopy or awning and located in front of building entrances, perpendicular to the faade. 
(14)  Home Occupation Sign: A sign used to identify the name and occupation of a person with a legal home occupation. 
(15)  Low Profile Sign: A sign with a permanent foundation which is not attached to a building, but is a stand-alone sign and which does not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height. 
(16)  Non-Commercial Sign: A work of art or message which is political, religious, or pertaining to a point of view, expression, opinion, or idea that contains no reference to the endorsement, advertising of, or promotion of patronage, of a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or attraction that is sold, offered, or existing. 
(17)  Off-Premise Commercial Sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or attraction sold, offered, or existing elsewhere than upon the premises where such sign is displayed. 
(18)  On-Premise Commercial Sign: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, entertainment, or attraction sold, offered, or existing upon the premises where such sign is displayed. 
(19)  Political Sign: Any sign which promotes a candidate for any public office or which advocates a position on any social issue as its primary purpose. Political signs shall be considered in the category of non-commercial signs except where there are regulations pertaining to their removal after an election. 
(20)  Portable Sign: A sign which is not affixed or attached to real property by poles, stakes, or other members which are placed into the ground, or upon some other type of permanent foundation; trailer signs, any sign with wheels or skids, and any sign which is constructed so as to sit upon the surface of the ground, without subsurface attachment or extension. 
(21)  Projection Sign : An attached sign end-mounted or otherwise attached to an exterior wall of a building and extends in whole or part more than 12 (twelve) inches beyond the face of the building. 
(22)  Real Estate, Finance, and Construction Sign: An attached or freestanding sign erected upon a lot or parcel of land for the purpose of advertising same for sale or lease, or for advertising the furnishing of interim or permanent financing for a project, or for the furnishing of labor, materials or the practice of crafts on the job site. 
(23)  Roof Sign: An outdoor advertising display sign erected, constructed, or maintained on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support, and which projects above the point of a building with a flat roof, six (6) feet above the eave line of a building with a shed, gambrel, gable or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof. 
(24)  Special District Identification Sign: An official, permanent, on-premise sign authorized by the City of College Station, which is used to identify a pedestrian or vehicular entrance to a Design District or Overlay District, as out lined in Article 5.10 Design Districts and 5.11 Overlay Districts. The sign shall be used to display only the name, logo, or identifying information about the district, and no other commercial information. 
(25)  Subdivision Identification Sign: A freestanding monument or wall sign with permanent concrete foundation or moorings, designed for permanent identification of a subdivision of greater than fifty (50) acres, and where adequate provision is made for permanent maintenance. 
(26)  Subdivision Marker: A subdivision logo of no more than one (1) square foot in area, that is attached to an architectural element such as a column, fence post, wall, mail kiosk, bus stop, or similar community structure, and whose purpose is to provide continuity and identity throughout the subdivision. 
Single-Unit Dwelling : A detached residential unit, located within a larger development on a common lot, providing complete, independent living facilities for one (1) family including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
Site Development: Any excavation, landfill or land disturbance, including new construction, reconstruction, relocation, or change of use. 
Site Plan: A site development plan showing the use of the land including locations of buildings, drives, sidewalks, parking areas, drainage facilities, and other structures to be constructed, and any other details required by the City in Section 3.9, Design District Site Plan Review, of this UDO. Also called a plot plan. 
Sitwall: A combination or seating with perimeter protection and/or screening in a subtle, attractive, and functional way. 
Specified Anatomical Area: Any showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the areola, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Specified Sexual Activities: Actual or simulated acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral or anal copulation or sadomasochism; fondling or other erotic touching of or physical contact with one's own or another's genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breasts, whether clothed or unclothed; human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; or excretory functions or acts with animals as part of or in conjunction with any of the activities set forth herein. Activities which are commonly referred to by the slang terms "lap dance," "straddle dance," "face dance," or "table dance" shall be included in this definition. For purposes of this definition, "sadomasochism" means infliction of pain, flagellation, or torture, or the condition of being bound, fettered, or otherwise physically restrained. 
Start of Construction: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a HUD-code manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as a dwelling unit and not part of the main structure. 
State: The State of Texas. 
Stealth Antenna: A telecommunication antenna located on an alternative mounting structure that is effectively camouflaged or concealed from view and blends into the surrounding environment. Examples include architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas painted and/or textured to match the existing structure, and antennas integrated into architectural elements. 
Stealth Technology or Facility: Design technology that blends the wireless telecommunications facility into the surrounding environment; examples of stealth facilities include, but are not limited to, architecturally-screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas painted and/or textured to match the existing structure, antennas integrated into architectural elements such as church spires or window wall, and antenna structures designed to resemble light poles or flag poles. 
Stealth Tower: A manmade tree, clock tower, church steeple, bell tower, utility pole, light standard, identification pylon, flagpole, or similar structure, that is camouflaged to be unrecognizable as a telecommunications facility, designed to support or conceal the presence of telecommunication antennas and blends into the surrounding environment. 
Storage Garage: A "storage garage" is any premises and structure used exclusively for the storage of more than five (5) automobiles. 
Storage, Outdoor: See "Outdoor Storage." 
Storage, Self Service: A structure containing separate, individual, and private storage spaces of varying sizes. 
Stormwater Management: All ordinances, standards, plans, and studies to insure the timely and effective construction of: 
(1)  A system of vegetative and structural measures that control the increased volume and rate of surface runoff caused by man-made changes to the land; and 
(2)  A system of vegetative, structural, and other measures that reduce or eliminate pollutants that might otherwise be carried by surface runoff. 
Street: A way for vehicular traffic to move, whether designated as a highway, arterial street, collector street, or local street. 
Street, Minor Arterial: A street that collects traffic from the collector system and connects with the major arterial system. 
Street, Major Arterial: A street that collects traffic from the collector and minor arterial system and connects with the freeway system. 
Street, Collector: A street that collects traffic from local streets and connects with minor and major arterials. This includes minor and major collectors. 
Street, Local: A street that provides vehicular access to abutting property. 
Stringcourse: A narrow, continuous ornamental band set in the face of a building as a design element; also known as a cordon. 

Stripping: Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the vegetative surface cover, including clearing and grubbing operations. 
Structure: Anything constructed, built, or erected. 
Structure, Principal: The principal structure which fulfills the purpose for which the building plot is intended. 
Subdivider: Any person or persons, firm, or corporation subdividing a tract or parcel of land to be sold or otherwise handled for his own personal gain or use. 
Subdivision: The division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more parts, lots, or sites, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, division of ownership, or building development. This also includes the resubdivision of land or lots which are a part of a previously recorded subdivision. Divisions of land for agricultural purposes, where no building construction is involved, in parcels of five (5) acres or more, shall not be included within this definition, unless such subdivision of five (5) acres or more includes the planning or development of a new street or access easement. An addition is a subdivision as is defined herein. 
Subdivisions, Minor: A division of land into four (4) or fewer lots on an existing street which does not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. 
Subdivision, Rural Residential: A subdivision that is predominately single-family lots and where one (1) acre is the minimum lot size of the base zoning district. Included are developments where lots are clustered to smaller than one (1) acre as permitted by the zoning district and/or the cluster development provision. 
Per Ordinance No. 2011-3308 (January 13, 2011) 
Substantial Improvement: Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure either: 
(1)  Before the improvement or repair is started, or 
(2)  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any projects for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(2)  Any alterations of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
Surveyor: A person duly authorized and licensed under the Texas Professional Land Surveying Practices Act to practice the profession of land surveying, either as a Registered Professional Land Surveyor or a Licensed State Land Surveyor. 
Taxicab Service: Any business associated with the storage or dispatch of vehicles for the transportation of passengers for hire. 
Taxicab, Commercial Vehicle: Any motorized passenger vehicle permitted or should be permitted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4 of the City of College Station Code of Ordinances. 
Per Ordinance No. 3281 (September 9, 2010) 
Theater: A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion pictures or for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances. 
Townhouse: One (1) of a group of no less than three (3), no more than twelve (12), attached dwelling units, each dwelling unit located on a separate lot and thereby distinguished from condominium units. 
Transom: Horizontal opening or window element framed across a window or door forming part of the frame. 
Tree, Canopy: An overstory tree that exhibits a layer or multiple layers of branches and foliage at its top or crown and extending a distance outward from its trunk or trunks. This tree's overall appearance is dominated by its tall stature (often over eighty (80) feet), its broad canopy, and the shade that it produces. 
Tree, Non-Canopy: A tree that may reach canopy tree height, but does not have the same dominance of canopy as the canopy tree, OR an understory tree that does not reach canopy tree height, but does exhibit a similar dominance of canopy size and structure. 
Transmission Tower: A wireless telecommunications support structure designed primarily of the support and attachment of a wireless telecommunications facility. Transmission towers include: 
(1)  Monopole Tower - A self-supporting structure composed of a single spire used to support telecommunications antenna and/or related equipment; 
(2)  Lattice Tower - A self-supporting three- or four-sided, open, steel frame structure used to support telecommunications antenna and/or related equipment; and 
(3)  Guyed Tower - An open, steel frame structure that requires wires and anchor bolts for support. 
Truck Stop: Any building, premises, or land in which or upon which a business, service, or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, storage, or repair of commercial vehicles is conducted or rendered, including the dispensing of motor fuel or other petroleum products directly into motor vehicles and the sale of accessories or equipment for trucks and similar commercial vehicles. A truck stop also may include overnight accommodations and restaurant facilities primarily for the use of truck crews. For the purposes of this definition, a use is classified as a truck stop when more than ten (10) fuel pumps are used. 
Two-Family Home: Two (2) dwelling units on a single platted lot, either side-by-side or upstairs and downstairs. Also known as a duplex. 
Two-Unit Dwelling : A residential structure, located within a larger development on a common lot, providing complete, independent living facilities for two (2) families including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
Use: The actual use(s) of a parcel of ground, whether conducted within or without structures, buildings, or improvements. An unoccupied and unused structure is not a use, irrespective of its design, purpose, or utility. 
Utility Easement: An interest in land granted to the City, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility company, for installation or maintenance of utilities across, over, or under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machines and vehicles as necessary for maintenance of such utilities. 
Utility Facility: Infrastructure services and structures necessary to deliver basic utilities essential to the public health, safety, and welfare. This includes all lines and facilities provided by a public or private agency and related to the provision, distribution, collection, transmission or disposal of water, storm and sanitary sewage, oil, gas, power, information, telephone cable, electricity and other services provided by the utility. This does not include facilities regulated by Section 6.4.P, Wireless Telecommunication Facilities. 
Variance: The modification of a specific standard in this UDO. 
Vehicle Repair and Service Shop: Any premises or structures when used for the servicing and/or repair of motor vehicles, including paint and body work, engine rebuilding and minor maintenance activities, irrespective of commercial gain derived therefrom. Excepted from this definition are residential premises where not more than two (2) motor vehicles belonging to the lawful residents thereof are involved in such activities at any one (1) time, and not in operating condition, or where not more than one (1) motor vehicle, whether or not in operating condition, and not belonging to the lawful residents thereof is involved in such activities for a period of more than one (1) week, and only one (1) motor vehicle may be serviced and/or repaired each month. 
Vehicle Sales and Rental: Any premises or structures used for the sale and or rental of motor vehicles. 
Violation: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water Surface Elevation: The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum if specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash, in and including any area adjacent thereto, which is subject to inundation by reason of overflow of flood water. 
Wireless Telecommunication Facility (WTF): An unstaffed facility operating for the transmission and reception of low-power radio signals consisting of an equipment shelter or cabinet, a support structure, antennas, and related equipment. 
Wholesale Sales: Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. 
Yard: Open spaces on the lot or building plot on which a building is situated and which are open and unobstructed to the sky by any structure except as herein provided. 
(1)  Front Yard. A yard facing and abutting a street and extending across the front of a lot or building plot between the side property lines and having a minimum horizontal depth measured from the front property line to a depth of the setback specified for the district in which the lot is located. 
(2)  Rear Yard. A yard extending across the rear of the lot or building plot between the side property lines and having a minimum depth measured from the rear property line as specified for the district in which the building plot is located. 
(3)  Side Yard. A yard located on a lot or building plot extending from the required rear yard to the required front yard having a minimum width measured from the side property line as specified for the district in which the building plot is located. 
Zoning: A method of land use control requiring the categorization of land use of every tract of land within a particular jurisdiction according to a zoning ordinance or code and usually in accordance with a land use plan which is intended to preserve the quality of life and orderly development of that jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2012-3450 , Pt. 1(Exh. F), 9-27-2012; Ord. No. 2013-3521 , Pt. 1(Exh. O), 9-12-2013; Ord. No. 2014-3624 , Pt. 1(Exh. P), 12-18-2014; Ord. No. 2015-3655 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 4-23-2015; Ord. No. 2015-3699 , Pt. 1(Exh. B), 9-21-2015; Ord. No. 2018-3999 , Pt. 1(Exh. K), 4-12-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4059 , Pt. 1(Exh. C), 11-19-2018; Ord. No. 2018-4060 , Pt. 1(Exh. B, a., b.), 11-19-2018; Ord. No. 2019-4086 , Pt. 1(Exh. E), 3-28-2019) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 2011 REPUBLICATION 
    This table gives the location within the 2017 Code of the 2011 Republication as supplemented through October 13, 2016. 
2011 Repub. 
Section Section 

2017 Code 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-2 1-4 1-5 1-5 1-7 1-6 1-8 1-7 36-16 1-8 2-94 1-9 36-17 1-10 36-18 1-11(A) 36-19 1-11(B) 36-20 1-11(C) 36-21 1-11(D) 36-22 1-11(E) 36-23 1-11(F) 36-24 1-12 2-1 1-13(A) 4-4 1-13(B) 4-2 1-13(D) 4-3 1-13(E) 4-1 1-14(intro. ) 32-19 1-14(A) 32-24 1-14(B) 32-21 1-14(C) 32-27 1-14(D) 32-28 1-14(E) 32-29 1-14(F)(1) 32-61 1-14(F)(2) 32-70 1-14(F)(3) 32-62 1-14(F)(4) 32-63 1-14(F)(5) 32-64 1-14(F)(6) 32-66 1-14(F)(7) 32-69 1-14(F)(8) 32-65 1-14(F)(9) 32-71 1-14(F)(10) 32-72 1-14(F)(11) 32-67 1-14(F)(12) 32-68 1-14(F)(13) 32-22 1-14(G) 32-30 1-14(H) 32-36 1-14(I) 32-23 1-14(J) 32-25 1-14(K) 32-26 1-14(L) 32-31 1-14(M) 32-32 1-14(N) 32-33 1-14(O) 32-34 1-14(P) 32-35 1-14(Q) 32-20 1-16 26-2 1-20 26-7 1-22 22-2 1-23(intro. ) 2-168 1-23(A) 2-169 1-23(B) 2-170 1-23(C) 2-170 1-23(D) 2-172 1-23(E) 2-171 1-24 34-4 1-25 24-1 1-26 24-2 1-27(A) 2-74 1-27(B) 2-75 1-27(C) 2-72 1-27(D) 2-73 1-27(E) 2-70 1-27(F) 2-71 1-28(A) 2-198 1-28(B) 2-199 1-28(C) 2-199 1-28(D) 2-201 1-28(E) 2-200 1-29(A)(1) 10-19 1-29(A)(2) 10-20 1-29(A)(3) 10-20 1-29(A)(4) 10-20 1-29(A)(5) 10-20 1-29(A)(6) 10-20 1-29(B) 10-21 1-29(C) 10-23 1-29(D) 10-27 1-29(E) 10-25 1-29(F) 10-26 1-29(G) 10-22 1-29(H) 10-28 1-29(I) 10-29 1-29(J) 10-30 1-29(K) 10-31 1-29(L) 10-32 1-29(M) 10-24 1-31 28-1 2-1 6-1 2-2 6-6 2-3 6-7 2-4 6-8 2-5(1) 6-45 2-5(2) 6-47 2-5(3) 6-48 2-5(4) 6-50 2-5(5) 6-51 2-5(6) 6-52 2-5(7) 6-3 2-6 6-49 2-7 6-46 2-8 6-9 2-9 6-10 2-10 6-11 2-11 6-12 2-12 6-13 2-21 6-78 2-22 6-79 2-23 6-80 2-24 6-4 2-25 6-5 2-26 6-81 2-27 6-82 2-31 6-108 2-32 6-109 2-33 6-110 2-34 6-111 2-35 6-112 2-36 6-113 2-38 6-114 2-39 6-115 2-40 6-116 2-51 6-146 2-52 6-147 2-53 6-148 2-54 6-149 2-55 6-150 2-56 6-151 2-57 6-152 2-58 6-153 2-59 6-154 3-1(A)(1) 103-44 3-1(A)(2)(a) 103-45 3-1(A)(2)(b) 103-45 3-1(A)(2)(c) 103-47 3-1(A)(2)(d) 103-46 3-1(A)(3) 103-48 3-1(A)(4) 103-49 3-1(A)(5) 103-50 3-1(B)(1) 103-74 3-1(B)(1)(a) 103-75 3-1(B)(1)(b) 103-76 3-1(B)(1)(c) 103-75 3-1(B)(2) 103-77 3-1(B)(3) 103-78 3-1(B)(4) 103-79 3-1(C)(1) 103-195 3-1(C)(2) 103-197 3-1(C)(3) 103-196 3-1(C)(4) 103-198 3-1(C)(5) 103-199 3-1(C)(6) 103-200 3-1(C)(7) 103-201 3-1(C)(8) 103-202 3-1(C)(9) 103-203 3-1(C)(10) 103-204 3-1(C)(11) 103-205 3-1(C)(12) 103-206 3-1(E) 103-1 3-2(A) 34-135 3-2(B) 34-134 3-2(C) 34-134 3-2(D) 34-133 3-2(E) 34-136 3-2(F)(1) 34-168 3-2(F)(2) 34-190 3-2(G) 34-137 3-2(H) 34-138 3-2(I) 34-139 3-2(J) 34-140 3-2(K) 34-141 3-2(L) 34-191 3-2(M) 34-192 3-2(N) 34-142 3-3(A) 34-31 3-3(B) 34-29 3-3(C) 34-34 3-3(D) 34-35 3-3(E) 34-36 3-3(F)(1) 34-61 3-3(F)(2) 34-63 3-3(F)(3) 34-64 3-3(F)(4) 34-65 3-3(F)(5)(a) 34-97 3-3(F)(5)(b) 34-100 3-3(F)(5)(c) 34-101 3-3(F)(5)(d) 34-99 3-3(F)(5)(e) 34-69 3-3(F)(5)(f) 34-67 3-3(F)(5)(g) 34-66 3-3(F)(6) 34-68 3-3(F)(7) 34-102 3-3(F)(8) 34-98 3-3(F)(9) 34-62 3-3(G) 34-33 3-3(H)(1) 34-32 3-3(H)(2) 34-30 3-4 34-2 3-5 34-3 3-6 103-131 3-6(A) 103-132 3-6(B) 103-134 3-6(C) 103-135 3-6(D) 103-136 3-6(E) 103-137 3-6(F) 103-138 3-6(G) 103-139 3-7 103-162 - 103-163 4-1(A) 8-181 4-1(B) 8-184 4-1(D) 8-209 4-1(E) 8-210 4-1(F) 8-211 4-1(G) 8-213 4-1(H) 8-212 4-1(I) 8-185 4-1(J) 8-235 4-1(K) 8-237 4-1(M) 8-236 4-1(N) 8-182 4-1(O) 8-183 4-1(P) 8-180 4-2 8-1 4-3(A) 34-223 4-3(B)(1) 34-246 4-3(B)(2) 34-225 4-3(C) 34-250 4-3(D) 34-226 4-3(E) 34-247 4-3(F) 34-249 4-3(G) 34-253 4-3(H) 34-252 4-3(J) 34-254 4-3(K) 34-248 4-3(L) 34-251 4-3(M)(1) 34-246 4-3(M)(2) 34-224 4-3(N) 34-246 4-4(A) 8-291 4-4(B) 8-268 4-4(C) 8-297 4-4(D) 8-271 4-4(E) 8-270 4-4(F) 8-292 4-4(G) 8-298 4-4(H) 8-293 4-4(I) 2-2 4-4(J) 8-295 4-4(K) 8-296 4-4(L) 8-299 4-4(M) 8-300 4-4(N) 8-301 4-4(O) 8-302 4-4(P) 8-294 4-4(Q) 8-269 4-5 8-2 4-6(A) 8-564 4-6(B) 8-565 4-6(C)(1) 8-587 4-6(C)(2) 8-588 4-6(D) 8-591 4-6(E) 8-589 4-6(F) 8-590 4-6(G) 8-616 4-6(H) 8-617 4-6(I) 8-619 4-6(J) 8-618 4-6(K) 8-620 4-6(L) 8-621 4-6(M) 8-622 4-6(N)(1) 8-650 4-6(N)(2) 8-649 4-6(N)(4) 8-651 4-6(N)(5) 8-652 4-6(N)(6) 8-655 4-6(N)(7) 8-653 4-6(N)(8) 8-656 4-6(N)(9) 8-654 4-6(O) 8-566 4-6(P) 8-567 4-6(Q) 8-568 4-6(R) 8-569 4-7(A) 12-50 4-7(B) 12-51 4-7(C)(1) 12-77 4-7(C)(2) 12-78 4-7(C)(3) 12-54 4-7(C)(4) 12-55 4-7(C)(5) 12-56 4-7(C)(6) 12-79 4-7(D) 12-53 4-7(E) 12-57 4-7(F) 12-58 4-7(G) 12-59 4-7(H) 12-52 4-7(I) 12-80 4-8(A) 12-104 4-8(B) 12-107 4-8(C) 12-108 4-8(D) 12-109 4-8(E) 12-110 4-8(F) 12-111 4-8(G) 12-112 4-8(H) 12-113 4-8(I) 12-106 4-8(J) 12-105 4-10(A) 38-174 4-10(B) 38-175 4-10(C) 38-176 4-10(D) 38-177 4-10(E) 38-178 4-10(F) 38-179 4-10(H) 38-180 4-10(I) 38-181 4-11 34-5 4-12(A) 20-19 4-12(B) 20-22 4-12(C) 20-23 4-12(D) 20-24 4-12(E) 20-25 4-12(F) 20-26 4-12(G) 20-21 4-12(H) 20-58 4-12(I) 20-59 4-12(J) 20-61 4-12(K) 20-27 4-12(L) 20-60 4-12(M) 20-20 4-13(A) 14-21 4-13(B) 14-22 4-13(C) 14-23 4-13(D) 14-24 4-13(E)(1) 14-56 4-13(E)(2) 14-26 4-13(E)(3) 14-62 4-13(E)(4) 14-63 4-13(E)(5) 14-97 4-13(E)(6) 14-57 4-13(E)(7) 14-61 4-13(E)(8) 14-98 4-13(E)(9) 14-66 4-13(F)(1) 14-58 4-13(F)(2) 14-59 4-13(F)(3) 14-60 4-13(G)(1) 14-99 4-13(G)(2) 14-100 4-13(G)(3) 14-101 4-13(H)(1) 14-132 4-13(H)(2) 14-133 4-13(H)(3) 14-134 4-13(H)(4) 14-135 4-13(H)(5) 14-136 4-13(H)(6) 14-137 4-13(H)(7) 14-138 4-13(H)(8) 14-139 4-13(H)(9) 14-140 4-13(H)(10) 14-141 4-13(H)(11) 14-142 4-13(H)(12) 14-143 4-13(H)(13) 14-131 4-13(H)(14) 14-144 4-13(H)(15) 14-145 4-13(H)(16) 14-146 4-13(H)(17) 14-147 4-13(H)(18) 14-148 4-13(H)(19) 14-149 4-13(I) 14-64 4-13(J) 14-65 4-13(K) 14-150 4-13(L) 14-67 4-13(M) 14-68 4-13(N) 14-151 4-13(O) 14-69 4-13(P) 14-152 4-13(Q) 14-153 4-13(R) 14-25 4-14 26-4 4-15(A) 8-323 4-15(B) 8-360 4-15(C) 8-361 4-15(D) 8-325 4-15(E) 8-326 4-15(F) 8-327 4-15(G) 8-328 4-15(H) 8-324 4-16(A) 8-114 4-16(B) 8-144 4-16(C) 8-145 4-16(D) 8-146 4-16(E) 8-115 4-16(F) 8-147 4-16(G) 8-148 4-17(A) 8-53 4-17(B) 8-56 4-17(C) 8-54 4-17(D) 8-55 4-17(E) 8-57 4-17(F) 8-81 4-17(G) 8-82 4-17(H) 8-83 4-17(I) 8-84 4-17(J) 8-85 4-17(K) 8-58 4-17(L) 8-59 4-17(M) 8-60 4-17(N) 8-61 4-18 26-1 4-19(A) 103-238 4-19(B) 103-236 4-19(C) 103-242 4-19(D) 103-240 4-19(E) 103-237 4-19(F) 103-239 4-19(G) 103-241 4-20(A) 8-381 4-20(B)(1) 8-414 4-20(B)(2) 8-415 4-20(B)(3) 8-416 4-20(B)(4) 8-415 4-20(B)(5) 8-418 4-20(B)(6) 8-417 4-20(B)(7) 8-419 4-20(B)(8) 8-420 4-20(B)(9) 8-421 4-20(B)(10) 8-422 4-20(C) 8-384 4-20(D) 8-385 4-20(E) 8-383 4-20(F) 8-382 4-21(A) 8-443 4-21(B) 8-480 4-21(C) 8-472 4-21(D) 8-473 4-21(E) 8-474 4-21(F) 8-479 4-21(G) 8-476 4-21(H) 8-475 4-21(I) 8-477 4-21(J) 8-478 4-21(K) 8-481 4-21(L) 8-482 4-21(M) 8-444 4-22(A) 8-686 4-22(B) 8-689 4-22(C) 8-690 4-22(D)(1) 8-713 4-22(D)(2)(a) 8-740 4-22(D)(2)(b) 8-740 4-22(D)(2)(c) 8-742 4-22(D)(2)(d) 8-743 4-22(E) 8-745 4-22(F) 8-741 4-22(G) 8-744 4-22(H) 8-804 4-22(I)(1) 8-805 4-22(I)(2) 8-805 4-22(I)(3) 8-805 4-22(I)(4) 8-805 4-22(I)(5) 8-806 4-22(J) 8-807 4-22(K) 8-809 4-22(L) 8-808 4-22(M) 8-774 4-22(N) 8-688 4-22(O) 8-775 4-22(P) 8-691 4-22(Q) 8-692 4-22(R) 8-687 4-23(A) 8-503 4-23(B) 8-504 4-23(C) 8-506 4-23(D)(1) 8-531 4-23(D)(2)(a) 8-532 4-23(D)(2)(b) 8-532 4-23(D)(2)(c) 8-533 4-23(E) 8-507 4-23(F) 8-508 4-23(G) 8-534 4-23(H) 8-509 4-23(I) 8-510 4-23(J) 8-511 4-23(K) 8-535 4-23(L) 8-505 4-24(A) 8-23 4-24(B) 8-25 4-24(C) 8-26 4-24(D) 8-27 4-24(E) 8-28 4-24(F) 8-29 4-24(G) 8-30 4-24(H) 8-31 4-24(I) 8-32 4-24(J) 8-24 6-1(A)(1) 16-51 6-1(A)(2) 16-78 6-1(B) 16-52 6-1(C) 16-79 6-2(A) 103-133 6-2(B) 16-25 6-2(C) 16-26 6-2(D) 16-27 6-2(E) 16-28 6-2(F) 16-29 6-2(G) 16-30 6-2(H) 16-31 6-2(I) 16-104 6-2(J) 16-105 6-2(K) 16-103 6-2(L) 16-102 6-3 16-1 6-4 16-2 6-5 16-3 7-1(A) 30-21 7-1(B) 30-22 7-1(C) 30-23 7-1(D) 30-24 7-1(E) 30-20 7-1(G) 30-19 7-2(A)(1) 26-5 7-2(A)(2) 26-5 7-2(A)(3) 26-5 7-2(A)(4) 26-5 7-2(A)(5) 26-5 7-2(A)(6) 26-5 7-2(A)(7) 26-5 7-2(A)(8) 26-6 7-2(A)(9) 26-3 7-2(A)(10) 26-8 7-2(A)(11) 26-9 7-2(C) 26-3 - 26-5 - 26-6 - 26-8 - 26-9 7-4 26-10 7-5(A) 18-59 7-5(B)(1) 18-93 7-5(B)(2) 18-94 7-5(B)(3) 18-95 7-5(C) 18-62 7-5(D) 18-63 7-5(E) 18-96 7-5(F) 18-97 7-5(G) 18-60 7-5(H) 18-61 7-5(I) 18-98 7-5(J) 18-64 7-5(K) 18-65 7-5(L) 18-66 7-5(M) 18-67 7-5(N) 18-58 7-7 18-1 7-9(A) 18-21 7-9(B) 18-23 7-9(C) 18-24 7-9(D) 18-24 7-9(E) 18-25 7-9(F) 18-22 7-9(G) 18-26 7-9(H) 18-27 7-10 14-1 7-11 26-11 7-13(A)(1) 14-176 7-13(A)(2) 14-177 7-13(A)(3) 14-175 7-13(B)(1) 14-241 7-13(B)(2) 14-241 7-13(B)(3) 14-242 7-13(C) 14-215 7-13(D) 14-216 7-13(E)(1) 14-263 7-13(E)(2) 14-264 7-13(F)(1) 14-210 7-13(F)(2) 14-178 7-13(F)(3) 14-211 7-13(F)(4) 14-214 7-13(F)(5) 14-213 7-13(F)(6) 14-212 8-2(A) 2-226 8-2(B) 2-226 8-2(C) 2-226 8-2(D) 2-228 8-2(E) 2-229 8-2(L) 2-227 8-2(O) 2-230 8-2(P) 2-231 8-3 101-21 - 101-22 8-4 12-19 8-5 12-20 8-6 12-21 8-7 12-22 8-8 12-23 8-11 2-48 8-12 22-1 ch. 10, sched. II 38-1002 ch. 10, sched. III 38-1003 ch. 10, sched. IV 38-1004 ch. 10, sched. V 38-1005 ch. 10, sched. VI 38-1006 ch. 10, sched. VII 38-1007 ch. 10, sched. VIII 38-1008 ch. 10, sched. IX 38-1009 ch. 10, sched. X 38-1010 ch. 10, sched. XI 38-1011 ch. 10, sched. XII 38-1012 ch. 10, sched. XIII 38-1013 ch. 10, sched. XIV 38-1014 ch. 10, sched. XV 38-1015 10-1 38-1 10-2 38-1003 10-2(A) 38-2 10-2(B) 38-5 10-2(C) 38-6 10-2(D) 38-7 10-2(E) 38-8 10-2(F) 38-9 10-2(G) 38-10 10-2(H) 38-3 10-2(J) 38-11 10-2(K) 38-12 10-2(L) 38-13 10-2(M) 38-14 10-2(N) 38-15 10-3(B) 38-16 10-3(E) 38-17 10-3(F) 38-18 10-4(A) 38-70 10-4(B) 38-71 10-4(C)(1) 38-72 10-4(C)(2) 38-73 10-4(C)(3) 38-74 10-4(C)(4) 38-75 10-4(C)(5) 38-76 10-4(C)(6) 38-77 10-4(C)(7) 38-78 10-4(C)(8) 38-79 10-4(C)(9)(a) 38-80 10-4(C)(9)(b) 38-80 10-4(C)(9)(c) 38-80 10-4(C)(9)(d) 38-42 10-4(C)(9)(e) 38-42 10-4(D) 38-44 10-4(E) 38-45 10-4(F) 38-46 10-4(G) 38-47 10-4(G)(3) 38-1015 10-4(H)(1) 38-106 10-4(H)(2) 38-107 10-4(H)(3) 38-108 10-4(H)(4) 38-105 10-4(H)(5) 38-104 10-4(H)(6) 38-109 10-4(I) 38-48 - 38-1014 10-5(A) 38-132 10-5(B) 38-137 10-5(C) 38-137 10-5(D) 38-136 10-5(E) 38-138 10-5(F) 38-139 10-5(G) 38-140 10-5(H) 38-141 10-5(I) 38-142 10-5(J) 38-143 10-5(K) 38-144 10-5(L) 38-145 10-5(M) 38-135 10-5(N) 38-135 10-5(O) 38-133 10-5(P) 38-134 10-6 38-43 10-7 28-2 10-8 28-4 10-9 28-3 10-10 28-5 10-11 38-4 10-12 28-6 10-13 28-7 10.01 1-1 11-1(A) 40-1 11-1(B) 40-5 11-1(C) 40-6 11-1(D) 40-7 11-1(E) 40-8 11-1(F) 40-9 11-1(G) 40-10 11-1(H) 40-2 11-1(I) 40-11 11-1(J) 40-12 11-1(K) 40-13 11-1(L) 40-14 11-2(A) 40-32 11-2(B) 40-33 11-2(C) 40-34 11-2(D)(1) 40-63 11-2(D)(2) 40-64 11-2(D)(3) 40-65 11-2(D)(4) 40-66 11-2(D)(5) 40-67 11-2(D)(6) 40-68 11-2(E) 40-35 11-3(A) 40-95 11-3(B) 40-96 11-3(C) 40-97 11-3(D) 40-98 11-3(E) 40-99 11-3(F) 40-100 11-3(G) 40-101 11-3(H) 40-102 11-3(I) 40-103 11-3(J) 40-104 11-3(K) 40-105 11-4(A)(intro. ) 40-314 11-4(A)(2) 40-315 11-4(A)(3) 40-316 11-4(A)(4) 40-317 11-4(A)(5) 40-318 11-4(A)(6) 40-319 11-4(A)(7) 40-320 11-4(A)(8) 40-321 11-4(A)(9) 40-322 11-4(A)(10) 40-323 11-4(A)(11) 40-324 11-4(A)(12) 40-325 11-4(B) 40-290 11-5(B)(1)(a) 40-396 11-5(B)(1)(b) 40-397 11-5(B)(1)(c) 40-355 11-5(B)(1)(d) 40-398 11-5(B)(1)(e) 40-393 11-5(B)(1)(f) 40-354 11-5(B)(1)(g) 40-389 11-5(B)(1)(h) 40-390 11-5(B)(1)(i) 40-392 11-5(B)(1)(j) 40-389 11-5(B)(1)(k) 40-389 11-5(B)(1)(l) 40-389 11-5(B)(1)(m) 40-394 11-5(B)(1)(n) 40-399 11-5(B)(1)(o) 40-400 11-5(B)(1)(p) 40-401 11-5(B)(1)(q) 40-401 11-5(B)(1)(r) 40-355 11-5(B)(1)(s) 40-459 11-5(B)(1)(t) 40-498 11-5(B)(1)(u) 40-499 11-5(B)(1)(v) 40-395 11-5(B)(1)(w) 40-407 11-5(B)(1)(x) 40-407 11-5(B)(1)(y) 40-408 11-5(B)(1)(z) 40-402 11-5(B)(1)(aa) 40-406 11-5(B)(1)(bb) 40-356 11-5(B)(1)(cc) 40-403 11-5(B)(1)(dd) 40-357 11-5(B)(1)(ee) 40-406 11-5(B)(1)(ff) 40-404 11-5(B)(1)(gg) 40-408 11-5(B)(1)(hh) 40-405 11-5(B)(1)(ii) 40-404 11-5(B)(1)(jj) 40-389 11-5(B)(2) 40-389 11-5(B)(3) 40-430 11-5(B)(4) 40-391 11-5(C)(1) 40-460 11-5(C)(2) 40-461 11-5(C)(3) 40-462 11-5(C)(4) 40-463 11-5(D) 40-388 11-5(E)(1) 40-495 11-5(E)(2) 40-496 11-5(E)(3) 40-497 11-6(A) 40-124 11-6(B) 40-125 11-6(C) 40-126 11-6(D)(1) 40-151 11-6(D)(2) 40-152 11-6(D)(3) 40-153 11-6(E) 40-154 11-6(F) 40-155 11-6(G) 40-156 11-6(H) 40-157 11-6(I) 40-158 11-6(J) 40-159 11-6(K) 40-160 11-6(L) 40-161 11-6(M) 40-162 11-6(N) 40-163 11-7(A) 40-522 11-7(B) 40-523 11-7(C) 40-524 11-8 40-37 11-9(A) 40-196 11-9(B) 40-198 11-9(C) 40-197 11-9(D) 40-199 11-9(E) 40-195 11-9(F) 40-201 11-9(G) 40-202 11-9(H) 40-206 11-9(I) 40-207 11-9(J) 40-208 11-9(K) 40-204 11-9(L) 40-203 11-9(M) 40-205 11-9(N) 40-200 11-10(A) 40-245 11-10(B) 40-240 11-10(C) 40-247 11-10(D) 40-248 11-10(E) 40-249 11-10(F) 40-250 11-10(G) 40-251 11-10(H) 40-252 11-10(I) 40-253 11-10(J) 40-254 11-10(K) 40-255 11-10(L) 40-256 11-10(M) 40-257 11-10(N) 40-258 11-10(O) 40-259 11-10(P) 40-260 11-10(Q) 40-243 11-10(R) 40-262 11-10(S) 40-244 11-10(T) 40-246 11-10(U) 40-261 11-10(V)(1) 40-242 11-10(V)(2) 40-241 11-10(V)(3) 40-263 11-11 40-36 11-12 40-3 11-13 34-1 Ch. 12 App. A 13-1(A) 105-21 13-1(B) 105-22 13-2 105-19 13-3(A) 105-28 13-3(B) 105-30 13-3(C) 105-59 13-3(E) 105-27 13-3(E)(1) 105-23 13-3(E)(2) 105-25 13-3(E)(3) 105-26 13-4(A) 105-57 13-4(B) 105-58 13-4(C) 105-55 13-4(D) 105-60 13-4(E) 105-61 13-5(A) 105-24 13-5(B) 105-31 13-5(C) 105-32 13-5(D) 105-33 13-5(E) 105-83 13-5(F) 105-84 13-5(G) 105-85 13-6 105-56 13-7(A) 105-29 13-7(B) 105-62 13-7(C) 105-20 13-7(D) 105-20 14-1 2-117 14-2 2-119 14-3 2-120 14-4 2-121 14-5 2-122 14-6 2-122 14-7 2-118 15-1(B) 107-2 15-1(C) 107-3 15-1(D) 107-1 15-1(E) 107-4 15-1(F) 107-5 15-1(G) 107-6 15-1(H) 107-7 15-1(I) 107-8 15-1(J) 107-9 15-1(K) 107-10 15-1(L) 107-11 15-1(M) 107-12 15-1(N) 107-13 15-1(O) 107-15 15-1(P) 107-16 15-1(Q) 107-17 15-1(R) 107-18 15-1(S) 107-19 15-1(T) 107-20 15-1(U) 107-21 15-1(V) 107-22 15-1(W) 107-23 15-3 107-50 15-4 107-51  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE DELETED SECTIONS 
    The following sections of the 2011 Republication were not included in the 2017 Recodification. 
Deleted Sections 1-17 1-19 1-21 1-30 2-37 7-12 8-1 8-9 8-10  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ADDED SECTIONS 
    The following Code sections were added as a part of the 2017 recodification: 
Added Sections 1-4 1-6 1-9 1-10 1-11 6-2 8-648 101-1  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ALTERED SECTIONS 
    The following sections of the 2017 Code were altered during the 2017 recodification. 
Altered Sections 1-1 1-2 1-3 1-5 1-7 1-8 2-1 2-2 2-70 2-73 2-117 2-118 2-119 4-3 6-1 6-151 8-54 8-81 8-145 8-184 8-185 8-212 8-235 8-268 8-292 8-293 8-294 8-296 8-299 8-301 8-302 8-326 8-360 8-361 8-418 8-472 8-475 8-476 8-533 8-535 8-564 8-566 8-588 8-591 8-619 8-620 8-622 8-650 8-654 8-686 8-742 8-745 8-774 8-775 8-806 8-809 10-25 12-50 12-53 12-54 12-55 12-56 12-59 12-79 12-104 12-106 12-113 14-21 14-58 14-67 14-68 14-99 14-100 14-101 14-151 16-2 18-22 22-1 24-1 24-2 26-1 26-2 26-5 26-7 26-10 28-1 28-3 28-5 28-6 28-7 32-24 32-25 32-26 32-62 34-2 34-3 34-4 34-29 34-36 34-61 34-69 34-99 34-100 34-102 34-133 34-134 34-168 34-190 34-225 34-226 34-246 34-247 34-248 34-249 34-250 34-252 34-253 34-254 36-17 36-22 36-24 38-2 38-5 38-7 38-47 38-48 38-77 38-106 38-107 38-108 38-132 38-136 38-137 38-139 38-1003 38-1014 38-1015 40-1 40-9 40-10 40-11 40-12 40-13 40-64 40-65 40-66 40-67 40-158 40-240 40-244 40-246 40-315 40-316 40-317 40-318 40-319 40-320 40-321 40-323 40-495 40-496 40-497 40-524 103-203 103-242 105-19 105-57 107-1 107-8  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within 2011 Republication of the Code of those ordinances adopted since the 2011 Republication of the Code. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date   Section Section 
this Code 2011-3355  6-23-2011 1(Exh. A) Ch. 12,  9.2 1(Exh. B) Ch. 12,  9.4 2011-3357  7-14-2011 1 4-6 O.(9), R. 2011-3362  8-25-2011 Pt. 1(Exh. A,  1 ) 4-6 A.(12) Pt. 1(Exh. A,  2 )       Rpld 4-6 B.(9) 2011-3363  8-25-2011 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2011-3369  9-22-2011 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-5 A.(2) 2011-3370  9-22-2011 Pt. 1       Rpld 1-15 2011-3373  9-22-2011 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-2 D.(3) 2011-3377 10-21-2011 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 7-5 2011-3378 11-20-2011 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Added 10-9 2011-3385 12- 8-2011 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 1-16 2011-3386 12- 8-2011 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 F.(Sched. V) 2011-3387 12- 8-2011 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 6-1 2011-3388 12- 8-2011 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 3-6       Added 3-7 2011-3390 12- 8-2011 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2012-3397  2-23-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-4 A.(2)-(8) 2012-3398  3- 8-2012 Pt. 2(Exh. A)       Added 6-4 2012-3399  3- 8-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Added 14-3 Z. 2012-3408  4-26-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 4-20 2012-3409  4-26-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 1-13 B. 2012-3410  4-26-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Added 4-21 2012-3411  4-26-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 5.6 B.13. 2012-3412  4-26-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 4-4 C., D. > 2012-3416  5-24-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-1 B.-D., K. 2012-3424  7-12-2012 Pt. 1(Exhs. A, B) 10-2 F. (Sched. V) 2012-3425  7-12-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 C. (Sched. II) 2012-3429  7-12-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 5.9.B.2.c., App. A, 5.10 2012-3429  7-12-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) Ch. 12,  5.6.2.c., Ch. 12,  5.7 2012-3430  7-12-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Added 7-13 2012-3431  7-12-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) Ch. 12,  7.8(tit.)       Added Ch. 12,  7.13 Pt. 2(Exh. B)       Added Ch. 12,  10.6 2012-3432  8- 9-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 1-29 B., E.(5), I.(1), L., M.(2)(c) 2012-3434  8- 9-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) Ch. 12,  8.7.I. 2012-3435  8- 9-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) Ch. 12,  8.2.K. 2012-3438  8-23-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 3-6 A.28. 2012-3445  9-13-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-2(D)(3) 2012-3449  9-27-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 1.4 Pt. 1(Exh. B)       Rnbd App. A, 2.7-2.9       as App. A, 2.8-2.10       Rnbd App. A, 2.10       as App. A, 2.12 Pt. 1(Exh. C)       Added App. A, 2.7 Pt. 1(Exh. D)       Added App. A, 2.11 Pt. 1(Exh. E)       Rnbd App. A, 3.1-3.21       as App. A, 3.2-3.22 Pt. 1(Exh.F)       Added App. A, 3.1 Pt. 1(Exh. G)       Rnbd App. A, 6.2-6.5       as App. A, 6.3-6.6 Pt. 1(Exh. H)       Added App. A, 6.2 Pt. 1(Exh. I)       Rnbd App. A, 7.1-7.12       as App. A, 7.2-7.13 Pt. 1(Exh. J)       Added App. A, 7.1 Pt. 1(Exh. K)       Rnbd App. A, 8.2-8.8       as App. A, 8.3-8.9 Pt. 1(Exh. L)       Added App. A, 8.2 Pt. 1(Exh. M) App. A, 5.2 Notes (G)-(I) App. A, 5.3.H.1.d. App. A, 5.6.A.1.c. App. A, 5.6.A.10. App. A, 5.6.B.2. App. A, 5.6.B.6. App. A, 5.6.B.6.c. App. A, 5.6.B.9. App. A, 5.6.B.9.a.3) App. A, 5.6.B.9.f. App. A,  5.6.B.10. App. A, 5.6.B.12.c.1)a) App. A, 5.6.B.12.c.5)b) App. A, 5.6.B.13. App. A, 5.6.B.14. App. A, 5.6.B.14.h.1) App. A, 5.6.B.14.i. App. A, 5.6.B.14.m. App. A, 5.6.B.14.m.2) App. A, 5.8.A.2.b. App. A, 5.8.A.4.b.1) App. A, 5.8.A.4.b.3) App. A, 5.9.C.1. App. A, 5.9.D.2.d.1)a), b) App. A, 9.2.A.2. App. A, 9.4.D. App. A, 10.5 2012-3450  9-27-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 1.10 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A, 4.1 Pt. 1(Exh. C)       Rnbd App. A, 5.5-5.10       as App. A, 5.8-5.12       Amd App. A, 5.4       Added App. A, 5.5-5.7 Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A, 6.3-6.5 Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A, 7.2, App. A, 7.3, App. A, 7.5, App. A, 7.7, App. A, 7.8, App. A, 7.10, App. A, 7.11, App. A, 7.13 Pt. 1(Exh. F) App. A, 11.2 2012-3458 11- 8-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 5.2(H) Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A, 7.2.D.1.e., App. A, 7.3.C., App. A, 7.3.I. Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A, 8.3.H.2 2012-3461 11-19-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-3.F.1. 2012-3465 12-13-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 4-20 B.(4)(n) 2012-3466 12-13-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2013-3471  1-10-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Added App. A, 2.3 D.4. App. A, 2.5 D.4.       Added App. A, 2.8 B.5.c. (Exh. B) App. A, 5.2, App. A, 5.4, App. A, 5.6, App. A, 5.9 (Exh. C)       Rpld App. A, 5.3       Rnbd App. A, 5.4-5.13       as App. A, 5.3-5.12 2013-3488  3-28-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A,  1 (A-L) 2-1-2-12 Pt. 1(Exh. A,  2 (A-G)) 2-21-2-27 Pt. 1(Exh. A,  3 (A-J)) 2-31-2-40 Pt. 1(Exh. A,  4 (A-I)) 2-51-2-59 2013-3492  4-11-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 4-10 2013-3500  5-23-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV       Added 10-4 E.(3) 2013-3507  7-25-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 C. (Sched. II) 2013-3508  7-25-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 H. 2013-3510  7-25-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 6.3 2013-3514  8-22-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2013-3516  9-12-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 G. 2013-3517  9-12-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2.D. 2013-3518  9-12-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 8.3.E.7.a., App. A, 8.3.G.2. 2013-3521  9-12-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 1.10 B.1.-7. Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A, 3.4.C.3 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A, 4.1 App. A, 4.5.B. Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A, 5.1.A.-I. Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A, 5.2 Pt. 1(Exh. F) App. A, 5.5.A.-E. Pt. 1(Exh. G) App. A, 5.6.A., B. Pt. 1(Exh. H) App. A, 6.3.C. Pt. 1(Exh. I) App. A, 6.4.A., X.3., 6.a. Pt. 1(Exh. J) App. A, 7.5.C., X., Y. Pt. 1(Exh. K) App. A, 7.7.F. Pt. 1(Exh. L) App. A, 7.13.B.1., C.1. Pt. 1(Exh. M) App. A, 8.3.H.4., K.3. Pt. 1(Exh. N) App. A, 9.4.C. Pt. 1(Exh. O) App. A, 11.2 Pt. 1(Exh. P) 2-51 2-52(1) 2-55(1) Pt. 1(Exh. Q) 6-1.B(16) Pt. 1(Exh. R) 7-1(C), 7-2(A)(8) Pt. 1(Exh. S) 10-6.D. Pt. 1(Exh. T) 15-1.I. 2013-3522  9-12-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 3.4.C.3.a.(23) Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A, 3.4.C.3.b.(20) Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A, 7.3.B., C., F., G., I. Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A, 7.4.B., C. Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A, 8.3.V.1., W.1.-4. 2013-3525  9-12-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-5.E. 2013-3526  9-26-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 2-5(1) 2013-3527  9-26-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4.H.(2) 2013-3528  9-26-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) Ch. 10, Sched. V 2013-3529  9-26-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-3, Sched. XII 2013-3533 10-25-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Added 4-22 2013-3537 11-14-2013 Pt. I(Exh. A) Ch. 15, Fig. 2-1 Table 2-1A Fig. 2-3 Table 2-1B Fig. 2-5 Table 2-1C Fig. 2-7 Table 2-1D Fig. 2-9 Table 2-1E Fig. 2-11 Pt. 1(Exh. B) Tables 2-2 -2-4 Tables 2-5A-2-5E Tables 2-6A-2-6E Tables 2-7A-2-7E Table 2-8 Tables 3-1A-3-1C Table 3-1E Table 3-2A-3-2E Pt. 1(Exh. C) Tables 3-3A-3-3E Pt. 1(Exh. D) Tables 3-3A-3-3E 2013-3538 11-25-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) Ch. 10, Sched. XII 2013-3539 11-25-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-6 N. 2013-3542 12-12-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 3.4.C.3.b.2 App. A, 3.18.B. 2013-3543 12-12-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4.E(1), Sched. XIV 2014-3544  1- 9-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 4-6.E. 2014-3545  1- 9-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-12 Pt. 2(Exh. B) 14-6.B 2014-3547  1- 9-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 7.5.C App. A, 7.5.Y 2014-3552  2-27-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-2 D.(4)(a)(i) 2014-3556  2-27-2014 Pt. 2       Added 4-17 2014-3558  3-13-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 1-23 2014-3560  3-27-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2014-3561  3-27-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 40-1 4-18 2014-3563  4-10-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 G.(3), Sched. XV 2014-3568  4-24-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-9 2014-3570  5-12-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 4-13 A Pt. 1(Exh. B) 4-13 F Pt. 2(Exh. C) 14-6 A 2014-3571  5-22-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-3, Sched. XIII 2014-3574  6-12-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 4-17 F 2014-3576  6-12-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2, Sched. II 2014-3580  6-26-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4, E.(1), Sched. XIV 2014-3586  6-26-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 4-19 2014-3587  7-24-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2014-3588  7-24-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 7.5 D App. A, 7.5 F App. A, 7.5 O.1       Added App. A, 7.5 CC 2014-3595  8-14-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 1-23 2014-3597  9-11-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-2 D.(4) 2014-3598  9-11-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2, Sched. II 2014-3600  9-11-2014 Pt. 2(Exh. A)       Added 7-9 A.(10)-(13)       Added 7-9 B.(2)(b)(3)-(5)       Added G., H. 2014-3607  9-22-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-5 E.(1)-(3) 2014-3604 10- 9-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2014-3608 11-13-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 A.-D. 2014-3611 11-24-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 C., Sched. II 2014-3612 11-24-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2014-3620 12-18-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-2 D.(3) 2014-3621 12-18-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 N., Sched. XI 2014-3624 12-18-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 1.10 B.4., 5. Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A, 4.1 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A, 5.1 G., H. Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A, 5.2 Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A, 5.5 B., C. Pt. 1(Exh. F) App. A, 5.6 A. Pt. 1(Exh. G) App. A, 6.3 Pt. 1(Exh. H) App. A, 6.4 J. Pt. 1(Exh. I) App. A, 7.2 H.2. Pt. 1(Exh. J) App. A, 7.3 E., I. Pt. 1(Exh. K) App. A, 7.5 C., F., Q., U. Pt. 1(Exh. L) App. A, 7.6 B. 3. Pt. 1(Exh. M) App. A, 7.7 F., F.1.f. Pt. 1(Exh. N) App. A, 7.8 C.2. Pt. 1(Exh. O) App. A, 7.10 A., 1-4, 8, 9 Pt. 1(Exh. P) App. A, 11.2 2014-3626 12-18-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2015-3628  1-22-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 7-5B(2)(c) 7-5 E. 2015-3630  1-22-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 4-13 Pt. 2(Exh. B) 14-6 A. 2015-3632  1-22-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-4 B. 2015-3636  2-26-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-7 C. 2015-3637  2-26-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 C., Sched. II 2015-3640  2-26-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 2.1, 2.2 App. A, 2.12 App. A, 8.5 D. 2015-3641  3-12-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E., Sched. XIV 2015-3642  3-12-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 N., Sched. XI 2015-3643  3-12-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 9.6 2015-3644  3-26-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 D., Sched. III 2015-3645  3-26-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E., Sched. XIV 2015-3647  3-26-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Added 11-13 2015-3652  4- 9-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E., Sched. XIV 2015-3654  4-23-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E., Sched. XIV 2015-3655  4-23-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 6.3 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A, 11.2 2015-3660  5-28-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 K., Sched. VIII 2015-3663  5-28-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 2.5 D.8, D.9 Pt. 1(Exh. B)       Added App. A, 2.8 B.4.c       Rnmd App. A, 2.8 B.4.c.-B.4.j.       as App. A, 2.8 B.4.d.-B.4.k. Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A, 2.12 Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A, 7.2 J., K. Pt. 1(Exh. E)       Added App. A, 7.3 C.10-12       Rnmd App. A, 7.3 C.11, 12       as App. A, 7.3 C.13, 14 Pt. 1(Exh. F)       Added App. A, 7.3 D., E.       Rnmd App. A, 7.3 F.-K.       as App. A, 7.3 E.-J. Pt. 1(Exh. G) App. A, 7.6 C., D. Pt. 1(Exh. H) App. A, 7.10 2015-3664  6-25-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 G. Pt. 1(Exh. B) Sched. VI 2015-3665  7- 9-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 C., Sched. II 2015-3666  7- 9-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 E., Sched. IV 2015-3667  7- 9-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 K., Sched. VIII 2015-3672  7- 9-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2015-3673  7- 9-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2015-3678  8-13-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 C., Sched. II 2015-3679  8-13-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-3 F.(1), Sched. XIII 2015-3680  8-13-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 K., Sched. VIII 2015-3681  8-13-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 F., Sched. V 2015-3682  8-13-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A, B) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2015-3683  8-13-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2015-3687  8-27-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2015-3694  9-10-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 C.(2)(a) 2015-3696  9-10-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 C.       Added 10-4 C.(9)(e) 2015-3699  9-21-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 8.3 W. Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A, 11.2 2015-3708 10- 8-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 4-20 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A, 6.3 Pt. 1 (Exh. C) App. A, 6.4 2015-3713 11-12-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 K., Sched. VIII 2015-3714 11-12-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 K., Sched. VIII 2015-3715 11-12-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 K., Sched. VIII 2015-3716 11-12-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 4-20.C.2(h)(1), (2) 2015-3720 11-23-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 5.8.B.8 App. A, 5.8.B.9.a App. A, 5.8.B.10 2015-3721 12-10-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 G.(3), Sched. XV 2015-3722 12-10-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Added 4-23 2015-3726 12-10-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 3-6, 3-7 2015-3727 12-10-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 6-1-6-4       Added 6-5 2015-3728 12-10-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 8.8, App. I 2016-3737  1-28-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-2 E. 2016-3738  1-28-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Added 4-24 2016-3739  1-28-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 4-4 G.(9) 2016-3740  1-28-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(2) 2016-3741  1-28-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 7.3.E. 2016-3749  2-11-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 2.2 B.1. 2016-3750  2-11-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 15-1 D.(1) 2016-3755  3-31-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2016-3757  4-14-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-3 F.(1), Sched. XIII 2016-3767  4-28-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Rnmd 6-1 B.(3)-(5)       as 6.1 B.(4)-(51)       Added 6.1 B.(3) 6.1 B.(11) 6.1 B.(36) 2016-3771  5-16-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2016-3772  5-16-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E.(1), Sched. XIV 2016-3775  6- 9-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 7-2(A)(11) 2016-3777  6- 9-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 7-5 Pt. 1(Exh. B)       Rpld 7-8 2016-3782  7-14-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 K., Sched. VIII 2016-3783  7-14-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E., Sched. XIV 2016-3784  7-14-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 I., Sched. XIV 2016-3786  7-28-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2.J., Sched. VII 2016-3787  7-28-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4.E., Sched. XIV Pt. 1(Exh. B) 10-4.E., Sched. XIV 2016-3792  7-28-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 1.10.B.5 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A, 4.1 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A, 5.1-5.4 Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A, 6.3.C App. A, 6.4.G App. A, 6.4.Q., R App. A, 6.4.U App. A, 6.4.AB Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A, 7.2.H.2 App. A, 7.2.K App. A, 7.3.C App. A, 7.3.H App. A, 7.5.C App. A, 7.5.F App. A, 7.5.S App. A, 7.7.F App. A, 7.8.C App. A, 7.10.C App. A, 7.11.C App. A, 7.13.B.1 App. A, 7.13.C.1 Pt. 1(Exh. F) App. A, 8.3.H.4.e 2016-3793  7-28-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 2-51, 2-52 2-55 2016-3796  8-11-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 3.4.C Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A, 7.13 2016-3797  8-11-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Added 10-14 2016-3802  8-25-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A, 7.2.H 2016-3804  9-22-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-3 F(1), Sched. XIII 2016-3805  9-22-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 C., Sched. II 2016-3806  9-22-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 N., Sched. XI 2016-3807  9-22-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E(1), Sched. XIV 2016-3811  9-22-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-4 A(1)-A(8) 2016-3812  9-22-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 11-2 D(3), D(4) Pt. 2(Exh. A)       Added 11-2 D(5) 2016-3814  9-22-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) Art. I(tit.)       Added 15-6-15-9 2016-3815 10-13-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-2 F., Sched. V 2016-3818 10-13-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 10-4 E(1), Sched. XIV  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location of the sections of the ordinances within the 2017 Code. 
Legislation Date Section Section 
2017 Code Ord. No. 2012-3411 4-26-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  5.6 Ord. No. 2012-3429 7-12-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  5.9 App. A,  5.10 Ord. No. 2012-3449 9-27-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  1.4 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  2.8-12-2.10 App. A,  2.12 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  2.7 Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A,  2.11 Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A,  3.1-3.22 Pt. 1(Exh. F) App. A,  3.1 Pt. 1(Exh. G) App. A,  6.2-6.6 Pt. 1(Exh. H) App. A,  6.2 Pt. 1(Exh. I) App. A,  7.2-7.13 Pt. 1(Exh. J) App. A,  7.1 Pt. 1(Exh. K) App. A,  8.3-8.9 Pt. 1(Exh. L) App. A,  8.2 Pt. 1(Exh. M) App. A,  5.2 App. A,  5.3 App. A,  5.6 App. A,  5.8 App. A,  5.9 App. A,  9.2 App. A,  9.4 App. A,  10.5 Ord. No. 2012-3450 9-27-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  1.10 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  4.1 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  5.8-5.12 App. A,  5.4 App. A,  5.5-5.7 Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A,  6.3-6.5 Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A,  7.2, 7.3, 7.5, 7.7, 7.8, 7.10, 7.11, 7.13 Pt. 1(Exh. F) App. A,  11.2 Ord. No. 2012-3458 11-8-2012 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  5.2 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  7.2 App. A,  7.3 App. A,  7.3 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  8.3 Ord. No. 2013-3471 1-10-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  2.3 App. A,  2.5 App. A,  2.8 (Exh. B) App. A,  5.2 App. A,  5.4 App. A,  5.6 App. A,  5.9 (Exh. C) App. A,  5.3 App. A,  5.3-5.12 Ord. No. 2013-3510 7-25-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  6.3 Ord. No. 2013-3518 9-12-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  8.3 App. A,  8.3 Ord. No. 2013-3521 9-12-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  1.10 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  3.4 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  4.1 App. A,  4.5 Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A,  5.1 Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A,  5.2 Pt. 1(Exh. F) App. A,  5.5 Pt. 1(Exh. G) App. A,  5.6 Pt. 1(Exh. H) App. A,  6.3 Pt. 1(Exh. I) App. A,  6.4 Pt. 1(Exh. J) App. A,  7.5 Pt. 1(Exh. K) App. A,  7.7 Pt. 1(Exh. L) App. A,  7.13 Pt. 1(Exh. M) App. A,  8.3 Pt. 1(Exh. N) App. A,  9.4 Pt. 1(Exh. O) App. A,  11.2 Ord. No. 2013-3522 9-12-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  3.4 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  3.4 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  7.3 Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A,  7.4 Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A,  8.3 Ord. No. 2013-3542 12-12-2013 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  3.4 App. A,  3.18 Ord. No. 2014-3547 1-9-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  7.5 App. A,  7.5 Ord. No. 2014-3588 7-24-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  7.5 App. A,  7.5 Ord. No. 2014-3624 12-18-2014 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  1.10 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  4.1 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  5.1 Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A,  5.2 Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A,  5.5 Pt. 1(Exh. F) App. A,  5.6 Pt. 1(Exh. G) App. A,  6.3 Pt. 1(Exh. H) App. A,  6.4 Pt. 1(Exh. I) App. A,  7.2 Pt. 1(Exh. J) App. A,  7.3 Pt. 1(Exh. K) App. A,  7.5 Pt. 1(Exh. L) App. A,  7.6 Pt. 1(Exh. M) App. A,  7.7 Pt. 1(Exh. N) App. A,  7.8 Pt. 1(Exh. O) App. A,  7.10 Pt. 1(Exh. P) App. A,  11.2 Ord. No. 2015-3640 2-26-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  2.1, 2.2 App. A,  2.12 App. A,  8.5 Ord. No. 2015-3643 3-12-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  9.6 Ord. No. 2015-3655 4-23-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  6.3 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  11.2 Ord. No. 2015-3663 5-28-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  2.5 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  2.8 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  2.12 Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A,  7.2 Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A,  7.3 Pt. 1(Exh. G) App. A,  7.6 Pt. 1(Exh. H) App. A,  7.10 Ord. No. 2015-3699 9-21-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  8.3 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  11.2 Ord. No. 2015-3720 11-23-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  5.8 Ord. No. 2015-3728 12-10-2015 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  8.8 Ord. No. 2016-3741 1-28-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  7.3 Ord. No. 2016-3749 2-11-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  2.2 Ord. No. 2016-3755 3-31-2016 Exh. A(10-4) 38-45 Exh. A(sched. XIV) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2016-3757 4-14-2016 Exh. A(10-3) 38-18 Exh. A(sched. XIII) 38-1013 Ord. No. 2016-3767 4-28-2016 Exh. A 16-25-16-31 - 16-102-16-105 - 103-133 Exh. A(6-1) 16-51, 16-52 - 16-78, 16-79 Exh. A(6-3) 16-1 Exh. A(6-4) 16-2 Exh. A(6-5) 16-3 Ord. No. 2016-3771 5-16-2016 Exh. A(10-4) 38-45 Exh. A(sched. XIV) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2016-3772 5-16-2016 Exh. A(10-4) 38-45 Exh. A(sched. XIV) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2016-3775 6-9-2016 Exh. A 26-9 Ord. No. 2016-3777 6-9-2016 Exh. A 18-59 Ord. No. 2016-3782 7-14-2016 Exh. A(10-2) 38-12 Exh. A(sched. VIII) 38-1008 Ord. No. 2016-3783 7-14-2016 Exh. A(10-4) 38-45 Exh. A(sched. XIV) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2016-3784 7-14-2016 Exh. A(sched. XIV) 38-1014 Exh. A(10-4) 38-48 exh. B(10-4) 38-48 Ord. No. 2016-3786 7-28-2016 Exh. A(10-2) 38-11 Exh. A(sched. VII) 38-1007 Ord. No. 2016-3787 7-28-2016 Exh. A(10-4) 38-45 Exh. A(sched. XIV) 38-1014 exh. B(sched. XIV) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2016-3792 7-28-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  1.10 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  4.1 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  5.1-5.4 Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A,  6.3 App. A,  6.4 App. A,  6.4 App. A,  6.4 Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A,  7.2 App. A,  7.2 App. A,  7.3 App. A,  7.3 App. A,  7.5 App. A,  7.5 App. A,  7.5 App. A,  7.7 App. A,  7.8 App. A,  7.10 App. A,  7.11 App. A,  7.13 Pt. 1(Exh. F) App. A,  8.3 Ord. No. 2016-3793 7-28-2016 Exh. A(2-51) 6-146 Exh. A(2-52) 6-147 Exh. A(2-55) 6-150 Ord. No. 2016-3796 8-11-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  3.4 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  7.13 Ord. No. 2016-3797 8-11-2016 Exh. A(10-14) 38-19 Ord. No. 2016-3802 8-25-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  7.2 Ord. No. 2016-3804 9-22-2016 Exh. A(10-3) 38-18 Exh. A(sched. XIII) 38-1013 Ord. No. 2016-3805 9-22-2016 Exh. A(10-2) 38-6 Exh. A(sched. II) 38-1002 Ord. No. 2016-3806 9-22-2016 Exh. A(10-2) 38-15 Exh. A(sched. XI) 38-1011 Ord. No. 2016-3807 9-22-2016 Exh. A(10-4) 38-45 Exh. A(sched. XIV) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2016-3811 9-22-2016 Exh. A(11-4) 40-315-40-321 Ord. No. 2016-3812 9-22-2016 Exh. A(11-2) 40-65-40-68 Ord. No. 2016-3814 9-22-2016 Exh. A(Exh. A) 107-51 Exh. A(exh. B) 107-51 Exh. A(exh. C) 107-51 Exh. A(exh. D) 107-51 Exh. A(exh. E) 107-52 Exh. A(exh. F) 107-52 Exh. A(exh. G) 107-52 Exh. A(exh. G-2) 107-52 Exh. A(exh. H) 107-52 Exh. A(exh. I) 107-52 Exh. A(exh. J) 107-72 Exh. A(exh. K) 107-72 Exh. A(exh. L-1) 107-72 Exh. A(exh. L-2) 107-72 Exh. A(exh. M) 107-72 Exh. A(exh. N) 107-72 Exh. A(15-1(B)) 107-2 Exh. A(15-1(C)) 107-3 Exh. A(15-1(D)) 107-1 Exh. A(15-1(E)) 107-4 Exh. A(15-1(F)) 107-5 Exh. A(15-1(G)) 107-6 Exh. A(15-1(H)) 107-7 Exh. A(15-1(I)) 107-8 Exh. A(15-1(J)) 107-9 Exh. A(15-1(K)) 107-10 Exh. A(15-1(L)) 107-11 Exh. A(15-1(M)) 107-12 Exh. A(15-1(N)) 107-13 Exh. A(15-1(O)) 107-15 Exh. A(15-1(P)) 107-16 Exh. A(15-1(Q)) 107-17 Exh. A(15-1(R)) 107-18 Exh. A(15-1(S)) 107-19 Exh. A(15-1(T)) 107-20 Exh. A(15-1(U)) 107-21 Exh. A(15-1(V)) 107-22 Exh. A(15-1(W)) 107-23 Exh. A(15-3) 107-50 Exh. A(15-4) 107-51 Exh. A(15-6) 107-71 Exh. A(15-7) 107-72 Exh. A(15-9) 107-94 Ord. No. 2016-3815 10-13-2016 Exh. A(10-2) 38-9 Exh. A(sched. V) 38-1005 Ord. No. 2016-3818 10-13-2016 Exh. A(10-4) 38-45 Exh. A(sched. XIV) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2016-3832 11-10-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 40-64, 40-65 Ord. No. 2016-3833 11-10-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A(11-14)) 40-4 Ord. No. 2016-3834 11-10-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2016-3835 11-10-2016 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  2.5.B Ord. No. 2016-3840 11-10-2016 Pt. 1(15-8) 107-73 Ord. No. 2016-3845 12-8-2016 Exh. A 103-132 Ord. No. 2017-3852 1-26-2017 Exh. A 38-1003 Ord. No. 2017-3853 1-26-2017 Exh. A 38-1004 Ord. No. 2017-3854 1-26-2017 Exh. A 10-30, 10-31 Ord. No. 2017-3857 1-26-2017 Exh. A 8-237 exh. M 8-236 Ord. No. 2017-3862 2-23-2017 Exh. A 2-95 Ord. No. 2017-3866 3-23-2017 11-1(A) 40-1 11-5(B)(1)(b) 40-397 11-5(B)(1)(h) 40-390 11-5(B)(1)(j) 40-389 11-5(B)(1)(k) 40-389 11-5(B)(1)(l) 40-389 11-5(B)(1)(q) 40-401 11-5(B)(3) 40-430 Ord. No. 2017-3867 3-23-2017 Exh. A(Sched. II) 38-1002 Ord. No. 2017-3868 3-23-2017 Exh. A(Sched. II) 38-1002 Ord. No. 2017-3869 3-23-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2017-3870 3-23-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2017-3871 3-23-2017 Exh. A(Sched. XI) 38-1011 Ord. No. 2017-3873 4-13-2017 Exh. A(Sched. II) 38-1002 Ord. No. 2017-3874 4-13-2017 Exh. A(Sched. II) 38-1002 Ord. No. 2017-3886  5-11-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  8.3.H.2 Ord. No. 2017-3893  7-13-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-11 38-1007 Ord. No. 2017-3894  7-13-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-45 38-1014 Ord. No. 2017-3895  7-13-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 8-268 8-270 8-292, 8-293 8-299 Ord. No. 2017-3911  8-10-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-45 38-1014 Ord. No. 2017-3912  8-10-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-12 38-1008 Ord. No. 2017-3913  8-10-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-12 38-1008 Ord. No. 2017-3914  8-10-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-9 38-1005 Ord. No. 2017-3915  8-10-2017 Adopt. Ord., pg. xi Ord. No. 2017-3916  8-10-2017 Pt. 2(Exh. A)       Added 34-278 08-10-17-2q(Res.)  8-10-2017 2-117 Ord. No. 2017-3918  8-24-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1002 Ord. No. 2017-3923  8-24-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  7.3 Ord. No. 2017-3924  9-11-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1013 Ord. No. 2017-3926  9-11-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 26-8(3)a. Ord. No. 2017-3927  9-11-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 103-236-103-242 Ord. No. 2017-3928  9-11-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 8-503-8-511 8-531-8-535 Ord. No. 2017-3931  9-11-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  6.3 Ord. No. 2017-3932  9-25-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1008 Ord. No. 2017-3933  9-25-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2017-3934  9-25-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 38-19 Ord. No. 2017-3938  9-25-2017 Pt. 1 
(Exh. A)       Added   
40-15 Pt. 2(Exh. B)       Rpld 40-63 40-64(6) 40-65(l) Ord. No. 2017-3945 10-12-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2017-3946 10-12-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2017-3947 10-12-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 16-52(22) Ord. No. 2017-3953 10-26-2017 Pt. 1(Exhs. A-C) App. A,  8.8.A, C.9., F.2. Ord. No. 2017-3955 11- 9-2107 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. >2017-3963 12-14-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-42(a) Pt. 1(Exh. B) 38-79(d) Ord. No. 2017-3906  7-27-2017 Pt. 1(Exhs. A, B) App. A,  7.6 B., D. Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  7.9 B Ord. No. 2017-3961 11-20-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  1.6 Ord. No. 2017-3967 12-14-2017 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  2.2 D Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  2.8 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  2.12 Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A,  3.2 H. Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A,  3.4 C Pt. 1(Exh. F) App. A,  3.4 E Ord. No. 2018-3970  1-11-2018 Pt. 1(Exhs. A, B) App. A,  9.2, 9.3 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  7.10 C.4 Ord. No. 2018-3977  1-25-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2018-3978  1-25-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1017 Ord. No. 2018-3982  2- 8-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2018-3984  2- 8-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  3.3.D.9 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  3.22.D.3 Ord. No. 2018-3990  2-22-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  7.2.J Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  7.3.J Ord. No. 2018-3991  2-22-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  2.2.D.3 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  2.8.B.4 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  5.8.B.4.f. Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A,  5.8.B.4.g. Pt. 1(Exh. E) 5.8.B.14 Pt. 1(Exh. F) 5.10.A.2 Pt. 1(Exh. G) 7.10.B Pt. 1(Exh. H) 7.10.C Pt. 1(Exh. I) 7.10.E Pt. 1(Exh. J) 7.10.F Ord. No. 2018-3992  3- 5-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1013 Ord. No. 2018-3995  3-22-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 16-52(3)(a) Ord. No. 2018-3996  3-22-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1013 Ord. No. 2018-3999  4-12-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  5.3.C Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  5.4 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  6.3.C Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A,  6.4 Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A,  7.2.H.3.b.2 Pt. 1(Exh. F) App. A,  7.3.H Pt. 1(Exh. G) App. A,  7.7.F Pt. 1(Exh. H) App. A,  7.10.C.3.c.10.b Pt. 1(Exh. I) App. A,  7.10.C.3.e Pt. 1(Exh. J) App. A,  7.11.C Pt. 1(Exh. K) App. A,  11.2 Ord. No. 2018-4001  4-12-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  1.10.B.7 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  2.5.D Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  4.1 Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A,  5.10.C Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A,  7.5.B Ord. No. 2018-4014  6-14-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1005 Ord. No. 2018-4015  6-14-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1003 Ord. No. 2018-4016  6-14-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 2-120 Ord. No. 2018-4018  6-14-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  7.6 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  7.7 Ord. No. 2018-4020  6-28-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1013 Ord. No. 2018-4022  6-28-2018 Pt. 1 
(Exh. A)       Added   
36-1 Ord. No. 2018-4024  7-12-2018 Pt. 2(Exh. A)       Added 8-810-8-825 Ord. No. 2018-3985  2- 8-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  2.5 Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  2.12 Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  3.7 Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A,  3.8 Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A,  5.8 Ord. No. 2018-4027  7-26-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2018-4028  7-26-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-104(e) Ord. No. 2018-4029  7-26-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-132 38-140 Ord. No. 2018-4030  7-26-2018 Pt. 2(Exh. A) 2-170 2-226 Pt. 3(Exh. B) 103-45 Pt. 4(Exh. C) App. A,  2.6.B App. A,  2.2 App. A,  2.5 Ord. No. 2018-4034  8-23-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  2.8 App. A,  3.12, 3.13 App. A,  5.2 App. A,  7.3 App. A,  7.6 App. A,  7.10 App. A,  8.3 Ord. No. 2018-4038  9-13-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1003 Ord. No. 2018-4040  9-13-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  7.3.H Ord. No. 2018-4042  9-27-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-42(c) Ord. No. 2018-4043  9-27-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 8-185 8-209(a) 8-210 8-211(c), (d) 8-212, 8-213 Ord. No. 2018-4045  9-27-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 12-104-12-113 Ord. No. 2018-4046  9-27-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 2-120(15) 2-122(10) Res. No. 09-27-18-2e  9-27-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 2-117 Ord. No. 2018-4056 11-19-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 30-24 Ord. No. 2018-4057 11-19-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-43 Ord. No. 2018-4058 11-19-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 26-6 Ord. No. 2018-4059 11-19-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  6.5.B Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  7.3.H Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  11.2 Ord. No. 2018-4060 11-19-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  7.2.H Pt. 1(Exh. B, a., b.) App. A,  11.2 Ord. No. 2018-4061 12-13-2018 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 32-25 Ord. No. 2019-4068  1-24-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2019-4069  1-24-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2019-4070  1-24-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2019-4071  2-14-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 38-13 Pt. 1 
(Exh. B)       Added   
38-201, 38-202 Pt. 1(Exh. C) 38-1009 Ord. No. 2019-4075  2-25-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 103-131, 103-132 103-134-103-139 103-161, 103-162 Ord. No. 2019-4076  2-25-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 16-51, 16-52 16-78 Ord. No. 2019-4077  3-14-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 2-122 Ord. No. 2019-4078  3-14-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  8.3.K Ord. No. 2019-4081  3-28-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1012 Ord. No. 2019-4082  3-28-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1005 Ord. No. 2019-4086  3-28-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) App. A,  8.3.E Pt. 1(Exh. B) App. A,  8.3.G Pt. 1(Exh. C) App. A,  8.3.V Pt. 1(Exh. D) App. A,  8.4.C Pt. 1(Exh. E) App. A,  11.2 Ord. No. 2019-4087  4-25-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 8-323-8-328 8-360, 8-361       Added 8-323-8-329 Ord. No. 2019-4088  4-25-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 40-195-40-208       Added 40-195-40-209 Ord. No. 2019-4089  4-25-2019 Pt. 2(Exh. A) 2-170 2-226 Pt. 3(Exh. B) 103-45 Pt. 4(Exh. C) App. A,  2.2.B.2, B.3 App. A,  2.5.B App. A,  2.6.B.2 Ord. No. 2019-4093  5-23-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 40-389 Ord. No. 2019-4094  5-23-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-74 Ord. No. 2019-4095  5-23-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-79(d)12 Ord. No. 2019-4096  5-23-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2019-4097  5-23-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 38-1014 Ord. No. 2019-4100  6-13-2019 Pt. 1(Exh. A) 2-122  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Texas Codes 
Texas Agriculture Code 
Section Section 
this Code 142.001 6-1 251.002 103-134  
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.06 Ch. 4 (note) ch. 105 4-4 109.31 et seq. Ch. 4 (note) 109.35 4-2  
Texas Code of Criminal Procedure 
Article Section 
this Code 45.056 28-3 45.203(c) 28-7 102.014(b) 28-6 102.017(d) 28-4 102.0172(d) 28-5  
Texas Family Code 
Section Section 
this Code 264.301 et seq. 28-3  
Texas Finance Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 302 107-16 ch. 371 Ch. 8, Art. VII - 8-323 ch. 393 Ch. 8, Art. III 393.001 8-54 393.601 et seq. 8-54 - 8-57 - 8-82 393.601 26-1 393.627 8-58  
Texas Government Code 
Section Section 
this Code 30.00001 et seq. Ch. 28 (note) - 28-1 30.00005 28-1 30.00009 28-2 30.00014 28-1 30.00019 28-1 311.005(2) 1-2 311.011 1-2 311.012(b) 1-2 311.014 1-2 311.016(1) 1-2 311.030 1-4 ch. 418 Ch. 12, Art. II - 12-19-12-21 418.103 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. II 418.106 Ch. 12, Art. II 418.173 12-22 ch. 441 Ch. 2, Art. IV 441.151 et seq. 2-70 441.158 et seq. 2-73 442.001(3) 34-278 448.168 2-74 ch. 551 Char. Art. III - 18-21 ch. 552 Char. Art. XII - Ch. 2, Art. IV - 2-70 552.101 et seq. 2-70 ch. 615 28-2 1508.001 et seq. Ch. 32 (note)  
Texas Health and Safety Code 
Section Section 
this Code 161.252 18-26 ch. 342 Ch. 30 (note) 342.001 et seq. Ch. 40, Art. IV 342.003 30-22 342.004 30-21 342.007 30-20 ch. 361 Ch. 40, Art. IV ch. 365 26-10 - Ch. 40, Art. IV 366.002 103-134 ch. 435 18-1 435.013 18-1 ch. 437 Ch. 8, Art. VIII - Ch. 18, Art. III ch. 481 8-507 - 8-532 - 8-617 - 8-805 ch. 501 14-1 ch. 711 et seq. Ch. 10 (note) 713.001 Ch. 10, Art. II 713.011 10-23 - 10-28 ch. 773 Ch. 12, Art. III - 12-52 - 12-54-12-56 773.051 Ch. 12, Art. III ch. 791 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) ch. 821 et seq. Ch. 6 (note) ch. 821 6-11 ch. 822 6-108 - 6-110 822.041 et seq. Ch. 6, Art. IV 822.0422 6-109 822.047 Ch. 6, Art. IV 822.102 6-153 ch. 826 6-4 - 6-78 826.041 6-5  
Texas Human Resources Code 
Section Section 
this Code 121.003 32-25 229.001 32-26  
Texas Insurance Code 
Article Section 
this Code ch. 1954 8-508  
Texas Labor Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 51 8-210  
Texas Local Government Code 
Section Section 
this Code 42.021 34-31 52.013 1-5 53.001 et seq. 1-1 54.001 1-7 - 8-55 54.004 Ch. 26 (note) 54.012 1-7 54.031 et seq. 1-7 109.33 4-3 132.003 2-118 ch. 171 Char. Art. XII ch. 201 Ch. 2, Art. IV - 2-70 ch. 212 107-10 212.016 107-8 214.001 et seq. Ch. 103, Art. IV 214.212 103-131 - 103-134 214.214 Ch. 103, Art. III, Div. 3 214.216 103-131 - 103-134 215.004 Ch. 8, Art. XI 215.029 Ch. 8, Art. XI, Div. 3 217.042 1-7 - 14-178 - 26-3 - 26-5, 26-6 - 26-8, 26-9 - Ch. 30 (note) - 30-19 ch. 218 Ch. 12, Art. IV 229.001 26-2 250.003 8-25 250.004 8-25 ch. 272 Char. Art. XII ch. 283 Ch. 34, Art. IV - 34-168 283.006 34-190 283.057(a), Tc>34-278 ch. 331 Ch. 32 (note) 341.012 22-1 342.004 30-23 342.011 et seq. Ch. 16 (note) 342.013 26-3 ch. 395 Ch. 107 (note) - 107-1 - 107-3 - 107-71-107-73 395.016 107-5 - 107-8, 107-9 395.019 107-9 395.023 107-11 395.024 107-12 395.025 107-16 395.044 et seq. 107-6 395.052 107-17 395.058 107-18 395.077 107-15, 107-94 552.017 Ch. 40, Art. II, Div. 2  
Texas Natural Resources Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 81 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II  
Texas Occupations Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 53 8-506 ch. 1301 103-134 ch. 1305 Ch. 103, Art. III, Div. 3 ch. 1701 Ch. 22 (note) ch. 1702 Ch. 12, Art. IV - 12-107 ch. 1903 103-134 ch. 1956 Ch. 8, Art. VII 1903.002(c)(1) 103-134 1956.051 et seq. 8-323 ch. 2154 26-3 2154.004 26-3 ch. 2308 38-78 2308.0575 38-176  
Texas Parks and Wildlife Code 
Section Section 
this Code 31.055 38-132  
Texas Penal Code 
Section Section 
this Code chs. 1-3 1-2 1.03 1-2 chs. 6-9 1-2 6.02 1-7 - 8-55 ch. 12 1-2 ch. 19-ch. 22 8-211 ch. 28 et seq. 8-360, 8-361 28.02 16-1 chs. 29-32 8-211 37.11 26-4 37.12 26-4 42.06 12-59 42.09 et seq. 6-9-6-13 ch. 46 8-211 48.01 Ch. 18, Art. II  
Texas Property Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 301 Ch. 20, Art. II 301.004 20-26 301.022 20-22 301.025 20-25 301.026 20-23 301.027 20-24  
Texas Tax Code 
Section Section 
this Code 11.13 36-17 302.101 36-18 ch. 321 36-16 321.105 36-16 ch. 351 Ch. 36, Art. II - 36-24  
Texas Transportation Code 
Section Section 
this Code ch. 311 et seq. Ch. 34 (note) ch. 501 et seq. 38-1 ch. 682 28-6 - Ch. 38, Art. II, Div. 2 ch. 683 Ch. 38, Art. III - 38-132 ch. 2308 Ch. 38, Art. IV 231.012 101-21 241.011 101-21 241.014 101-21 542.202 28-6 542.202(a)(2) Ch. 38, Art. II - 38-1014, 38-1015 542.202(a)(7) 38-12 - 38-15 - 38-1008 - 38-1011 542.202(a)(8) 38-6-38-8 - 38-1002-38-1004 542.202(a)(9) 38-5 - 38-11 - 38-1001 542.202(a)(11) 38-9 - 38-1005 - 38-1007 545.301 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II 545.356 38-16-38-18 - 38-1012, 38-1013 545.424 et seq. 38-19 545.425 38-19 551.104 8-688 621.203 38-13 683.071 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. III 683.071 38-132 683.072 38-137 683.074(b)(1) 38-142 683.074(b)(3) 38-145 683.074(g) 38-143 683.075 38-138 683.076 38-139 - 38-141 683.077 38-136 683.078 38-144  
Texas Utilities Code 
Section Section 
this Code 11.003 34-278 36.351 40-324 51.002 34-278  
Texas Water Code 
Section Section 
this Code 11.039 40-204 13.042 Ch. 40, Art. II, Div. 2 13.501 et seq. 40-34 16.311 et seq. Ch. 105 - 105-21 16.3145 Ch. 105 (note) - 105-21 16.315 Ch. 105 (note) - 105-21  
