7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/438
City of Cuero
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 2
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deem appropriate to be included as enacted through Ordinance 2018-25 adopted 9/24/18.
HOME RULE
CHARTER
HOME RULE CHARTER*
CITY OF CUERO, TEXAS
ARTICLE I
FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES
SECTION 1.01 INCORPORATION.
The inhabitants of the City of Cuero, DeWitt County, Texas, residing within its corporate limits as heretofore or hereafter established, are hereby
constituted and shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the “City of Cuero”, hereinafter
referred to as the “City” with such powers, privileges, rights, duties and immunities as are herein provided.
SECTION 1.02 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as the “Council-Manager government.” Pursuant to this Charter and subject
only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution, the statutes of the State and by this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an
elective council, hereinafter referred to as the “Council”, which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the
City Manager, who in turn shall execute the laws and administer the government of the City. All powers of the City shall be exercised in the
manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance.
State law reference–Form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 26.021.
ARTICLE II
POWERS OF THE CITY†
SECTION 2.01 GENERAL.
The City shall be a Home Rule City, with full power of local self-government, including the right to amend this Charter, as provided by the
Constitution and laws of this State. It shall have and may exercise all the powers granted to the cities by the Constitution or laws of Texas
including specifically those powers made available to cities of more than 5,000 inhabitants by what is known as the Home Rule Amendment to
the Constitution of Texas (Article XI, Section 5) and the Home Rule Enabling Act (Chapter 13, Title 28 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of
Texas, 1925), as now or hereafter amended. The City may acquire property within or outside its corporate limits for any municipal purpose; may
cooperate with the government of Texas or any agency thereof, or with the federal government or any agency thereof, or with the government of
any county, city or political subdivision to accomplish any lawful purpose for the advancement of the health, morals, safety, convenience or
welfare of the City or its inhabitants; may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interest may require; provided the
City shall not sell, convey, lease, mortgage, or otherwise alienate any public utility without prior approval by the qualified voters of the City; and
may exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter or the
Constitution or laws of Texas. The enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall not be held or deemed exclusive, but in addition to the
powers enumerated herein, implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the City shall have and may exercise all other powers which
under the Constitution and general laws of this State it would be competent for this Charter to specifically enumerate.
SECTION 2.02 EMINENT DOMAIN.
The City shall have the full power and right to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers
conferred upon it by this Charter or by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas. The City may exercise the power of eminent domain in
any manner authorized or permitted by the Constitution and laws of this state. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the
right of the City to take the fee in land so condemned and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such
purposes. The City shall have and possess the power of condemnation, for any municipal or public purposes even though not specifically
enumerated in this Charter.
State law references–Eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Property Code, ch. 21; municipal right of eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 251.
SECTION 2.03 EXTENSION OR DETACHMENT OF BOUNDARIES.
A. The City Council shall have power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the City of Cuero; and to provide for the alteration, and
extension, of said boundary limits, the detachment of territory, and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to the City, with or without
the consent of the territory and inhabitants annexed or detached. Before the City may institute annexation or detachment proceedings, the City
Council shall provide an opportunity for all interested persons to be heard at a public hearing to be held not more than twenty (20) days nor less
than ten (10) days prior to institution of such proceedings. Notice of such hearings shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation
in the City and in the territory proposed to be annexed or detached. The notice shall be published at least once in such newspaper not more then
twenty (20) days nor less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing. However, amendments not affecting the boundary limits set forth in the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/438
proposed ordinance may be incorporated into the proposed ordinance without the necessity of republication of said notice. Annexation or
detachment of territory by the City shall be brought to completion within ninety (90) days of the date on which the City Council institutes
annexation or detachment proceedings or be null and void. Provided, however, any period of time during which the City is restrained or enjoined
from annexing or detaching any such territory by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be computed in such ninety (90) days limitation
period. Upon final passage of any such ordinance, the corporate limits of the City shall thereafter include (exclude) the territory so annexed
(detached); and when any additional territory has been so annexed, the same shall be a part of the City of Cuero, and the inhabitants thereof
shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of all citizens, and shall be bound by the acts and ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the
City. Upon the final adoption of any ordinance detaching territory from the City, the corporate limits of the City shall be reduced by the territory so
detached, but said territory shall still be liable for its prorata share of any debts incurred while said area was a part of said City, and the City shall
continue to levy, assess and collect taxes on the property within said territory to pay the indebtedness incurred while said area was a part of the
City as though the same had not been excluded from the boundaries of the City.
B. ANNEXATION BY ANY OTHER METHOD PROVIDED BY LAW.
Additional territory may also be annexed to the City in any manner and by any procedure that may now be provided by law or that may be
hereafter provided by law. Same shall be in addition to the methods herein above provided.
C. EXTENSION OF MUNICIPAL UTILITIES.
The City shall within three (3) years of the effective date of such annexation provide or cause to be provided such area with governmental and
proprietary services, the standard and scope of which are substantially equivalent to the standard and scope of governmental and proprietary
services furnished by the City in other areas of the City which have characteristics of topography, patterns of land utilization, and population
density similar to that of the particular area annexed. Should the City fail to extend or provide for extension within three (3) years, the owners of
the annexed territory may petition Council to de-annex the territory. If the Council fails to act on said petition within three (3) months of the date of
filing the owners may then resort to suit in district court to require de-annexation.
State law references–Municipal boundaries and annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 41 et seq.; municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, ch. 43; authority of home-rule municipality to annex area, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 43.021.
SECTION 2.04 ADVERTISING THE CITY.
The City shall have the power to appropriate funds for the purpose of advertising and promoting the City of Cuero in order to attract tourists,
commerce, and industry and thereby improve the City and benefit its inhabitants.
State law reference–Promotional advertising by municipality with population of 900,000 or less, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 371.001 et seq.
SECTION 2.05 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
A. The City Council, when necessary or as otherwise provided by any federal, state or local law, shall establish new boundaries for districts
covering the entire City for the election of District Council Members. Such boundaries shall be established by ordinance.
B. Following the addition of territory to the City by a boundary change, the City Council by ordinance, shall add such territory to an adjacent
district or districts by ordinance.
C. The City Council shall regularly conduct an investigation and determine the population of the City and the population of the districts from
which the District Council Members are elected. Each such determination shall be based upon the best available data, including, but not limited
to, the most recent federal census. Each such determination shall be expressed in an ordinance. After any such determination, if the distribution
of population among the various districts is determined by the City Council to be materially unbalanced, then the City Council shall establish new
boundaries for districts covering the City for the purpose of electing District Council Members.
ARTICLE III
THE CITY COUNCIL
SECTION 3.01 NUMBERS, SELECTION, AND TERM.
A. The legislative and governing body of the City shall be the “City Council of Cuero”. The members of the City Council shall be the Mayor and
six other City Council Members.
B. The Mayor and two (2) other Council members shall be elected from the city at large by a plurality of the votes cast. One (1) Council
member shall be elected from each of the four (4) single-member districts designated 1, 2, 3, and 4 on the City's current posted map delineated
and on file in the office of the City Secretary, by a plurality of the votes cast in such single-member district.
C. The two (2) at-large Council members shall be elected in odd numbered years. They shall not run or be elected by places. The ballot shall
instruct voters that in the race for the at-large positions they may “vote for one (1) or two (2) candidates (vote por uno o dos candidatos)”.
D. Council members for single-member Districts Nos. 1 and 4 shall be elected in odd numbered years. Council members for single-member
Districts Nos. 2 and 3 shall be elected in even numbered years. The Mayor shall be elected in even numbered years.
E. Each member of the City Council shall hold office for two (2) years and/or until his/her successor is elected and qualified.
SECTION 3.02 QUALIFICATIONS.
1. Each member of the City Council, in addition to having other qualifications prescribed by law:
A. Shall be a qualified voter of the City.
B. Shall have resided for as at [sic] least one (1) year preceding his election within the corporate limits of Cuero; or shall have been
a resident for a period of not less than one (1) year immediately preceding his election, of any territory not formerly within the
corporate limits of said City, but which is annexed under the provision of Section 2.03 of this Charter. If elected at-large, shall maintain
their primary residence within the corporate limits of the City of Cuero during his or her term of office. If elected for a single-member
district, shall maintain their primary residence within the corporate limits of the City of Cuero and within the single-member district to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/438
which they are elected during his or her term of office. EXCEPTION: This residency requirement shall not apply in the event that a
Council Member is required to move from his/her primary residence within the City or District due to an Act of God, any Federal Law,
State Law or any order, rule or regulation of a governmental authority.
C. Shall not hold any other office or employment under the City Government while he/she is a member of said Council.
D. Shall not be an officer or director of any public service corporation within the City or without the City but serving inhabitants of
the City, nor shall he/she be the owner or proprietor of any public service corporation in the City.
State law reference–Age and residence requirements for home-rule city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 141.003.
SECTION 3.03 COUNCIL TO BE JUDGE OF ELECTION QUALIFICATION.
The City Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its own members and other elected officials of the City.
SECTION 3.04 COMPENSATION.
The Mayor shall receive as compensation for his/her services the sum of $500.00 per month and each Councilmember shall receive as
compensation the sum of $200.00 per month. Such compensation shall be paid on the first day of each month.
SECTION 3.05 MAYOR PRO-TEM.
The Mayor Pro-Tem shall be appointed by the Mayor from among the members of the Council and shall perform all duties of the Mayor in his/her
absence or disability.
SECTION 3.06 VACANCIES, FORFEITURES OF OFFICE & FILLING VACANCIES.
The processes for vacancies, forfeitures of office, and filling vacancies for Mayor and Councilpersons are as follows:
1. The office of a Councilperson or the Mayor shall become vacant upon their death, resignation, forfeiture of, or removal from
office by any manner authorized by law.
2. Any member of the City Council or the Mayor shall automatically be deemed to have forfeited such office and shall be removed
therefrom by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Council by resolution and enforced by the Council if that person:
A. ceases to possess the required qualifications for their office;
B. is convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;
C. fails to attend three (3) regularly scheduled council meetings at the beginning of each month without being excused by the
Council; or
D. willfully and knowingly violates any express provision of this Charter.
3. If there is a declared vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem shall assume that office until the office of Mayor is filled
pursuant to sections 4 and 5 below.
4. In the event of a vacancy existing in the office of the Mayor or any Councilperson for any cause whatsoever, the remaining
members of the City Council shall by a majority vote thereof, at the next regular meeting elect a member or members to fill the
vacancy/vacancies thus existing, and such member or members so elected by the City Council shall serve in such position for the
remainder of the unexpired term thereof.
5. In the event the City Council fails to elect a member to fill any vacancy on the Council on or before the close of the second
regular scheduled meeting after such vacancy occurs, the Council shall lose its power to fill such vacancy and the vacancy shall be
filled by the qualified voters in a regular or specially called municipal election on the next Uniform Election Date provided by State law.
State law reference–Special election to fill vacancy generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 201.051 et seq.
SECTION 3.07 POWERS OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
All powers and authority which are expressly or impliedly, conferred on or possessed by the City shall be vested in and exercised by the Council;
provided, however, that the Council shall have no power to, and shall not; accept or admit liability in, or pay any claim for damages asserted
against the City without first obtaining a written opinion from the City Attorney regarding the City's liability therein.
SECTION 3.08 CITY COUNCIL NOT TO INTERFERE IN APPOINTMENTS OR REMOVALS.
Neither the Council nor any of its members shall instruct or request the City Manager or any of his/her subordinates to appoint or to remove any
person from office or employment. Except for the purpose of inquiry and investigations as set out in Section 3.14 the Council and its members
shall deal with the administrative services of the City solely through the City Manager and shall not give orders to any of the Manager's
subordinates, either publicly or privately. The City Manager shall appoint and, when he/she deems it necessary for the good of the City, suspend
or remove any City employees and appointive administrative officers provided for by or under this Charter, except as otherwise provided by law,
this Charter, or personnel rules adopted pursuant to this Charter.
SECTION 3.09 MEETINGS OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
The City Council shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting in each month at a time to be fixed by it for such regular meetings and it may hold as
many additional meetings as may be necessary to transact the business of the City. Special meetings of the Council may be called by the City
Secretary upon the written request of the Mayor or of any two (2) members of the City Council. All meetings of the City Council shall be held at
Council Chambers except that the City Council may designate another place for any such meeting and cause notice of such designation to be
published prior to such meeting in one (1) issue of a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Cuero. All meetings of the City Council shall
comply with the provisions of the State Open Meeting Law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/438
State law reference–Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551.
SECTION 3.10 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
The City Council shall determine by ordinance its own rules of procedure and order of business. A majority of the members of the City Council
shall constitute a quorum but no action of the City Council shall be of any force or effect unless it is adopted by the favorable votes of a majority
of the entire Council. Minutes of all meetings of the Council, including the “ayes” and “nays” upon the passage of each ordinance and resolution,
shall be taken and recorded and such minutes shall constitute a permanent record to which any citizen may have access at all reasonable times.
SECTION 3.11 PROCEDURE FOR PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES.
The Council shall legislate by ordinance, and the enacting clause of every ordinance shall be, “Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of
Cuero.” The City Attorney shall approve all ordinances adopted by the Council, as to the legality thereof, or shall file with the City Secretary
his/her written legal objections thereto. Evidence of approval of an ordinance by the City Attorney may be by notation on the ordinance itself, or
by separate paper or instrument. Each ordinance enacted by the Council shall be signed by the Mayor, Mayor Pro-Tem, or by two (2)
Councilmembers and shall be filed with and recorded by the City Secretary. All ordinances shall be read in open meeting of the City Council on
two (2) separate meetings; provided that the two (2) readings required herein shall be sufficient if they are read by descriptive caption only;
provided further, that the rule herein requiring ordinances be read on two (2) separate days shall be dispensed with for the purpose of adopting
an emergency ordinance which may be adopted on consent of a majority of the entire Council. Unless otherwise provided by law or by this
Charter, no ordinance shall become effective until the expiration of ten (10) days following the date of its final passage, except where an
ordinance relating to the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety and containing a statement of the nature of the emergency
is adopted as an emergency measure by a favorable vote of a majority of the entire Council.
SECTION 3.12 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCE.
Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the City Secretary shall give notice of the enactment of every penal ordinance and of
every other ordinance required by law or by this Charter to be published, by causing the said ordinance, or its caption and penalty, to be
published at least one (1) time within ten (10) days following the date of final passage thereof in some newspaper of general circulation within the
City. The City Secretary shall note on every ordinance and on the record thereof the dates and medium of its publication, and such notation shall
be prima facie evidence of compliance with the requirements of this section.
State law reference–Publication of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 52.013.
SECTION 3.13 OFFICIAL BONDS FOR CITY EMPLOYEES.
The City Manager, Director of Finance and such other City officers and employees as the City Council may require, shall, before entering upon
the duties of their offices, enter into a good and sufficient corporate surety bond in the sum to be determined by State law or by the City Council.
The bonds shall be payable to the City of Cuero and conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of such persons and upon the faithful
accounting of all monies, credits and things of value coming into the hands of such persons, and such bonds shall be signed as surety by a
corporate surety bond company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of Texas, and the premium on such bonds shall be paid by
the City of Cuero, and such bonds must be acceptable to the City Council. The City Council may also require new bonds at any time, if in its
opinion, the existing bond on any employee is insufficient.
State law reference–Official bonds, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 604.
SECTION 3.14 INVESTIGATION BY THE CITY COUNCIL.
The City Council shall, as a body, have the power to inquire into the official conduct of any officer, department, agency, or employee of the City
and to make investigations as to municipal affairs and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of
books, papers, and other evidence material to the inquiry. The Council shall provide by ordinance penalties for contempt in failing or refusing to
obey any such subpoena or to produce any such books, papers, or other evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such contempt in the
manner provided by ordinance. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize any Council member individually to inquire into or
investigate the official conduct of any office, department, agency, officer, or employee of the City or to investigate as to municipal affairs without
the express authorization of a majority of the entire Council. In the event it is found by the City Council that a Council member has inquired into
or investigated the official conduct of any office, department, agency, officer, or employee of the City or to investigate as to municipal affairs
without the express authorization of a majority of the entire Council, then that Council member shall be deemed to have violated this provision of
the Charter. The only exception to this provision would be an inquiry by a Council member for the sole purpose of obtaining information needed
by them in the normal discharge of their duties, including response to constituent requests.
SECTION 3.15 AUDIT AND EXAMINATION OF CITY BOOKS AND ACCOUNTS.
The City Council shall cause an annual audit to be made of the books and accounts of each and every department of the City. At the close of
each fiscal year a complete audit shall be made by a Certified Public Accountant, who shall be selected by the City Council, and who shall have
no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the City Government or of any of its officers. Such audit shall include a recapitulation
of all internal audits made during the course of each fiscal year, and all audit reports shall be filed with the City Council, shall be available for
public inspection, and shall be made a part of the archives of the City. Such accountant, so selected, shall not maintain or keep any of the City's
accounts or records.
State law reference–Audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 103.
ARTICLE IV
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES*
SECTION 4.01 CITY MANAGER.
A. Appointment and Qualifications:
The City Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall be the Chief administrative and executive officer of the City, and shall be responsible to
the City Council for the administration of all affairs of the City. He/she shall be chosen by the City Council solely on the basis of his/her executive
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/438
and administrative training, experience, and ability; and need not, when appointed, be a resident of the City of Cuero. No member of the City
Council shall, during the time for which he/she is elected, and for one (1) year thereafter, be appointed City Manager.
B. Term and Salary:
The City Manager shall not be appointed for a definite term, but may be removed at the will and pleasure of the City Council, by a vote of the
majority of the entire Council. The action of the City Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final, it being the intention of
this Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility of such suspension or removal, in the City Council.
C. Acting City Manager
In case of temporary absence or disability, the City Manager may designate by letter filed with the City Secretary a qualified administrative officer
of the City to perform the duties of the City Manager for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. In the event of failure of the City Manager to
make such designation or in event said designation exceeds thirty (30) days, the Council may by resolution appoint an officer of the City to
perform the duties of the City Manager, until he/she shall return or his/her disability shall cease. The City Manager shall receive compensation as
may be fixed by the Council.
D. Duties of the City Manager:
1. Appoint and remove an employee of the City.
2. Shall have the responsibility to select and evaluate annually the Department heads.
3. Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the City Council, and be responsible for its administration after adoption.
4. Prepare and submit to the City Council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative
activities of the City for the preceding year.
5. Keep the City Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations as may
seem desirable.
6. Perform such duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or may be required of him/her by the City Council, consistent with this
Charter.
7. Attend all meetings of the Council, except when he/she is under discussion, with the right to take part in the discussions, but
having no vote; and he/she shall be notified of all special meetings of the Council.
8. Promote partnerships among council, staff, and citizens in developing public policy and building a sense of community.
9. Keep a written inventory of all real property and all permanent equipment owned by the City, said inventory to be audited
annually. A system shall be established to control the use and accountability of all permanent, non-expendable equipment and the
use and replacement of expendable equipment, as well.
10. The City Manager may abolish or consolidate, subject to Council approval, such offices and departments as he/she may deem
to be in the best interest of the City, and may divide and sub-divide the administration of any such departments as he/she may deem
advisable; With council approval, the City Manager may create new departments and may discontinue any offices or departments at
his/her discretion, except those specifically established by this Charter.
SECTION 4.02 CITY SECRETARY.
The City Manager shall appoint a City Secretary and such Administrative Assistant as the City Manager deems advisable. The City Secretary
and any Administrative Assistant shall serve at the will and pleasure of the City Manager and shall be removed by the City Manager, with or
without cause. The City Secretary, or Administrative Assistant, shall give notice of Council meetings, shall keep the minutes of the proceedings of
such meetings, shall authenticate by his/her signature and record in full in a book kept and indexed for that purpose, all ordinances and
resolutions, and shall perform such other duties as the City Manager shall assign to him/her, and those elsewhere provided for in this Charter.
The City Manager will annually evaluate the City Secretary and such Administrative Assistants.
SECTION 4.03 MUNICIPAL COURT.
(a) There shall be established and maintained a court, designated the Municipal Court, for the trial of misdemeanors with all the powers and
duties that are now or may hereafter be prescribed by Law of the State of Texas relative to Municipal Courts.
(b) The City Council shall appoint a qualified Municipal Court Judge and a qualified Associate Judge who shall each serve a two (2) year term.
In the event the City Council does not make said appointment(s) to fill said judge position(s), the municipal judge or associate judge who is not
reappointed by the 91st day following the expiration of a term of office shall, absent action by the City Council, continue to serve for another term
of office beginning on the date the previous term of office expired. In the case of the disability or absence of the Municipal Court Judge, the
Associate Judge shall act as Judge of said municipal court. The Judge of said municipal court and Associate Judge shall receive such salary as
may be fixed by the City Council.
(c) There shall be a Clerk of said Court appointed by the City.
(d) The Clerk of said Court and his/her deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said
Court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual, and necessary to be performed, by the Clerks of Courts, in issuing process of
said Courts, and conducting the business thereof.
State law references–Municipal courts generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.001 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government
Code, sec. 29.003.
SECTION 4.04 CITY ATTORNEY.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/438
The City Council shall appoint a competent and duly qualified and licensed Attorney, practicing Law in the State of Texas, who shall be the
Attorney for the City (and may also be referred to as City Attorney). He/she shall receive for his/her services such compensation as may be fixed
by the City Council and shall hold his/her office at the pleasure of the City Council. The Attorney for the City, or such other attorneys selected by
him/her, with the approval of the City Council, shall represent the City in all litigation. He/she shall be the legal Advisor of, and Attorney and
counsel for, the City and all officers and departments thereof; provided, that the City Council may retain Special Counsel at any time they deem
same appropriate and necessary. At the discretion of said Council the City Attorney shall appear at its meeting. He/she shall prepare or review all
ordinances and advise the City Council of the same; He shall conduct all prosecutions in the Municipal Court.
State law reference–Appointment of municipal attorney, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 22.071.
ARTICLE V
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS*
SECTION 5.01 ELECTIONS.
The regular City Election shall be held annually on the second Saturday in May or at such other time as may be required by statute, at which
time persons shall be elected to fill those positions which become vacant that year. The City Council shall fix the places for holding such election.
The City Council may, by resolution, order a special election, fix the date and place for holding same, and provide all means for holding such
special election.
State law reference–Election dates, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 41.
SECTION 5.02 REGULATION OF ELECTIONS.
All elections shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas regulating the holding of municipal elections and in accordance with
the ordinances adopted by the City Council for the conduct of elections provided that the City Council shall appoint the election judges and other
election officials. Voting precincts shall be established by ordinance and may be altered from time to time in like manner.
SECTION 5.03 FILING FOR OFFICE.
Any qualified person who desires to become a candidate for election to a place on the City Council shall file with the City Secretary not later than
5:00 P.M. of the 45th day before the Election Day an application for a place on the ballot. Such application shall designate the place on the
Council to which the candidate seeks election and shall contain all the information required by Section 141.031 of the Texas Election Code and
amendments thereof. Those members of the City Council who have more than 12 months remaining on their term may file to run for the office of
Mayor on the City Council without resigning the seat presently held. Any vacancy created shall be filled according to Section 3.06 of this City
Charter.
State law reference–Candidate's application for home-rule city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 143.005.
SECTION 5.031 WRITE-IN CANDIDATES.
A declaration of write-in candidacy may be filed with the City Secretary not later than 5:00 P.M. on the 30th day before the municipal election day.
The declaration must contain all the information required for an application for a place on the ballot. A write-in vote may not be counted unless
the name written in is the name of a candidate who has timely filed a declaration of write-in candidacy. The City Secretary shall prepare a list
containing the name of each write-in candidate who has filed a declaration of write-in candidacy. Copies of the list shall be distributed to each
presiding judge with the other election supplies. A copy of the list shall be posted in each polling place.
State law reference–Write-in candidate in city election, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 146.051 et seq.
SECTION 5.04 THE OFFICIAL BALLOT.
The names of all candidates for office, except such as may have withdrawn, died, or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots
without party designation. The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates for each respective council place shall be determined by lot in a
drawing to be held under the supervision of the City Secretary, at which drawing each candidate or his named representative shall have a right to
be present. The candidate shall be notified of the time and place for drawing for the candidate order on the ballot as provided by the Texas
Election Code.
State law reference–Ballot form, content and preparation, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 52.
SECTION 5.05 ELECTION RESULTS.
At any regular or special municipal election the candidates in each place on the ballot who shall have received the greatest number of votes cast
in such election for such place shall be declared elected.
State law reference–Election by plurality, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 2.001 et seq.
SECTION 5.06 LAWS GOVERNING CITY ELECTIONS.
All City elections shall be governed by the Constitution of the State of Texas, general laws of the State, this Charter, and ordinances of the City,
in the order named.
State law reference–Applicability of Election Code, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 1.002.
SECTION 5.07 CONDUCTING AND CANVASSING ELECTIONS.
The returns of every municipal election shall be delivered by the election judges to the City Secretary not later than 12 hours after the closing of
the polls. Returns of the elections, general and special, shall be presented to the City Council on the first Wednesday next following said election
at which time the Council shall canvass and declare the results of such election.
State law reference–Canvassing elections, V.T.C.A., Election Code, ch. 67.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/438
SECTION 5.08 STATEMENT OF ELECTED OFFICER AND OATH OF OFFICE.
Before entering upon the duties of their respective office, the Mayor and Council Members shall take and subscribe to a statement of elected
officer and oath of office as required by the Constitution and the General laws of the State of Texas.
State constitution reference–Oath of office, Texas Constitution, art. 16, sec. 1.
SECTION 5.09 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
Any member of the City Council having a conflict of interest, pursuant to any State Laws or City Ordinances regulating conflicts of interest of
municipal officers, with an agenda item then before the Council, shall openly declare same before discussion proceeds, and is thereby prohibited
from participating in the discussion of the item or voting on the item.
State law references–Conflicts of interest of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 171; disclosure of certain relationships with local government
officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 176; public disclosure, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 553.
SECTION 5.10 CODE OF ETHICS.
The City Council shall have a Code of Ethics, pursuant to all Federal Laws, State Laws and Local Laws, governing the City Council which shall
include, but not limited to, the following: wrongful influence, wrongful interference, employees' political activities, penalties, conflict of interest,
acceptance of gifts, conduct of members, and confidential information.
ARTICLE VI
INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
SECTION 6.01 POWER OF INITIATIVE.
The people of the City reserve the power of direct legislation by initiative, and in the exercise of such power may propose any ordinance, except
ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes, or ordinances repealing ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes, not in conflict with
this Charter, the State Constitution, or the State Laws. Any initiated ordinance may be submitted to the Council by a petition signed by qualified
voters of the City equal in number to at least ten (10%) percent of the qualified voters voting in the last regular City election or two hundred fifty
(250) whichever is the greater.
SECTION 6.02 POWER OF REFERENDUM.
The people reserve the power to approve or reject at the polls any legislation enacted by the Council which is subject to the initiative process
under this Charter, except that ordinances authorizing the issuance of bonds (either tax bonds or revenue bonds), whether original or refunding
bonds, shall not be subject to such referendum. Prior to or within thirty (30) days after the effective date of any ordinance which is subject to
referendum a petition signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least ten (10%) percent of the qualified voters voting in the last
regular City election or two hundred fifty (250) whichever is the greater may be filed with the City Secretary requesting that any such ordinance
be either repealed or submitted to the vote of the people. When such a petition has been certified as sufficient by the City Secretary, the
ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action thereunder shall be suspended if it shall have gone into effect, until
and unless it is approved by the voters as herein provided.
SECTION 6.03 FORM OF PETITIONS.
Initiation petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed legislation in the form of an ordinance, including a descriptive caption.
Referendum petition papers shall contain a sufficient description of the ordinance sought to be referred to identify it, or if the ordinance has been
passed by the Council, the full text of the ordinance sought to be referred shall be included in such papers. The signatures to the initiative or
referendum petitions need not be all appended to one (1) paper, but each signer shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil, together with a
notation showing his/her residence address. No signature shall be counted where there is reason to believe it is not the actual signature of the
purported signer or that it is a duplication either of name or of handwriting used in any other signature on the petition, and no signature shall be
counted unless the residence address of the signer is shown, or unless it is signed exactly as the name of the voter appears on the official copy
of the current list of exempt voters. Before signatures on any petition paper may be counted one (1) of the signers of such petition paper, a
qualified voter, shall make oath before the City Secretary or any other officer competent to administer oaths, that the statements made therein
are true, that each signature to the paper appended is the genuine signature of the person whose name purports to be signed thereto, and that
such signatures were placed thereon in his/her presence.
SECTION 6.04 FILING, EXAMINATION AND CERTIFICATION OF PETITIONS.
Within thirty (30) days after an initiative or referendum petition is filed, the City Secretary shall determine whether the same is properly signed by
the requisite number of qualified voters. The City Secretary shall declare void any petition paper which does not have an affidavit attached
thereto as required in Section 6.03 of this Article. In examining the petition the Secretary shall write the letters “D.V” in red ink opposite the
names of the signers found not qualified. After completing examination of this petition the Secretary shall certify the result thereof to the Council
at its next regular meeting. If the certificate of the City Secretary shall show an initiative or referendum petition to be insufficient, the Secretary
shall notify the person filing the petition, and it may be amended within ten (10) days from the date of such notice by filing a supplementary
petition upon additional papers signed and filed as provided for in the original petition. Within thirty (30) days after such amendment is filed, the
Secretary shall examine the amended petition and certify as to its sufficiency. If the amended petition is then found to be insufficient no further
proceedings shall be had with regard to it.
SECTION 6.05 COUNCIL CONSIDERATION AND SUBMISSION TO VOTERS.
When the Council receives an authorized initiative petition certified by the City Secretary to be sufficient, the Council shall either:
A. pass the initiated ordinance without amendment within thirty (30) days after the date of the certification to the Council; or
B. submit said initiated ordinance without amendments to a vote of the qualified voters of the City at a regular or special election to
be held within ninety (90) days after the date of the certification to the Council; or
C. at such election submit to a vote of the qualified voters of the City said initiated ordinance without amendment, and an
alternative ordinance on the same subject proposed by the Council; the voters being given the opportunity to accept either or reject
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/438
both.
When the Council receives an authorized referendum petition certified by the City Secretary to be sufficient, the Council shall reconsider the
referred ordinance, and if upon such reconsideration such ordinance is not repealed within thirty (30) days, it shall be submitted to the qualified
voters of the City at a regular or special election to be held not more than ninety (90) days after date of the certification to the Council. Special
elections on initiated or referred ordinances shall not be held more frequently than once each six months, and no ordinance on the same subject
as an initiated ordinance which has been defeated or on the same subject as a referred ordinance which has been approved at any election may
be initiated by the voters within two (2) years from the date of such election.
SECTION 6.06 RESULTS OF ELECTIONS.
Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election in accordance with the provisions of this Article. If a majority of the legal votes
cast is in favor of an initiated ordinance, it shall thereupon be effective as an ordinance of the City. An ordinance so adopted may be repealed or
amended at any time after the expiration of two (2) years by a vote of three fourths (3/4) of the Council members qualified and serving. A referred
ordinance which is reflected by a majority of the legal votes cast in a referendum election shall be deemed thereupon repealed.
SECTION 6.07 POWER OF RECALL.
The people of the City reserve the power to recall any elected officer of the City of Cuero. Such power may be exercised by filing with the City
Secretary a petition demanding the removal of such elected officer. In the case of the Mayor or a Council member elected at large, the petition
must be signed by at least ten percent (10%) of the number of qualified voters voting in the last regular City election for all candidates for such
office OR by two hundred fifty (250) qualified voters, whichever number is greater. In the case of a Council member elected from a singlemember
district the petition must be signed by at least ten percent (10%) of the number of qualified voters from that single-member district voting
in the last regular City election for all candidates for such office or by seventy-five (75) qualified voters, whichever number is greater. Only
residents of the single-member district may sign a petition seeking recall of a Council member elected from a single-member district.
SECTION 6.08 RECALL ELECTION.
The provisions regulating examination, certification and amendments of initiative petitions shall apply to recall petitions. If the petition is certified
by the City Secretary to be sufficient, the Council shall order and hold an election forthwith to determine whether such officer shall be recalled.
SECTION 6.09 RESULTS OF RECALL ELECTION.
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be against removal of the City Council Member named on the ballot, he/she shall continue
in office. If the majority of the votes cast at such election be for the removal of the City Council Member named on the ballot, the Council shall
immediately declare his office vacant and such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of this Charter for the filling of vacancies.
A City Council Member thus removed shall not be a candidate to succeed himself/herself in an election called to fill the vacancy thereby created.
SECTION 6.10 LIMITATION ON RECALL.
No recall petition shall be filed against a City Council Member within six months after he/she takes office, and no City Council Member shall be
subject to more than one (1) recall election during a term of office.
ARTICLE VII
MUNICIPAL PLANNING AND ZONING*
SECTION 7.01 PLANNING COMMISSION.
The Council shall appoint a City Planning Commission consisting of not less than five (5) nor more than seven (7) members who shall be
residents of and/or own real property in the City, and shall serve without compensation.
SECTION 7.02 TERM OF OFFICE.
Members shall be appointed by the City Council for a three (3) year term with one-third (1/3) to be appointed each year on a continuing basis.
SECTION 7.03 VACANCIES.
Vacancies occurring in the commission shall be filled within thirty (30) days by the Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. Membership
shall be accompanied by active participation in the activities of the commission, and any member, who is absent three (3) consecutive regular
meetings, shall automatically be dropped from membership and the commission shall immediately notify the Council that a vacancy exists.
SECTION 7.04 ORGANIZATION.
The commission shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary from its membership annually, and shall establish rules of procedure which
shall include the following:
A. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the membership and an affirmative vote of a majority of the membership shall be
necessary to pass upon pending questions.
B. The chairman shall be entitled to vote upon any question unless a conflict of interest is involved.
C. Minutes shall be kept of the proceedings of the commission and shall be a public record.
D. All meetings shall be open to the public. Upon any matter being submitted to the Commission for consideration, said
Commission shall hold a meeting within 30 days to consider same unless otherwise provided by law.
SECTION 7.05 POWERS AND DUTIES.
The commission shall have the power and be required to:
A. Be responsible to and act as an advisory body to the Council;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/438
B. Recommend to the City Council, amendments, extensions, and additions to a master plan for physical development of the City;
C. Recommend to the Council approval or disapproval of proposed changes in the zoning plan;
D. Review all plans for platting or sub-dividing of land within the City and within adjacent areas as permitted by law and submit
findings and recommendations to the Council;
E. Require information from the other departments of the City government in relation to its work;
F. Perform such other duties and be vested with such other powers as the Council may prescribe in accordance with the Laws of
the State of Texas.
SECTION 7.06 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Any member of the Planning & Zoning Commission having a conflict of interest, pursuant to any State Laws or City Ordinance regulating conflict
of interest of appointed city boards with an agenda item then before the Planning & Zoning Commission shall openly declare same before
discussion proceeds, and is thereby prohibited from participating in the discussion of the item or voting on the item.
ARTICLE VIII
FINANCIAL PROCEDURE*
SECTION 8.01 FISCAL YEAR.
The fiscal year of the City of Cuero shall begin on the first day of October and shall end on the last day of September of each calendar year.
Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year.
State law references–Power to establish fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 101.022; city fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 1.05.
SECTION 8.02 PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF BUDGET.
The City Manager, between sixty (60) and ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, shall submit to the Council a proposed
budget, which budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year, and shall contain the following:
A. A budget message, explanatory of the budget, which message shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of the
City for the ensuing fiscal year, shall set forth the reasons for salient changes from the previous fiscal year in expenditure and revenue
items, and shall explain any major changes in financial policy.
B. A consolidated statement of anticipated receipts and proposed expenditures for all funds.
C. An analysis of property valuations.
D. An analysis of tax rate.
E. Tax levies and tax collections by years for the five (5) preceding years.
F. General fund resources in detail.
G. Summary of proposed expenditures by function, department, and activity.
H. Detailed estimates of expenditures shown separately for each activity to support summary (H) [(G)] above.
I. A revenue and expense statement for all types of bonds.
J. A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount authorized, amount
issued and amount outstanding.
K. A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest of each issue of bonds.
State law references–Annual budget required, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.002; itemized budget and contents, V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, sec. 102.003.
SECTION 8.03 ANTICIPATED REVENUE COMPARED WITH OTHER YEARS IN BUDGET.
In preparing the budget, the City Manager shall place in parallel columns opposite the several items of revenue: the actual amount of each item
for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year.
SECTION 8.04 PROPOSED EXPENDITURES COMPARED WITH OTHER YEARS.
The City Manager in the preparation of the budget shall place in parallel columns opposite the various items of expenditures: the actual amount
of such items of expenditures for the last completed budget year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year and the proposed amount for
the ensuing fiscal year.
SECTION 8.05 BUDGET A PUBLIC RECORD.
The budget and all supporting schedules shall be filed with the person performing the duties of City Secretary, submitted to the City Council and
shall be a public record. The City Manager shall provide copies for distribution to all interested persons.
State law reference–Proposed budget filed with municipal clerk and public inspection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.005.
SECTION 8.06 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ON BUDGET.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/438
At the meeting of the City Council at which the budget is submitted, the City Council shall fix the time and place of public hearing on the budget
and shall cause to be published in one (1) or more newspapers of general circulation in the City of Cuero a general summary of the proposed
budget and a notice of the hearing setting forth the time and place thereof at least ten (10) days before the day of such hearing but not more than
30 days before the date of the hearing.
State law reference–Special notice by publication for budget hearing, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.0065.
SECTION 8.07 PUBLIC HEARING ON BUDGET.
At the City Council meeting when the proposed budget is submitted, the City Council shall set the dates and place of one (1) public hearing and
shall publish in the official newspaper of the City, (1) in accordance with state law, the time and place of such public hearing, which will be not
less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the date of notice and (2) a general summary of the proposed budget. At this hearing,
interested citizens may express their opinions concerning items in the budget.
State law reference–Public hearing on proposed budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.006.
SECTION 8.08 PROCEEDINGS ON BUDGET AFTER PUBLIC HEARING.
As a result of such public hearing, the City Council may insert new items or may increase or decrease the items of the budget, except items in
proposed expenditures fixed by law, but where it shall increase the total proposed expenditures, it shall also provide for an increase in the total
anticipated revenue to at least equal such proposed expenditures.
SECTION 8.09 VOTE REQUIRED FOR ADOPTION.
The budget shall be adopted by the favorable vote of a majority of the members of the whole City Council. The budget (appropriation) ordinance
and tax levying ordinance shall also be adopted by the favorable vote of a majority of the members of the whole City Council.
State law reference–Adoption of budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.007.
SECTION 8.10 DATE [OF] FINAL ADOPTION.
The budget shall be finally adopted not later than September 30 of the fiscal year, and should the City Council fail to so adopt a budget, the
existing budget together with its tax-levying ordinance and its appropriation ordinance, shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year.
SECTION 8.11 EFFECTIVE DATE OF BUDGET; CERTIFICATION; COPIES MADE AVAILABLE.
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the fiscal year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the person
performing the duties of City Secretary and such other officials as may be designated by law. The final budget shall be printed, or otherwise
reproduced and copies thereof shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments and agencies and for the use of interested persons
and civic organizations.
State law reference–Approved budget filed with municipal clerk, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.008.
SECTION 8.12 BUDGET ESTABLISHES APPROPRIATIONS.
From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the
several objects and purposes therein named.
SECTION 8.13 BUDGET ESTABLISHES AMOUNT TO BE RAISED BY PROPERTY TAX.
From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the
amount of the levy for the purposes of the City in the corresponding tax year; provided, however, that in no event shall such levy exceed the legal
limit provided by the laws and constitution of the State of Texas.
SECTION 8.14 CONTINGENT APPROPRIATION.
Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a contingent appropriation in amount not more than three
percent (3%) of the total budget, to be used in case of unforeseen items of expenditure. Such contingent appropriation shall be under the control
of the City Manager and distributed by him/her, after approval of the City Council. Expenditures from this appropriation shall be made only in
case of established emergencies and a detailed account of such expenditures shall be recorded and reported.
SECTION 8.15 ESTIMATED EXPENDITURES SHALL NOT EXCEED ESTIMATED RESOURCES.
The total estimated expenditures of the general fund and debt service fund shall not exceed the total estimated resources of each fund
(prospective income plus cash on hand). The classification of revenue and expenditure accounts shall conform as nearly as local conditions will
permit to the uniform classification as promulgated by the National Committee on Governmental Accounting or some other nationally accepted
classification.
SECTION 8.16 OTHER NECESSARY APPROPRIATIONS.
The City budget may be amended and appropriations altered in accordance therewith in cases of public necessity, the actual fact of which shall
have been declared by the City Council.
SECTION 8.17 PURCHASE PROCEDURE.
All purchases made and contracts executed by the City shall be pursuant to a requisition from the head of the office, department or agency
whose appropriation will be charged and no contract or order shall be binding upon the City unless and until the City Manager certifies that there
is to the credit of such office, department or agency a sufficient unencumbered appropriation and an allotment balance to pay for the supplies,
materials, equipment or contractual services for which the contract or order is to be issued. Before the City makes any purchase or contract for
supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services, opportunity shall be given for competition. The Council may by ordinance confer upon the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/438
City Manager general authority to contract for expenditures without further approval of the Council for all budgeted items with a cost to the City
that is less than legal dollar amount for which mandatory competitive bidding is required as prescribed by law.
Editor's note–Section 2.09.002 of the Code of Ordinances provides that Local Government Code section 252.002 supersedes section 8.17 of the charter.
ARTICLE IX
BORROWING FOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS*
SECTION 9.01 POWER TO BORROW.
The City of Cuero shall have the right and power to borrow money on the credit of the City for permanent public improvements or for any other
public purpose not prohibited by the Constitution or Statutes of the State of Texas. The City shall also have the power to borrow money against
the revenues of any municipally-owned utility and to mortgage the physical properties of such utilities in payment of such debt. In no event,
however, shall revenue bonds be considered an indebtedness of the City nor repaid with funds secured by taxation.
SECTION 9.02 BOND REGISTER.
The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare, maintain and cause to be filed in his/her office a complete bond register, showing all bonds, the date
and amount thereof, the rate of interest, a schedule of maturity dates and a record of all bonds and all other transactions of the City Council
having reference to the refunding of any indebtedness of the City of Cuero. When bonds or their coupons are paid, their payment or cancellation
shall be noted in the register.
SECTION 9.03 MISAPPLICATION APPLICATION OF BOND FUNDS.
Any officer or employee of the City of Cuero who shall willfully or knowingly divert or use any funds arising from the issuance of any bond or
sinking fund for any other purpose than that for which the fund is created or as herein otherwise authorized, shall be subject to prosecution as
provided by the Laws of the State of Texas on the diversion and conversion of funds belonging to any other municipalities of the State of Texas.
ARTICLE X
TAX ADMINISTRATION
The City shall have the power to levy, assess, and collect taxes as may be provided by the Constitution of Texas, the Texas Tax Code, and other
applicable laws of the State of Texas.
ARTICLE XI
FRANCHISE AND PUBLIC UTILITIES*
SECTION 11.01 POWERS OF THE CITY.
In addition to the City's power to buy, construct, lease, maintain, operate, and regulate public utilities and to manufacture, distribute, and sell the
output of such utility operations, the City shall have such further powers as may now or thereafter be granted under the Constitution and Laws of
the State of Texas.
SECTION 11.02 POWER TO GRANT FRANCHISE.
The council shall have the power, by ordinance, to grant, renew, extend and amend by mutual agreement, all franchises of all public utilities of
every character operating with [within] the City. No franchise shall be for an indeterminate period, and no franchise shall be granted for a term of
more than fifteen (15) years from the date of the grant, renewal or extension.
SECTION 11.03 GRANT NOT TO BE EXCLUSIVE.
No grant or [of] franchise to construct, maintain, or operate a public utility and no renewal or extension of any such grant shall be exclusive.
SECTION 11.04 ORDINANCE GRANTING FRANCHISE.
All ordinances granting, renewing, extending or amending a public utility franchise shall be read at three (3) separate meetings of the Council,
and shall not be finally passed until thirty (30) days after the first reading; and not [no] such ordinance shall take effect until thirty (30) days after
its final passage; and the full text of such ordinance shall be published once, within fifteen (15) days following the first reading, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the prospective franchise holder.
SECTION 11.05 TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
No public utility franchise shall be transferable except with the approval of the Council expressed by ordinance.
SECTION 11.06 FRANCHISE VALUE NOT TO BE ALLOWED.
No value shall be assigned to any franchise granted by the City in fixing reasonable rates and charges for utility service within the City and in
determining the just compensation to be paid by the City for public utility property which it may acquire by condemnation or otherwise.
SECTION 11.07 RIGHT OF REGULATION.
Every grant, renewal, extension or amendment of a public utility franchise, whether so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the
right of the Council:
A. To forfeit any such franchise by ordinance at any time for the failure of holder thereof to comply with the terms of the franchise,
such power to be exercised only after notice and hearing, and an opportunity to correct the default.
B. To require such expansion and extension of plant and facilities as are necessary to provide adequate service to the public and
maintain plant and fixtures at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency.
C. To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/438
D. To impose regulations to insure safe, efficient and continuous service to the public. In opening and refilling of all openings made
by franchise holder, it shall re-lay the pavement and do all other work necessary to complete restoration of streets, sidewalks or
grounds to a condition equally as good or better than before it was disturbed.
E. To examine and audit at any time during regular business hours the accounts and records of any such utility which are relevant
to the City's right of regulation.
F. To prescribe the form of accounts kept by each such utility; provided, that if the utility shall keep its accounts in accordance with
the uniform system of accounts for said utility prescribed by the National Association of Railroad and Public Utility Commissioners, the
Federal Power Commission, the Federal Communications Commission, or the Railroad Commission of Texas, their successor, or
successors, this shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this paragraph.
G. To require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the Laws of the State of Texas.
SECTION 11.08 PUBLIC SERVICE CORPORATIONS TO FILE ANNUAL REPORTS.
It shall be the duty of the City Council to pass an ordinance requiring all public service corporations operating within the corporate limits of the
City to file a sworn annual report of the receipts from the operation of the said business for the current year, how expended, how much thereof for
betterment or improvements, the rate of tolls or charges for services rendered to the public, and any other facts or information that the Council
may deem pertinent for its use in intelligently passing upon any questions that may arise between the City and the said public service
corporations; said reports to be filed with the City Secretary, and preserved for the use of the City Council. Such reports shall be reviewed
annually by the Council to determine the propriety of the rates being charged.
SECTION 11.09 REGULATION OF RATES.
The Council shall have full power, after notice and hearing, to regulate by ordinance, the rates of every public utility operating in the City provided
that no such ordinance shall be passed as an emergency measure; shall have the [power to] employ expert advice and assistance in determining
a rate and equitable profit to the public utility; and shall have the power to require within the franchise grant, or any extension or renewal thereof,
or as a condition precedent to any hearing concerning rates and service of any public utility operating within the City, that the public utility
seeking the rate or service change pay the cost of such expert advice and assistance as chosen and deemed necessary by the Council.
SECTION 11.10 MUNICIPALLY OWNED UTILITIES.
Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City, in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of
such City ownership and operation, including all assets and all liabilities, appropriately subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other
reserves and surplus; also revenues, operating expenses including depreciation, interest payments, rental and other disposition of annual
income. The accounts shall show actual capital cost to the City of each utility owned. The accounts shall show as nearly as possible the cost of
any service furnished to or rendered by any such utility to any city department. The Council shall cause an annual report to be made by a
Certified Public Accountant and shall publish such report showing the financial results of such City ownership and operation, giving the
information specified in this section and such other data as the Council shall require.
SECTION 11.11 SALES OF MUNICIPAL SERVICES.
A. The City Council shall have the power and authority to sell and distribute electricity and water and to sell and provide for sewer services,
and any other utilities to any person, firm or corporation outside the limits of the City of Cuero, and to permit them to connect with said system
under contract with the City, under such terms and conditions as may appear to be for the best interests of the City; provided the charges fixed
for such services outside the City Limits shall be reasonable when considered in the light of all circumstances, to be determined by the City
Council.
B. The City Council shall have the power and authority to prescribe the kind of materials used within or beyond the limits of the City of Cuero
where it furnishes the service, and to inspect the same and require them to be kept in good order and condition at all times and to make such
rules and regulations as shall be necessary and proper, and prescribe penalties for non-compliance with same.
ARTICLE XII
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 12.01 PUBLICITY OF RECORDS.
All records and accounts of every office, department, or agency of the City shall be open to inspection by any citizen or by any representative of
the press at all reasonable times and under such reasonable regulations as may be established by the City Council or the Mayor, except records
and documents the disclosure of which would tend to defeat the lawful purposes which they are intended to accomplish.
State law references–Public access to records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 201.009; public information, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 552.
SECTION 12.011 PROCEDURE OF BOARDS, COMMITTEES, AND COMMISSIONS.
All boards, committees, and commissions appointed by the City Council shall conduct their business in open meetings except in cases where
closed meetings are permitted by law. Each such board, committee, and commission shall determine by resolution its own rules of procedure
and order of business. Accurate minutes shall be kept of all meetings of such boards, committees, and commissions and shall constitute a public
record of such meetings.
State law reference–Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551.
SECTION 12.02 PERSONAL INTEREST.
No officer or employee of the City shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the City, nor shall be financially interested,
directly or indirectly, in the sale to the City of any land, or right or interest in any land, materials, supplies or service. The above provision shall not
apply where the interest is represented by ownership of stock in a corporation involved, provided such stock ownership amounts to less than
10% of the corporation stock. Any violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any office, and any officer or employee of
the City found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the
person or corporation contracting with the City shall render the contract voidable by the City Manager or the City Council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/438
State law references–Conflicts of interest of officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 171; disclosure of certain relationships with local government
officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 176.
SECTION 12.03 NEPOTISM.
The City of Cuero shall be subject to the provisions of Article 5996(a), Texas Revised Civil Statutes, and amendments thereof, relating to
nepotism.
State law reference–Nepotism, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 573.
SECTION 12.04 PROVISIONS RELATING TO ASSIGNMENT, EXECUTION AND GARNISHMENT.
The property, real and personal, belonging to the City shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ or execution or cost bill. The
funds belonging to the City, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor
shall the City be liable to garnishment on accounts of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person.
Neither the City nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The City shall
not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or contractors.
State law references–Authority relating to property, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 51.076; authority to provide that municipal funds not subject to
garnishment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 101.023.
SECTION 12.05 CITY NOT REQUIRED TO GIVE SECURITY OR EXECUTE BOND.
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City of Cuero is a party, for any bond, undertaking, or security to be
demanded or executed by or on behalf of said city in any of the State Courts, but in all such actions, suits, appeals, or proceedings same shall be
conducted in the same manner as it such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required by law.
State law reference–Cities exempt from security for court costs, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, sec. 6.002.
SECTION 12.06 SPECIAL PROVISIONS COVERING DAMAGE SUITS.
Before the City shall be liable to damage claim or suit for personal injury, or damage to property, the person who is injured or whose property is
damaged or someone in his/her behalf shall give the City Manager or the person performing the duties of City Secretary, notice in writing, duly
verified, after the occurrence of the alleged injury, or damage, stating specifically in such notice when, where and how the injury or damage was
sustained and setting forth the extent of the injury or damage as accurately as possible. No action at law for damages for personal injury or
property damage shall be brought against the City prior to the expiration of thirty (30) days after the said notice has been filed with the City
Manager or person performing the duties of City Secretary no later than one (1) year after the occurrence of the injury or damage. In case of
injuries resulting in death, before the City shall be liable in damages therefor the person or persons claiming such damages shall after the death
of the injured person give notice as above required in case of personal injury. Provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be
construed to mean that the City of Cuero waives any right, privileges, defenses or immunities in tort actions which are provided under the
common law, the constitution and general laws of the State of Texas.
State law references–Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, ch. 101; notice procedures, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies
Code, sec. 101.101.
SECTION 12.07 SEPARABILITY CLAUSE.
If any section or part of section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the
remainder of this Charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire
section or part of section may be inseparable connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall
directly apply.
SECTION 12.08 EFFECT OF THIS CHARTER ON EXISTING LAW.
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force under the City Government of Cuero and not in conflict with the provisions of this
Charter, shall remain in force under this Charter until altered, amended or repealed by the Council after this Charter takes effect; and all rights of
the City of Cuero under existing franchise and contracts are preserved in full force and effect to the City of Cuero.
SECTION 12.09 APPLICABILITY OF GENERAL LAWS.
The Constitution of the State of Texas, the statutes of said State applicable to Home-Ruled Municipal Corporations, as now or hereafter enacted,
this Charter and ordinances enacted pursuant hereto shall, in order mentioned, be applicable to the City of Cuero, but the City shall also have
the power to exercise any and all powers conferred by the laws of the State of Texas upon any other kind of city, town or village, not contrary to
the provisions of said home-rule statutes, Charter and ordinances, but the exercise of any such powers by the City of Cuero shall be optional
with it, and it shall not be required to conform to the law governing any other cities, towns or villages unless and until by ordinance it adopts
same.
SECTION 12.10 AMENDING THE CHARTER.
Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the City in the manner provided by Chapter 13 of Title 28 of the
Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as now or hereafter amended.
The City Council shall appoint a Charter Review Commission to review the charter at least every five years or sooner if necessary. The
Commission shall consist of seven (7) citizens from the City of Cuero, with each single member district within the City having at least one (1)
appointed member on the Commission. City Council Members that represent a single member district shall submit a name from their respective
single member district's electorate. The Mayor and At-Large City Council Members shall each submit a name to be placed on the Commission
from any District.
A. Duties of the Commission:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/438
1. Inquire into the operation of the City Government under the Charter provisions and determine whether any such provisions
require revision. To this end public hearings may be held; and the Commission shall have the power to compel the attendance of
any officer or employee of the City and to require the submission of any of the City records which it may deem necessary to the
conduct of such hearing.
2. Propose any recommendations it may deem desirable to insure compliance with the provisions of the Charter by the
several departments of the City government.
3. Propose, if it deems desirable, amendments to this charter to improve the effective application of said Charter to current
conditions.
4. Report its finding and present its proposed amendments, if any, to the City Council.
B. Action by the City Council:
The City Council shall receive and have published in a newspaper of general circulation published in Cuero any report
presented by the Charter Review Commission, shall consider any recommendations made, and if any amendments be
presented as a part of such report, may order such amendment or amendments to be submitted to the voters of the City in
the manner provided by Chapter 13 of Title 28 of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as now or hereafter amended.
C. Term of office:
The term of office of such Charter Review Commission shall be six months, and, if during such term no report is presented
to the City Council, then all records of the proceedings of such Commission shall be filed with the person performing the
duties of the City Secretary and shall become a public record.
State law reference–Adoption or amendment of charter, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 9.001 et seq.
SECTION 12.11 RE-ARRANGEMENT AND RENUMBERING OF CHARTER PROVISIONS.
The City Council may, without approval of the voters, adopt an ordinance that corrects scrivener's errors in spelling, grammar, cross-references,
punctuation and provides gender neutral language where applicable. A revision adopted under this section is not intended to and is not to be
interpreted as making any substantive change in any charter provision. A copy of said ordinance thereof, certified by the City Secretary shall be
forwarded to the Secretary of State for filing.
SECTION 12.12 SUBMISSION OF CHARTER TO VOTERS.
The Charter Commission in preparing this Charter finds and decides that it is impracticable to segregate each subject so as to permit a vote of
“yes” or “no” on the same, for the reason that the Charter is so constructed that in order to enable it to work and function it is necessary that it
should be adopted in its entirety. For these reasons, the Charter Commission directs that the said Charter be voted upon as a whole and that it
shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City of Cuero at an election to be held for that purpose. Not less than thirty (30) days prior to such
election, the City Council shall cause the City Secretary to mail a copy of this charter to each qualified voter of the City of Cuero as appears from
the latest tax collector's roll. If a majority of the qualified voters voting in such election shall vote in favor of the adoption of this charter, it shall
become the Charter of the City of Cuero, and after the returns have been canvassed, the same shall be declared adopted and the City Secretary
shall file an official copy of the Charter with the records of the City. The Secretary shall furnish the Mayor a copy of said Charter, which copy of
the Charter so adopted, authenticated and certified by his signature and the seal of the City, shall be forwarded by the Mayor to the Secretary of
State of the State of Texas and shall show the approval of such Charter by majority vote of the qualified voters voting at such election.
We, the undersigned members of the Cuero Charter Commission heretofore duly appointed to prepare a Charter for the City of Cuero, Texas, do
hereby certify that this publication constitutes a true copy of the proposed Charter for the City of Cuero, Texas, as unanimously adopted by the
members thereof.
Charles Riebschlaeger Herbert Dornbluth
Walter Richter Dr. John C. Davis
Dewey Henderson Nathan Post
C.P. Ernster Errol J. Dietze
Jimmy Crain Mrs. E. H. Nielsen
J. J. Fischer, Jr. Allen L. Dietze
Henry F. Sheppard
As amended by Charter Amendment Election held in the year 1993.
As amended by Charter Amendment Election held in the year 2001.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/438
As amended by Charter Amendment Election held in the year 2009.
As amended by Charter Amendment Election held in the year 2011.
As amended by Charter Amendment Election held in the year 2014.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Cuero, Texas, as compiled, edited and published by Franklin Legal Publishing,
Inc. (Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated the “Code of
Ordinances, City of Cuero, Texas,” and may be so cited. (1994 Code, sec. 10.01; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the article,
division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions
and sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the
catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (1994 Code, sec. 10.04; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
(a) In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed,
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated.
City and town. Each means the City of Cuero, Texas.
City administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city administrator,” “city manager,” “city secretary,”
“chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be construed to mean the city administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or
such other municipal officer or department, respectively, of the City of Cuero, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to
include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of the City of Cuero, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of DeWitt, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act
or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform
the act or duty unless the terms of the provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and
corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/438
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and
in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in
current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships, organizations, business trusts, estates,
trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
State law reference–“Preceding” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of
pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, recessed parking
areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(b) Rules under state law. Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and
application shall govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
(c) Technical words and phrases. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and
phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
(d) Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, such requisite shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized agent or deputy.
(e) General term following enumeration of terms. A general term following a specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class
enumerated unless expressly so limited.
(1994 Code, secs. 10.02, 10.05, 10.06, 10.11, 10.12(B); Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/438
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences,
paragraphs and sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of any
such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (1994 Code, sec. 10.07; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
(a) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(b) No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its
repeal shall in any wise be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
(c) The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has
been previously repealed.
(1994 Code, sec. 10.16; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or presented to the city council for
enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code
shall be made by reference to the chapter and section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation
of chapter, article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of such ordinances.
(1966 Code, General Provisions, sec. 4; 1994 Code, secs. 10.17, 10.19; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city
council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted
by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement
shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially
obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption
of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by omission
thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the
supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is
necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions of the code printed in the
supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to
accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,” “this section,” “this subsection,”
etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance material inserted into the code,
but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already
embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful,
and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of
not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation,
including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(c) A person convicted of an offense under title 7, subtitle C, Transportation Code (the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways) for which
another penalty is not provided shall be punished by a fine of not less than one dollar ($1.00) or more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus
such other penalties and costs as may be provided by such subtitle C.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/438
(d) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that does not
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any
such offense. Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that
exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(e) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state.
(f) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
(g) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such nuisance may be summarily abated
by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and
revocation of licenses or permits.
(1994 Code, sec. 10.99; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec.
12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
Sec. 1.01.010 Applicability to future ordinances
All provisions of this article compatible with future legislation shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided. (1994 Code, sec. 10.03)
Sec. 1.01.011 References to other sections
Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or
revision. (1994 Code, sec. 10.08)
Sec. 1.01.012 References to offices
Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. (1994
Code, sec. 10.09)
Sec. 1.01.013 Errors and omissions
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or
words was clearly intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as
will conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as
originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of such error. (1994 Code, sec.
10.10)
Sec. 1.01.014 Reasonable time
In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice. (1994 Code, sec.
10.12(A))
Sec. 1.01.015 Ordinances repealed by adoption of code
This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this code. (1994 Code, sec. 10.13)
Sec. 1.01.016 Ordinances unaffected by adoption of code
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force
and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication. (1994 Code, sec. 10.14)
Sec. 1.01.017 Effective date of ordinances
All ordinances passed by the city council requiring publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided. (1994 Code,
sec. 10.15)
ARTICLE 1.02 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.02.001 National Incident Management System (NIMS) adopted
(a) Findings.
(1) On February 28, 2003, the President issued Homeland Security Presidential Directive HSPD-5 that directed the Department of
Homeland Security, in cooperation with representatives of federal, state, and local government, to develop a National Incident
Management System (NIMS) to provide a consistent approach to the effective management of situations involving natural disasters,
man-made disasters or terrorism;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/438
(2) The final NIMS was released on March 1, 2004;
(3) The NIMS contains a practice model for the accomplishment of the significant responsibilities associated with prevention,
preparedness, responses, recovery, and mitigation of all major and national hazards situations; and
(4) The city council desires to adopt the NIMS as required by HSPD-5.
(b) The city hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) dated March 1, 2004.
(1994 Code, sec. 38.10; Ordinance 2005-08 adopted 7/7/05)
Secs. 1.02.002–1.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Emergency Management Program
Sec. 1.02.031 Powers and duties of emergency management director
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law.
(1) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director;
(2) The director shall be responsible for conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for
carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in subsection (c) of this section. He may delegate authority for execution of these
duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for the execution shall remain with the director.
(b) The powers and duties of the director shall include an ongoing survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property
within the city, and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to
prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of the hazards if a disaster did occur. As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the director
shall supervise the development of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend the plan for adoption by the city council
along with any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of the emergency management plan.
The powers of the director shall include the authority to declare a state of disaster, but the action may be subject to confirmation by the city
council at its next meeting. The duties of the director shall also include the causing of a survey of the availability of existing personnel,
equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein, as well as a continuing study of the need for
amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan.
(c) The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the county emergency management organization, as well as the
training of emergency management personnel.
(2) The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization
of the city.
(3) The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, federal, or other emergency
management organizations.
(4) The marshaling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for above, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from
any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(5) The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of
the city emergency management plan.
(6) The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city.
The rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity unless publicity would
be of aid and comfort to the enemy.
(7) The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and
of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county
in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency
management efforts.
(8) The supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance
of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city.
(9) The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other
purposes.
(1966 Code, ch. 3.0, art. I, secs. 1, 2, 4; Ordinance 83-24 adopted 12/1/83; 1994 Code, sec. 38.01)
Sec. 1.02.032 Emergency management council; interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an emergency
management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in
the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of
emergency management insofar as the program may affect the city. (1966 Code, ch. 3.0, art. I, sec. 3; Ordinance 83-24 adopted 12/1/83; 1994
Code, sec. 38.02)
Sec. 1.02.033 Operational organization
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/438
The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the
director in the emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be
distributed among the officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. The plan shall set forth the form
of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to
carry out the provisions of this division. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations
of the state division of emergency management and of the federal government. (1966 Code, ch. 3.0, art. I, sec. 5; Ordinance 83-24 adopted
12/1/83; 1994 Code, sec. 38.03)
Sec. 1.02.034 Oath of personnel
Each employee or any individual that is assigned a function or responsibility shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the
Constitution of the United States, laws of the state, and this code and other ordinances of the city. (1966 Code, ch. 3.0, art. I, sec. 12; Ordinance
83-24 adopted 12/1/83; 1994 Code, sec. 38.04)
Sec. 1.02.035 Liability
This division is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety, and neither the city,
the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the
agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this division shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of the activity. Any person owning or controlling real
estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to
inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of the real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual,
impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any
person on or about the real estate or premises under the license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of the
person. (1966 Code, ch. 3.0, art. I, sec. 9; Ordinance 83-24 adopted 12/1/83; 1994 Code, sec. 38.05)
Sec. 1.02.036 Expenditure of public funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this
division without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without
prior and specific approval of the city council. (1966 Code, ch. 3.0, art. I, sec. 10; Ordinance 83-24 adopted 12/1/83; 1994 Code, sec. 38.06)
Sec. 1.02.037 Unauthorized operation of warning device
Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this division and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this division. (1966 Code, ch. 3.0, art. I, sec. 6;
Ordinance 83-24 adopted 12/1/83; 1994 Code, sec. 38.07)
Sec. 1.02.038 Offenses
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the
enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this division, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the
authority contained in this division. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means
of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to the person by
the proper officials. (1966 Code, ch. 3.0, art. I, sec. 11; Ordinance 83-24 adopted 12/1/83; 1994 Code, sec. 38.08)
Sec. 1.02.039 Override; conflicting regulations
(a) At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this division shall be in effect, they shall supersede
and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.
(b) This division shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation.
(1966 Code, ch. 3.0, art. I, secs. 7, 8; Ordinance 83-24 adopted 12/1/83; 1994 Code, sec. 38.09)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Returned checks
(a) Whenever a person or entity pays any charge, fee, cost or bill owing to the city, including but not limited to fees and charges for utility
services, in whole or in part by check and such check is not paid upon presentation to the bank on which it is drawn but is returned to the city for
any reason, the city shall charge and collect from such person or entity a service charge for servicing such account in the amount set forth in the
fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) If any person or entity pays any charge, fee, cost or bill to the city, including but not limited to fees and charges for any utility services, by
check or automatic check transfer draft and has two or more checks and/or automatic check transfer drafts returned over a period of 12 months
to the city for insufficient funds, then that account will be placed on “cash only” status for a 24-month period, whereby only cash will be accepted
for that 24-month period on all payments made by that customer to the city. That customer will be notified in writing of the “cash only” status. In
the event, after notification of the “cash only” status, that customer pays his or her city utility bill by check during this 24-month period, this will be
sufficient reason for the city to discontinue the utility service to that person or entity as the case may be. Upon the expiration of the 24-month
period, the subject account may be taken off the “cash only” basis.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/438
(c) “Cash only” is defined as cash or money order. Credit cards will be accepted as payment.
(1994 Code, sec. 10.98; Ordinance 02-16 adopted 9/5/02; Ordinance 2008-07 adopted 10/15/08; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 2.01.002 City seal
The seal of the city shall be the coat of arms of the state in a circle with the words “City of Cuero, State of Texas” engraved around the margin
thereof. (1966 Code, ch. 1.0, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 11.01)
ARTICLE 2.02 CITY COUNCIL†
Sec. 2.02.001 Order of business at council meetings
The order of business at all city council meetings shall be as follows:
CUERO CITY COUNCIL AGENDA
Notice is hereby given of a meeting of the City Council of the City of Cuero to be held on ____________, 20___, at ____ p.m.
at: City Hall, Council Chambers, 201 E. Main, Cuero, Texas, for the purpose of considering the following agenda items. The City
Council of the City of Cuero will meet, consider, deliberate and may take action on all agenda items. The City Council reserves
the right to meet in a closed session on any agenda item should the need arise and if applicable pursuant to authorization by
Tex. Gov't Code Title 5, Ch. 551.
(1) Call to order.
(A) Invocation;
(B) Pledge of Allegiance.
(2) Presentations and recognitions.
(3) Public hearings.
(4) Public comments. An opportunity for the public to address the Council on agenda items or concerns not on the agenda
(limited to two minutes);
(5) Consent agenda. All consent agenda items are considered routine by the City Council and will be enacted by one motion.
There will be no separate discussion of these items unless a Councilmember so requests, in which event the item will be
removed from the consent agenda and considered in its normal sequence on the agenda. Information concerning consent
agenda items is available for public review.
(A) Approval of minutes;
(B) Appointments;
(C) Purchases and amendments to the budget;
(D) Accepting monthly and quarterly reports; and
(E) Miscellaneous.
(6) Ordinances.
(A) First reading of ordinances;
(B) Second reading of an ordinance (caption only);
(C) Third and final reading of an ordinance (caption only).
(7) Authorizations by Council. Authorizing the execution by the mayor or city manager for proposals, contracts, and
agreements.
(8) Reports.
(A) City Council calendar of events and activity reports;
(B) City manager's report.
(9) Executive session.
(10) Reconvene. Take necessary action, if any, after reconvening in open session.
(11) Adjournment.
The City Council may convene into executive (closed) session in accordance with the Texas Government Code when necessary
and legally justified. Any item on this agenda may be discussed in executive session if authorized by Texas law regardless of
whether it is listed under “Executive Session” of this agenda, and regardless of any past or current practice of the City Council.
Executive sessions herein are closed meetings, and may include the consideration of any item otherwise listed on the agenda
plus any subject matter specified in the executive session notice, and may include items under the Texas Government Code as
follows: section 551.071 (Consultations with Attorney Regarding Contemplated or pending Litigation, a Settlement Offer or
Administrative hearing); section 551.072 (Deliberations Regarding Real Property); section 551.073 (Deliberations about Gifts
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/438
and Donations); section 551.074 (Personnel Matters); section 551.076 (Deliberation about Security Devices); section 551.086
(Deliberation Regarding Municipally Owned Utility); and section 551.087 (Deliberation Regarding Economic Development
Negotiation).
In compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act, the City of Cuero will provide reasonable accommodations for persons
attending City Council meetings. To better serve you, requests should be received 24 hours prior to the meetings. Please
contact Lisa Ley, City Secretary, at 361-275-3476.
CERTIFICATION
I certify that a copy of the ____________, 20___, agenda of items to be considered by the City of Cuero Council was posted on
the City Administration and City Hall windows on ____________, 20___.
Lisa Ley, City Secretary
I certify that the attached notice and agenda of items to be considered by the City Council was removed by me from the City
Administration and City Hall windows on ____________, 20___.
____________________________ Title: ________________________
(1994 Code, sec. 30.01; Ordinance 2009-16 adopted 8/6/09; Ordinance 2011-01 adopted 1/11/11)
Charter references–Meetings of the city council, sec. 3.09; rules of procedure, sec. 3.10.
State law reference–Open meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 551.
ARTICLE 2.03 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 2.03.001–2.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Planning and Zoning Board†
Sec. 2.03.031 Creation
There is hereby created a city planning and zoning board for and in the city. (1966 Code, ch. 16.1, art. I, sec. 1; Ordinance 662 adopted 7/7/66;
1994 Code, sec. 32.01)
Sec. 2.03.032 Membership; terms; organization
(a) The city planning and zoning board shall of not less than five (5) nor more than seven (7) members who shall be residents of and/or own
real property in the city, and shall serve without compensation as same is provided by section 7.01 of the city charter. Said board shall be
appointed by the city council. The city council will consider for appointment to the commission only those persons who have demonstrated their
civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent judgment, interest in planning and zoning, and availability to prepare for and
attend meetings. It is the intent of the city council that members shall, by reason of diversity of their occupational backgrounds, constitute a
commission which is broadly representative of the community.
(b) Each member shall be appointed by the city council for a three (3) year term with one-third (1/3) of the members to be appointed each
year, with each respective term ending on January 31. Each member shall hold office from the first day of appointment. Members may be
removed at any time by a majority vote of the city council for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office.
(c) Vacancies occurring in the commission shall be filled within thirty (30) days by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term.
Membership shall be accompanied by active participation in the activities of the commission, and any member who is absent three (3)
consecutive regular meetings shall automatically be dropped from the membership and the commission shall immediately notify the city council
that a vacancy exists as provided in section 7.03 of the city charter.
(d) When the term of office for a member expires, the member shall continue to serve until a new member is appointed to the member's place.
Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms, but no member shall be appointed for a term in excess of three (3) years. Newly appointed
members shall be installed at the first regular board meeting after their appointment.
(e) This section shall be in addition to those provisions as provided in the city charter applicable to the planning and zoning commission. In the
event of conflict, the city charter shall control and prevail over any city ordinance.
(1966 Code, ch. 16.1, art. I, sec. 2; Ordinance 662 adopted 7/7/66; 1994 Code, sec. 32.02; Ordinance 2015-02, sec. 2, adopted 1/30/15)
Charter references–Term of office, sec. 7.02; vacancies, sec. 7.03.
Sec. 2.03.033 Rules and regulations; meetings
The city planning and zoning board shall adopt the rules and regulations as it may deem proper for the practical and efficient transaction of its
business, subject to this code and any other applicable ordinances of the city. Its records shall be public records. It shall meet from time to time
upon call of its chairperson. (1966 Code, ch. 16.1, art. I, sec. 3; Ordinance 662 adopted 7/7/66; 1994 Code, sec. 32.03)
Charter reference–Organization, sec. 7.04.
Sec. 2.03.034 Adoption of master plan; contents
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/438
(a) The city planning and zoning board shall make, or cause to be made, and adopt a master plan for the city, including any area outside of its
boundaries which may relate to the comprehensive planning of the city.
(b) The master plan, with the accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter, shall show the city planning and zoning board's
recommendations for the development of the territory, including, among other things, the general location, character and extent of streets,
viaducts, bridges, railroads, terminals, parks, parkways, playgrounds, aviation fields, athletic fields, school grounds, or public improvements, and
the removal, relocation, widening or extension of the public works that exist. As the work of making the whole master plan progresses, the city
planning and zoning board shall from time to time alter, amend, extend or add to the plan.
(1966 Code, ch. 16.1, art. I, sec. 4; Ordinance 662 adopted 7/7/66; 1994 Code, sec. 32.04)
Sec. 2.03.035 Purpose of master plan; surveys and studies; presentation to council
In preparation of the master plan, the city planning and zoning board shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present
conditions and future growth of the city and with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The plan shall be made with the general
purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance
with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare as well as efficiency and
economy in the process of development, among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers,
adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design
and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. The
plan, as approved by the city planning and zoning board, shall be presented to the city council for its ratification and acceptance. (1966 Code, ch.
16.1, art. I, sec. 5; Ordinance 662 adopted 7/7/66; 1994 Code, sec. 32.05)
Sec. 2.03.036 Approval required for construction within areas affected by master plan
Whenever the city council shall have adopted a master plan recommended by the city planning and zoning board, no public buildings, streets,
subways, viaducts, bridges, railroads, terminals, parks, parkways, playgrounds, aviation fields, athletic fields, school grounds, fire station sites, or
other public grounds or public improvements, or part thereof, shall be constructed within areas affected by the plan, until and unless the location
thereof shall be recommended by [the city planning and zoning board and approved by the city council. Provided, however, that in case of its
disapproval,] the city planning and zoning board shall communicate its reason for disapproval to the city council and, thereupon, the city council
shall either permit, or refuse to permit, the improvements to be made. The widening, narrowing, ornamentation, vacancies, or change in the use
of streets and other public ways, public grounds, or other public improvements appearing on the adopted plan shall be subject to similar
recommendation by the city planning and zoning board. The city planning and zoning board may make recommendations to any public
authorities or to any corporations or individuals in the city or in the territory contiguous thereto, concerning the relocation of any building,
structures or works to be erected or constructed by them. (1966 Code, ch. 16.1, art. I, sec. 6; Ordinance 662 adopted 7/7/66; 1994 Code, sec.
32.06)
Sec. 2.03.037 Rulings on matters of zoning changes
The city planning and zoning board shall rule on matters of zoning changes that are presented to it from time to time. (1966 Code, ch. 16.1, art. I,
sec. 7; Ordinance 662 adopted 7/7/66; 1994 Code, sec. 32.07)
Sec. 2.03.038 Annual reports; recommendations regarding public improvements
The city planning and zoning board shall make the city council an annual report, submitted during the month of January each year, giving a
statement of its work during the preceding year. In the annual report it shall also make its recommendations as to future projects to be
undertaken, and from time to time it shall also make like recommendations for public improvements which, in its judgment, should be undertaken.
(1966 Code, ch. 16.1, art. I, sec. 9; Ordinance 662 adopted 7/7/66; 1994 Code, sec. 32.08)
Sec. 2.03.039 Attendance at hearings by property owner/applicant
Public hearings concerning land use matters shall be attended by the property owner/applicant or person or persons delegated by said property
owner/applicant in order to provide testimony relevant to the case at hand. Failure to attend the hearing may result in the matter being tabled
until the next regularly scheduled meeting or removed from the agenda until further notice. Any additional costs involved in the order to republish
and/or provide written notice to other property owners will be the responsibility of the owner/applicant requesting said public hearing. (Ordinance
2015-06, sec. 1, adopted 3/24/15)
Secs. 2.03.040–2.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Airport Zoning Board*
Sec. 2.03.061 Creation
Subject to like provision being made by the commissioners court of DeWitt County by proper order duly promulgated and entered on its minutes,
and as authorized by the provisions of chapter 391 of the Acts of the Regular Session of the 50th Legislature, 1947, there is hereby created a
joint airport zoning board, to be known as the DeWitt County-City of Cuero joint airport zoning board, which shall have the powers and exercise
the duties set forth in Tex. Local Gov't Code section 241.014. (1966 Code, ch. 1.2, art. II, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 32.20)
Sec. 2.03.062 Membership
The DeWitt County-City of Cuero joint airport zoning board shall be composed of five members, two to be appointed by the city council, and two
members to be appointed by the commissioners court of DeWitt County. The fifth member shall be elected by a majority of the members so
appointed and the fifth member shall serve as chairperson of the DeWitt County-City of Cuero joint airport zoning board. (1966 Code, ch. 1.2, art.
II, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 32.21)
Secs. 2.03.063–2.03.090 Reserved
Division 4. Building and Standards Commission*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/438
Sec. 2.03.091 Creation
There is created in the city a building and standards commission, which the city expressly finds is in the public interest and is necessary to
preserve the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. The building and standards commission shall undertake its public duties on behalf of the
city in the manner and form prescribed by this division. (1994 Code, sec. 32.30; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.092 Membership; authority
(a) Authority. There is hereby established a building and standards commission (“commission”) in the city. The commission shall have the
authority provided for by Tex. Local Gov't Code section 54.031 et seq. and its supplements and amendments, this division, the municipal charter
of the city and the general law. The provisions of this division shall at all times be liberally construed to safeguard, keep, protect and provide for
the public interest.
(b) Composition; qualifications of members. The commission shall consist of one panel of seven members and two alternates, each of whom
shall be a duly qualified elector of the city or of the county. Commissioners or alternates residing outside of the city shall be required to either
work in the city, own a business located in the city or pay municipal property taxes. Each commission member and alternate shall be appointed
by the city council. No more than two nonresidents shall be eligible for simultaneous appointment to or service upon the commission as either a
member or alternate. It is the declared policy of the city that the city council may consider for appointment to the commission those persons who
have demonstrated their civic interest, general knowledge of the community, independent and intelligent judgment, understanding of building
standards, understanding of neighborhood integrity and availability to prepare for and attend meetings, and who, by reason of diversity of their
occupations, constitute a commission which is broadly representative of the community. Alternates shall serve when requested to do so by the
mayor or the city manager.
(c) Place numbers. The members of the commission shall be identified by place numbers one through seven. The alternates shall be identified
as alternate (A) and alternate (B).
(d) Terms; removal of members. Except as provided in subsection (e) below, members of the commission and alternates shall be appointed for
a two-year term, unless removed prior to the expiration of the term. Commission members and alternates shall be subject to removal at any time
by the city council for cause on a written charge. The city council must hold a public hearing on the matter of removal if requested by the
commission member or alternate subject to the removal action. Grounds for removal for cause shall consist of incompetency, official misconduct,
neglect of duty, the final conviction of a crime of “moral turpitude,” the final conviction of any felony, the unexcused absence from three
consecutive commission meetings or failure to meet residency requirements as provided by subsection (b) above.
(e) Expiration of term; initial terms. Members of the commission in the odd-numbered places and alternate (A) shall serve terms expiring
January 31 of odd-numbered years. The first term of members in odd-numbered places and alternate (A) shall expire January 31, 2017.
Members of the commission in the even-numbered places and alternate (B) shall serve terms expiring January 31 of the even-numbered years.
The first term of members in even-numbered places and alternate (B) shall expire January 31, 2016. When the term of office for a member
expires, the member shall continue to serve until a new member is appointed to the member's place.
(f) Vacancies. Any vacancy in commission membership, including alternates, shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term of the
member or alternate whose place or position has, by removal or otherwise, become vacant. The city council shall endeavor to fill vacancies
within 60 days of removal or resignation.
(g) Procedures and standards. The commission shall follow all established procedures and standards on their effective date.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.31; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09; Ordinance 2015-02, sec. 3, adopted 1/30/15)
Sec. 2.03.093 Powers and duties of building inspector
(a) The building inspector is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this division. The building inspector may hold the office
concurrently with another appointed municipal office or position with the city if approved by the city manager.
(b) The building inspector and the building inspector's authorized representatives shall, in accordance with article 18.05 of the Tex. Code of
Criminal Procedure, be authorized to make inspections of all buildings, structures or premises within the city for the purpose of determining
compliance with this division.
(c) The building inspector may appoint such number of officers and employees as shall be authorized by the city manager. The building
inspector may deputize such employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions required for the enforcement of this division.
(d) The building inspector, deputies and officers shall be supplied with official city identification, and, upon request, they shall exhibit such
identification when performing any duties imposed and authorized by this division.
(e) The building inspector shall forward all proposed amendments to this division to the building official for review and, when necessary,
present the same to the commission and the city council for consideration.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.32; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.094 Abatement cases generally
(a) The commission, pursuant to Tex. Local Gov't Code sections 54.004 and 54.031 et seq., the general law and the municipal charter, is
hereby authorized, after notice and hearing, to enforce ordinances:
(1) Relating to dangerously damaged or deteriorated buildings or improvements;
(2) Relating to conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation or other matter that creates breeding and living places for
insects and rodents; or
(3) Relating to a building code or to the condition, use or appearance of a property.
(b) The commission may, after notice and hearing:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/438
(1) Order the repair or removal, within a fixed period, of violations of an ordinance and further order that the city may repair or
remove the violation if the commission's order is not complied with within the allotted time;
(2) Order the repair or removal of a nuisance, within a fixed period, of property found to be in violation of an ordinance related to a
building code or condition, use or appearance of property in a municipality;
(3) Determine the amount and duration of the civil penalty the municipality may recover pursuant to section 2.03.098;
(4) Order, in an appropriate case, the immediate removal of persons or property found on private property;
(5) Order the entrance on private property to secure the removal if it is determined that conditions exist on the property that
constitute a violation of an ordinance; and
(6) Issue orders or directives to the chief of police of the municipality, to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the
commission panel.
(c) All abatement cases to be heard by the commission shall be heard as prescribed by section 2.03.095.
(d) The building inspector shall give notice of all proceedings on abatement cases before the commission in the manner set forth in section
2.03.096.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.33; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.095 Meetings and rules of procedure; conduct of hearings
(a) All cases to be heard by the commission shall be heard by a quorum of not less than four members including alternates serving in the
manner prescribed by section 2.03.092(b). No decision by the commission shall be deemed rendered unless concurred in by a majority of the
panel of members in attendance.
(b) At its first meeting, and then at the first meeting of each subsequent year, the commission shall select a chairperson, who shall act as
presiding officer during the hearing of all cases. The chairperson shall serve from the date of selection until December 31 of the year selected,
and may be selected for subsequent terms of office. The chairperson shall be entitled to act and vote upon all matters before the commission in
the same manner as other members.
(c) All owners, mortgagees and lienholders of the property shall be given an opportunity to present evidence at the hearing. Interested parties
shall also be given an opportunity to present evidence. In a hearing to determine whether a building, property or structure is substandard, the
owner, mortgagee or lienholder of the building or structure has the burden of proof to demonstrate the scope of work that may be required to
bring the building or structure into compliance with this division and the time it will reasonably take to perform the work.
(d) The commission shall establish rules of procedure for the conduct of hearings, but such rules shall be consistent with this division and
applicable state law.
(e) Meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chairperson or upon the request of the building inspector to the commission. All
meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. The chairperson, or in the chairperson's absence the acting chairperson, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
(f) The city manager shall appoint an appropriate municipal official to act as secretary for the commission. The secretary shall prepare and be
the custodian of minutes for all commission proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent
or fails to vote. The secretary shall keep records of the commission's examinations and other official duties.
(g) The city council may appoint special counsel to present cases before the commission.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.34; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.096 Notice of hearing
(a) The building inspector shall give notice of all proceedings before the commission:
(1) By certified mail, return receipt requested, to:
(A) The record owners of the affected property as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk of the county in which
the affected property is located; and
(B) Each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk of
the county in which the affected property is located, if the address of the lienholder can be ascertained from such records.
Any required notice provided by this division shall be presumed to have been delivered three days after deposit in the
United States mail. Any notice returned unclaimed by the addressee shall be presumed to have been delivered, and the
commission may, without further notice, undertake any action authorized by this division.
(2) To all other persons by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or
as close to the front door as practicable.
(b) The notice shall be mailed and posted on or before the twenty-first calendar day before the date of the hearing before the commission.
Additionally, the notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the city on one occasion on or before the tenth calendar day before the
date fixed for the hearing.
(c) The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, and shall include a statement that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee shall
be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this division, and the time in calendar
days which it will take to reasonably perform the work. The notice shall also inform the owner of his or her right to hire an attorney at the owner's
cost to represent him or her at the hearing, his or her right to inspect the file on the property at code compliance headquarters prior to the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/438
hearing, his or her right to request the presence of city staff for the purpose of questioning at the hearing, and shall advise the owner of his or her
right to cross-examine city staff at the hearing.
(d) The commission may file a notice of a proceeding that is before it in the official public records of real property in the county in which the
affected property is located.
(1) The notice shall contain the name and address of the owner of the affected property if that information can be determined from
a reasonable search of the instruments on file in the office of the county clerk, a legal description of the property and a description of
the proceeding.
(2) The filing of the notice is binding on subsequent grantees, lienholders or other transferees of an interest in the property who
acquire such interest after the filing of the notice and constitutes notice of the proceeding on any subsequent recipient of any interest
in the property who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.35; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.097 Issuance of order
(a) The commission may, after notice and hearing, declare a building or structure to be in violation of this division if one of the following is
proven to exist:
(1) Substandard;
(2) Substandard and a hazard to the public health, safety and/or welfare;
(3) Regardless of its structural condition, a building or structure is unoccupied by its owners, lessees or other invitees and
unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of
harborage or could be entered or used by children;
(4) When a building or structure is boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner and it:
(A) Constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
(B) The means used to secure the building or structure are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or use of the building or
structure by children, vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage;
(5) A construction site where there has been no significant construction work done in the previous three months, and the site is not
secured by a fence or other means to prevent its use by children, vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage; or
(6) A construction site where there has been no significant construction work done in the previous three months, and all building
materials, construction equipment and tools have neither been removed from the site nor secured at the site to prevent their use by
children, theft, deterioration, vandalism or harborage of rodents or insects.
(b) The commission may specify, in its written order:
(1) A reasonable time, in compliance with this division, for the building or structure to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed or
demolished by the owner; and
(2) May specify a reasonable time for the owner to relocate the occupants and an additional reasonable time for any of the
mortgagees or lienholders to take the ordered action in the event that the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided
for action by the owner.
(c) In the event that the owner fails to comply timely with the order of the commission, the only notice the city needs to furnish to a mortgagee
or lienholder of the failure is a copy of the order.
(d) If the commission makes a finding under subsection (a) above, the commission shall order the owners, lienholders or mortgagees of the
building or structure to within 30 calendar days:
(1) Secure the building or structure from unauthorized entry; and/or
(2) Repair, remove or demolish the building or structure, unless the owner, mortgagee or lienholder establishes at the hearing, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the work cannot reasonably be performed within 30 calendar days.
(e) If the commission allows the owner, mortgagee or lienholder more than 30 calendar days to repair, remove or demolish the building or
structure, the commission shall establish specific time schedules for the commencement and performance of the work and shall require the
owner, lienholder or mortgagee to secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed.
(f) The commission shall not allow the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 calendar days to repair, remove or demolish the building
or structure or fully perform all work required to comply fully with the order of the commission, unless the owner, lienholder or mortgagee:
(1) Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
(2) Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 calendar days because of the scope and
complexity of the work.
(g) If the commission allows the owner, lienholder or mortgagee more than 90 calendar days to complete any part of the work required to
repair, remove or demolish the building or structure, the municipality shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress
reports to the municipality to demonstrate that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee has complied with the time schedules established for
commencement and performance of the work. The order may require that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee appear before the commission or
the building inspector to demonstrate compliance with the time schedule, and may require a surety or other financial guarantees of performance
in such form and amounts determined suitable by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/438
(h) The commission shall personally deliver, or mail by first class mail with certified return receipt requested, or deliver by the United States
Postal Service using signature confirmation service, a copy of its order to all persons to whom notice is required to be sent under section
2.03.096. The city shall publish an abbreviated copy of the commission order in a newspaper of general circulation within ten calendar days of
the mailing of the order. The order shall include the following:
(1) The street address or legal description of the property;
(2) The date of the hearing;
(3) A brief statement indicating the results of the order;
(4) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained; and
(5) A copy of the order shall be filed in the office of the city secretary.
(i) The order shall be deemed issued and effective on the date the commission hears and decides the case.
(j) The order shall be reduced to writing and signed by the chairperson of the commission.
(k) After the hearing, the building inspector shall promptly mail by certified mail, return receipt requested, a copy of the order to the owner of
the building or structure, and to any known lienholder and mortgagee of the building or structure.
(l) A hearing before the commission shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a violator.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.36; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.098 Assessment of civil penalty
(a) In a proceeding under section 2.03.097, the commission, after notice and hearing, may assess a civil penalty against the property owner, in
an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per day per violation, with each day of violation being considered a separate offense and assessable, if at
the hearing the city proves:
(1) The property owner was notified of the requirements of this division; and
(2) After notification, the property owner committed an act in violation of this division or failed to take an action necessary to bring
the property into compliance with this division.
(b) After the time to comply with an order of the commission issued pursuant to section 2.03.097 has lapsed, the commission may hold a
hearing on violations of the order and may assess a civil penalty against the property owner, in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per day per
violation, with each day of violation being considered a separate offense and assessable, if at the hearing the city proves:
(1) The property owner was notified of the requirements of this division and the commission's order; and
(2) After notification, the property owner committed an act in violation of this division or failed to take an action necessary to bring
the building or structure into compliance with this division and the order of the commission.
(c) A determination made by the commission panel constitutes prima facie evidence of the penalty in any court of competent jurisdiction in a
civil suit brought by the city for final judgment in accordance with the established penalty.
(d) To enforce the civil penalty, the city secretary shall file with the county district clerk a certified copy of the order of the commission panel
establishing the amount and duration of the civil penalty. No other proof shall be required for a district court to enter final judgment on the penalty.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.37; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.099 Performance of work by city
(a) If the commission's order to vacate, secure, repair, remove or demolish the building or structure is not complied with within the allotted
time, the building inspector may vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or structure, or relocate the occupants of the building or
structure, at the city's expense. This division does not limit the ability of a municipality to collect on a bond, letter of credit from a financial
institution or guaranty from a third party or other financial guaranty that may be required by section 2.03.097(g).
(b) The building inspector may repair the building or structure only to the extent necessary to bring the building or structure into compliance
with the minimum standards of this division, and only if the building or structure is a residential building or structure with ten or fewer dwelling
units. The repairs shall not improve the building or structure to the extent that the building or structure exceeds minimum building standards.
(c) After securing a building or structure as provided in subsection (a) above, the building inspector may post a notice to vacate on or near the
front door of the building or structure. The notice to vacate must be in substantially the following form:
DO NOT OCCUPY
This building or structure is in violation of the City Code of the City of Cuero.
Occupancy is suspended until such time as the violations are corrected and approved by the City Building Inspector.
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or structure or to remove or deface this notice.
(d) In a proceeding under section 2.03.097, if the commission's order is not complied with within the allotted time, the building inspector may
act upon the order at the city's expense.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.38; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/438
Sec. 2.03.100 Lien for city's expenses and civil penalty
(a) If the city incurs expenses under section 2.03.099, the city may assess the expense on, and the city has a lien against, the property on
which the building or structure is or was located.
(b) If the commission assesses a civil penalty under section 2.03.098, the city has a lien against the property on which the building or structure
is or was located to secure payment of any civil penalty.
(c) A lien may not be made on property protected as a homestead under the Texas Constitution except in a proceeding under section
2.03.097.
(d) A lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk.
(e) The notice of the lien shall contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a
legal description of the real property on which the building or structure is or was located, the amount of expenses incurred by the municipality
and the balance due.
(f) Except as provided by subsection (g), the city's lien to secure payment of a civil penalty or the costs of repairs, removal, or demolition is
inferior to any previously recorded bona fide mortgage lien attached to the real property, if the mortgage lien was filed for record in the office of
the county clerk before the civil penalty is assessed or the repair, removal, or demolition is begun by the city. The city's lien is superior to all
previously recorded judgment liens.
(g) If notice is given and the opportunity to relocate the occupants of the building or structure or to repair, remove, or demolish the building or
structure is afforded to each mortgagee and lienholder, the lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens.
(h) Any civil penalty or expenses assessed by the city under this section shall accrue interest at the rate of ten (10) percent per annum from
the date of the assessment until paid in full. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to
the property reimburses the city for the expenses and the civil penalty plus interest.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.39; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.101 Additional authority to secure building
(a) Without a prior hearing before the commission, the building inspector may secure a building or structure the building inspector determines:
(1) Is substandard and a hazard to the public health, safety and/or welfare; and
(2) Is unoccupied or is occupied only by persons who do not have a right of possession to the building or structure.
(b) After securing a building or structure as provided in subsection (a), the building inspector may post a notice to vacate on or near the front
door of the building or structure. The notice to vacate must be in substantially the following form:
DO NOT OCCUPY
This building or structure is in violation of the City Code of the City of Cuero. Occupancy is suspended until such time as the
violations are corrected and approved by the City Building Inspector.
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or structure [or] to remove or deface this notice.
(c) Before the eleventh (11th) calendar day after the date the building or structure is secured, the building inspector must give notice to the
owner by:
(1) Personally serving the owner with written notice;
(2) Mailing such notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner at the owner's last known post office address. Such
owner shall be deemed to have been served three (3) calendar days after deposit of the notice in the United States mail;
(3) Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten (10) calendar day period in the official newspaper of the city if personal service
cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; or
(4) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building or structure if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's
post office address is unknown.
(d) The notice must contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building or structure and the property on which it is
located;
(2) A description of the violation of the standards established by this division;
(3) A statement that the building inspector has secured the building or structure; and
(4) An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the building inspector's securing of
the building or structure.
(e) The commission shall conduct a hearing at which the owner may testify or present witnesses or written information about any matter
relating to the building inspector's securing of the building or structure, if within 30 calendar days after the date the building inspector secures the
building or structure, the owner files a written request for a hearing with the building inspector. The commission will conduct the hearing within 20
calendar days after the date the owner files a request for hearing.
(f) The commission will conduct the hearing in the manner provided for by this division. The issues to be determined in such hearing are:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/438
(1) Whether the building or structure was substandard, and a hazard to the public health, safety and/or welfare at the time it was
secured;
(2) Whether the building or structure, at the time it was secured, was unoccupied or was occupied only by persons who did not
have a right to possession of the building or structure;
(3) Whether the building or structure is a construction site where there has been no significant construction work done in the
previous three months, and the site is not secured by a fence or other means to prevent its use by children, vagrants or other
uninvited persons as a place of harborage;
(4) Whether the building or structure is a construction site where there has been no significant construction work done in the
previous three months, and all building materials, construction equipment and tools have neither been removed from the site nor
secured at the site to prevent their use by children, theft, deterioration, vandalism or harborage of rodents or insects; and
(5) Whether the expenses incurred by the city to secure the building or structure were reasonable.
(g) The city may assess expenses for securing a building or structure herein in the manner provided for in section 2.03.100. A lien is created
under this subsection in the same manner as a lien is created in section 2.03.100, and is subject to the same conditions as a lien created under
section 2.03.100.
(h) The violation of the requirements of subsection (b) above by any person or entity is declared unlawful and shall be punished by prosecution
and the imposition of a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 in the municipal court, with each day of continuing violation considered to be a separate
offense and punishable by a separate fine.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.39; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.102 Judicial review
(a) Any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of record of property jointly or severally aggrieved by an order of the commission issued under this
division may file a verified petition in a county civil district court:
(1) Setting forth that the commission decision is illegal, either in whole or in part; and
(2) Specifying the grounds of the illegality.
(b) The petition must be presented within 30 calendar days after the date a copy of the final decision of the commission is personally
delivered, mailed by first class mail certified receipt requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation
service to all record owners and each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the records in the county clerk's office,
and all mortgagees of record.
(c) Upon the filing of the petition, the court may issue a writ of certiorari directed to the city to review the commission order, and shall prescribe
in the writ the time within which the city must make a return on the writ. Such time must not be less than ten days and must be filed with and
served on the city secretary.
(d) The city shall not be required to return the originals of papers called for in the writ, and it shall be sufficient for the city to return certified or
sworn copies of such papers or parts thereof.
(e) In the return, the city shall set forth other facts that may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the commission order. The return
must be verified.
(f) The issuance of the writ does not stay the order.
(g) The appeal in the district court shall be limited to a hearing under the substantial evidence rule. The court may reverse or affirm, in whole or
in part, or may modify the commission order. Costs may not be allowed against the commission.
(h) If the commission order is affirmed or not substantially reversed but only modified, the district court shall allow the city all attorney's fees
and other costs and expenses incurred by the city, and shall enter a judgment for those items, which may be entered against the property
owners, lienholders or mortgagees, as well as all persons found to be in occupation of the property subject to the proceedings before the
commission.
(i) A lienholder does not have standing to bring a proceeding under this section on the grounds that the lienholder was not notified of the
proceedings before the commission or was unaware of the condition of the property, unless the lienholder had first appeared before the
commission and entered an appearance in opposition to the proceedings.
(j) If no appeals are taken from the decision of the commission within the required period, the decision of the commission is, in all things, final
and binding.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.40; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.103 Preservation of historic properties
(a) Prior to the issuance of notice for a hearing under section 2.03.096, the building inspector shall request a hearing before the city council if
the building or structure which is the subject of the hearing:
(1) Is designated or pending designation as:
(A) Highly significant endangered property; and
(B) A historic and cultural landmark;
(2) Is located in an area designated or pending designation as a historic and cultural landmarks district; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/438
(3) Is not a single-family dwelling.
(b) The building inspector may secure the structure from entrance until the requirements in subsection (c) below are completed.
(c) The city council shall review the condition of the building or structure to determine whether it can be reasonably rehabilitated and shall
submit a written report of its findings and recommendations to the building inspector within 60 calendar days from the date of the initial city
council hearing.
(d) If the city council determines that the building or structure cannot be rehabilitated, the building inspector may proceed as provided in
section 2.03.097, and the commission may order its demolition.
(e) If the city council determines that the building or structure can be reasonably rehabilitated, the city may not permit the building or structure
to be demolished for at least 90 calendar days after the date the report is submitted to the building inspector. During this 90-calendar-day period,
the building inspector shall notify the building or structure's owner to afford the owner an opportunity to attempt to identify a feasible alternative
use for the building or structure or to locate an alternative purchaser to rehabilitate and maintain the building or structure.
(f) If the city is not able to locate the owner or if the owner does not respond within the 90-calendar-day period, the building inspector may
proceed as provided by section 2.03.097, and the city may file suit pursuant to Tex. Local Gov't Code section 214.003 for the appointment of a
receiver. A receiver may not be appointed for a building or structure that is an owner-occupied single-family residence.
(g) The building inspector may proceed as provided in section 2.03.097, and the commission may order the demolition of a building or
structure, if after the expiration of the 90-calendar-day period the city is not able to:
(1) Identify a feasible alternative use for the building or structure;
(2) Locate an alternative purchaser to rehabilitate and maintain the building or structure; or
(3) Appoint a receiver for the building or structure as provided by Tex. Local Gov't Code section 214.003.
(h) An owner of a substandard building or structure declared to be in violation of this division is not liable for penalties related to the building or
structure that accrue during the 90-calendar-day period provided for disposition of historic property under subsection (e) above.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.41; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.104 Quarterly report to council of buildings on demolition/rehabilitation list
(a) The building inspector shall make quarterly reports to the city council of all buildings or structures on the city-funded
demolition/rehabilitation list. The report shall list each building or structure by its street address, owners of record, city council district, length of
time on the list and its priority on the list.
(b) The building inspector shall list buildings or structures on the report as priority one demolish, priority one rehabilitate, priority two demolish,
priority two rehabilitate, priority three demolish and priority three rehabilitate, and shall develop criteria for determining a building or structure's
placement in a category.
(c) The city council, by a majority vote, may remove a building or structure from the list or may change its priority on the list.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.42; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.105 Civil action without commission hearing
(a) The city may bring suit for injunctive relief and civil penalties against the owner of property in violation of this division, or to complete the
demolition or repair of buildings or structures, as provided for by Tex. Local Gov't Code section 54.012 et seq. and other municipal ordinances.
(b) Filing a suit for civil penalties, injunctive relief or other remedies shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against a violator.
(1994 Code, sec. 32.43; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.106 Abstract of judgment
An abstract of judgment shall be issued against all parties found to be the owners of the subject property or in possession of that property. Actual
ownership of the property is not required to proceed under the provisions of this division. (1994 Code, sec. 32.44; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted
8/6/09)
Sec. 2.03.107 Remedies cumulative
The rights, remedies and penalties provided in this division are cumulative, are not mutually exclusive and are in addition to any other rights,
remedies and penalties available to the city under any other provisions of law. (1994 Code, sec. 32.45; Ordinance 2009-14 adopted 8/6/09)
ARTICLE 2.04 CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.04.001 Rental or sale of city property or materials
It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to rent any equipment belonging to the city to any person, or to sell any materials
belonging to the city, unless the rental or sale is previously authorized by the city manager. (1966 Code, ch. 1.0, art. I, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec.
31.01)
Sec. 2.04.002 Acceptance of gifts or services
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/438
It shall be unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to solicit, accept, or agree to accept any gift having a retail value of more than $10.00
from any person, firm or corporation or from any officer, agent, or employee of any person, firm, or corporation which either before or after the
date of such gift or agreement sells or offers to sell any goods, wares, merchandise, or service to the city or to any department thereof. (1966
Code, ch. 1.0, art. I, sec. 13; Ordinance 73-14 adopted 12/6/73; 1994 Code, sec. 31.02)
Charter reference–Code of ethics for city council, sec. 5.10.
Secs. 2.04.003–2.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Appointed Officials
Sec. 2.04.031 City attorney
(a) Qualifications. The city attorney shall be a licensed lawyer and competent to discharge the duties required of him or her by the charter, this
code and any other applicable ordinances of the city.
(b) Duties. It shall be the duty of the city attorney to serve the city council, to advise it as a counsel, and each of the members of the council
respectively, from time to time, with respect to the provisions and a proper interpretation of the charter, and the powers and authority of the
council as the governing body for the city, and to attend the meetings of the council. The city attorney is also charged with the duty to draw all
ordinances and resolutions that may be passed on by the council, and to represent the city in all of its litigations in the courts, and to discharge
the other duties as are usually imposed upon city attorneys, including advice and counsel from time to time to the city manager.
(1966 Code, ch. 1.0, art. I, secs. 3, 4; 1994 Code, sec. 31.16)
Charter reference–City attorney, sec. 4.04.
State law reference–Appointment of municipal attorney, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 22.071.
Sec. 2.04.032 City engineer
It shall be the duty of the city engineer to ascertain the established monuments of the city, and from them to extend surveys thereof and establish
others and to locate, establish and survey all private property, streets and alleys where the interests of the city are involved, within the territorial
limits of the city, when so called on or required to do so. (1966 Code, ch. 1.0, art. I, sec. 5; 1994 Code, sec. 31.17)
ARTICLE 2.05 EMPLOYMENT POLICIES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.05.001 Personnel policies adopted
The current personnel policies prepared by the city manager and the director of personnel published in a booklet entitled “City of Cuero
Personnel Policies” are declared to be the official personnel policies for employees of the city and are hereby adopted as a part hereof as if set
out herein at length. The policies shall not supersede any rule of the city civil service commission relating to civil service employees in the fire
and police departments of the city, and the rules shall not supersede any rule or regulation for any employee set forth in the charter or in any
statute of the state. In all other respects, the rules and regulations set forth in the personnel policies shall be followed in all problems, relations
and procedures with respect to employees of the city. (1966 Code, ch. 1.0, art. I, sec. 6; 1994 Code, sec. 34.01)
Sec. 2.05.002 Classification and pay plan
The current classification and pay plan together with the amendment and addition shall be the official classification and pay plan for the city.
(1966 Code, ch. 1.0, art. I, sec. 12; 1994 Code, sec. 34.02)
Sec. 2.05.003 Health benefits coverage for retirees
(a) The city hereby elects to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees through the TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool under
the pool's interlocal agreement.
(b) For purposes of this section, the city hereby adopts the following definition:
Retiree. All former city employees receiving retirement benefits from the Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS) in accordance with TMRS
plan provisions adopted by the city.
(c) The interlocal agreement in effect between the city and the TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool provides that the board of
trustees may adopt rules and regulations. The rules and regulations of the TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool allow the participating
member entity to provide retiree medical coverage at the same contribution as charged to active employees, to select a contribution level which
is an elevated percentage (150%, 160%, etc., which may change from time to time) of the active employee contribution or to offer over age 65
retirees a Medicare Supplement.
(d) The city elects to have the retiree medical contribution for under age 65 retirees be the same as the active employee for as long as the
TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool offers this rate structure for retiree medical coverage. The city elects to have the retiree medical
contribution for over age 65 retirees be the same as the active employee. Other coverages will be as established annually by the TML
Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool board of trustees.
(e) The city shall adopt on an annual basis any additional or alternative retiree benefit plans to be provided through the TML Intergovernmental
Employee Benefits Pool. The cost of these plans shall be paid for entirely by the retiree.
(f) This section will only apply to individuals retiring after its effective date or to employees which retired under a previous ordinance. For
individuals retiring after the effective date of this section to qualify they must enroll for this coverage within 30 days of their retirement.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/438
(1994 Code, sec. 34.03; Ordinance 2011-28 adopted 9/13/11)
Secs. 2.05.004–2.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Texas Municipal Retirement System*
Sec. 2.05.031 Participation in system
(a) On behalf of the city, the city council exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all of the departments of the
city participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided by Tex. Gov't Code section 851.001 et seq., as amended, and all of the
benefits and obligations of the system are hereby accepted as to the employees.
(b) The city manager is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System that the city has elected to
participate and have the employees of all departments of the city participate in the system.
(c) Each person who becomes an employee of any department of the city on or after the effective date [April 2, 1970] shall become a member
of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as condition of his or her employment. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or
new employees to the system but shall never discontinue as to any participants.
(d) In accordance with the provisions of the statute, the deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System on account of current
service of the employees of the city are hereby fixed at the rate of 3% of the total earnings of each employee, and in determining the deposits to
be made on account of the service the total earnings of all employees, prior to any deductions, in any one year shall be used.
(e) The city manager is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System at its office in Austin, the
city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by the
board and the provisions of chapter 75, Acts of the 50th Legislature of the state, as amended, and the city manager is hereby authorized and
directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city the prior service rendered to the municipality by each of the employees of the city,
and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and
certifications which may be required of the city under the provisions of chapter 75, Acts Regular Session, 50th Legislature, as amended, or in
compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System.
(f) Ordinances affecting the plan for participation in the TMRS, employee contributions, updated service credits, restricted prior service credit,
increases in benefits and retirement annuities, and any other applicable legislation of the city and state are adopted by reference into this Code
of Ordinances as if fully set forth herein and shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk.
(g) The city council elects to revoke the prior election not to provide five-year vesting under section 854.205 of the TMRS Act (Tex. Gov't Code
section 854.205) for its employees. The city shall promptly notify the board of trustees of the system of this action.
(Ordinance 70-5 adopted 4/2/70; 1994 Code, sec. 34.15; Ordinance 96-05 adopted 6/6/96; Ordinance 98-34 adopted 12/3/98; Ordinance 01-25
adopted 11/1/01; Ordinance 2008-11 adopted 9/23/08; Ordinance 2008-12 adopted 10/23/08)
Sec. 2.05.032 Updated service credits and increase in retirement annuities (2010)
(a) Updated service credits.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in Tex. Gov't Code, sections 853.401 through 853.404 of subtitle G of title 8, as amended
(hereinafter referred to as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the
“system”) who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on the first day of January of the
calendar year preceding such allowance by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36 months
of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby allowed “updated service credit” (as that term is defined in subsection (d) of
section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(2) On the terms and conditions set out in section 853.601 of the TMRS Act, any member of the system who is eligible for updated
service credits on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another
participating municipality or municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on the first day of January of
the calendar year preceding such allowance, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to, calculated in accordance with
and subject to adjustment as set forth in section 853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all future grants under this section.
(3) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100% of the “base updated service credit” of the member
(calculated as provided in subsection (c) of section 853.402 of the TMRS Act).
(4) Each updated service credit allowed hereunder shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior
service credit or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(5) In accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of section 853.401 of the TMRS Act, the deposits required to be made to the
system by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the
effective date of this section on the full amount of such person's compensation as an employee of the city.
(b) Increase in retirement annuities.
(1) On the terms and conditions set out in section 854.203 of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for
payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of
deceased employees of the city under current service annuities paid [and] prior service annuities arising from service by such
employees of the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the
same person.
(2) The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities
on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70% of the percentage
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/438
change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the
person's retirement to the December that is 13 months before the effective date of this section.
(3) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same
manner that the original annuity was reduced.
(4) If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity shall not be
changed hereunder.
(5) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of
the city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system.
(c) Date of allowances and increases. The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement annuities hereunder shall be
effective on January 1, 2010, subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase
in retirement annuities shall be made hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this section ceases to be in effect under subsection
(e) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set
forth in subsection (d) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act.
(d) Increased municipal contributions. Effective January 1, 2010, for each month of current service thereafter rendered by each of its
employees who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the city shall contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each
such member at the time of his or her retirement, a sum that is 200% of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment,
and the sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality accumulation fund.
(1994 Code, sec. 34.16; Ordinance 2009-26 adopted 11/3/09)
ARTICLE 2.06 POLICE*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 2.06.001–2.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Police Department
Sec. 2.06.031 Chief administrative officer; appointment and removal of personnel
The chief administrative officer of the police department shall be known as the chief of police. The chief of police and all other officers and
employees of the police department shall be appointed and may be removed by the city manager. (1966 Code, ch. 16.3, art. I, sec. 1; 1994
Code, sec. 33.01)
Sec. 2.06.032 Arrest without warrant
Every police officer of the city is authorized to arrest, without warrant, all persons found in suspicious places and under circumstances that
reasonably show that the persons have been guilty of some felony or breach of the peace, or threaten or are about to commit some offense
against the laws. (1966 Code, ch. 16.3, art. II, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 33.02)
State law reference–Authority to make arrest without warrant, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. sec. 14.01 et seq.
Secs. 2.06.033–2.06.060 Reserved
Division 3. Police Reserve†
Sec. 2.06.061 Established
An auxiliary police force to be known as the police reserve is hereby established, such force to be separate and distinct from the police
department. (1994 Code, sec. 33.15; Ordinance 00-11 adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 2.06.062 Powers of chief of police
The chief of police shall be the head of the police reserve and the members of the reserve shall be under the authority, control and command of
the chief of the police, subject to all of the provisions of the city charter, ordinances of the city and this division. The chief of police may, by order,
establish rules and regulations to govern the police reserve force, to fix specific duties of its members, and to provide for the maintenance of
discipline. He may change such orders from time to time, and he may command members of the police reserve force to obey the instructions of
regular police officers in carrying out their orders. (1994 Code, sec. 33.16; Ordinance 00-11 adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 2.06.063 Composition
The police reserve force shall be composed of personnel who have volunteered to join the organization and whose applications for membership
have been accepted and who have complied with all the rules, regulations and orders provided for the conduct and control of the members
thereof. It shall be composed of not more than ten members. (1994 Code, sec. 33.17; Ordinance 00-11 adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 2.06.064 Diminishing or expanding membership
The chief of police may by order diminish or expand the membership of the police reserve force as exigency may require, within the limit
established by section 2.06.063. (1994 Code, sec. 33.18; Ordinance 00-11 adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 2.06.065 Application for membership
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/438
Application for membership in the police reserve shall be filed with the police department. Such application shall be on a form prescribed by the
chief of police and approved by the city commission and shall state the residence of the applicant. (1994 Code, sec. 33.19; Ordinance 00-11
adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 2.06.066 Applicant's qualifications and references
Each applicant for membership in the police reserve shall be at least 21 years of age and shall furnish satisfactory proof of good character,
temperate habits, freedom from communicable diseases and physical ability to perform the duties of the position for which he seeks
appointment. He shall furnish three references and attach letters of recommendation from such references to the application. (1994 Code, sec.
33.20; Ordinance 00-11 adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 2.06.067 Oath of applicants
Every person whose name appears on the list of eligibles referred to in section 2.06.068 shall subscribe to an oath that he will observe and obey
the Constitution of the United States, the constitution of this state, and the laws of this nation, this state and this city, and that he will carry out the
duties of a member of the police reserve force to the best of his ability. (1994 Code, sec. 33.21; Ordinance 00-11 adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 2.06.068 List of eligibles
A list of eligibles compiled by the chief of police and accompanied by a complete set of fingerprints or supplemented immediately by the police
department, which fingerprints shall be checked by the identification bureau to ascertain any criminal record of such person, shall be maintained
by the police department. Members of the police reserve shall be appointed by the chief of police from such list of eligibles. (1994 Code, sec.
33.22; Ordinance 00-11 adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 2.06.069 Uniforms and badges
The chief of police shall prescribe the uniforms and furnish badges for the members of the police reserve force and direct the manner in which
the same shall be worn. (1994 Code, sec. 33.23; Ordinance 00-11 adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 2.06.070 Duties
The duties of the police reserve force, subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the chief of police, shall be to assist the
regular members of the police department in the enforcement of law and the maintenance of peace and order during periods of emergency
designated by the chief of police. The chief may prescribe other duties than those mentioned herein by the police reserve force not inconsistent
with the provisions of this division. (1994 Code, sec. 33.24; Ordinance 00-11 adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 2.06.071 Power of arrest
A member of the police reserve force shall have the following powers of arrest and none other:
(1) He may arrest only while on active duty.
(2) He may arrest for a public offense committed in his presence.
(3) He may arrest a person who he knows as a fact has committed a felony even though it was not committed in his presence.
(4) He may arrest when a felony has in fact been committed, when he has reasonable cause for believing the person arrested has
committed it.
(5) He may lend physical aid to any regular or reserve member of the police department in making any lawful arrest, when
authorized by the chief of police or requested by any regular or reserve member of the police department.
(1994 Code, sec. 33.25; Ordinance 00-11 adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 2.06.072 Termination of membership
Membership of any person in the police reserve may be terminated by the chief of police at any time for any cause deemed sufficient by the chief
of police, and any member may resign from the police reserve at any time, but it shall be his duty to notify the chief of his resignation. (1994
Code, sec. 33.26; Ordinance 00-11 adopted 4/13/00)
Sec. 2.06.073 Expiration and renewal of membership
All commissions for membership in the police reserve shall expire automatically at midnight on the 31st of December of each year. A request for
renewal of such commission for any next ensuing year may be had by filing an application. (1994 Code, sec. 33.27; Ordinance 00-11 adopted
4/13/00)
Sec. 2.06.074 Impersonating member
It shall be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display a police reserve force identification card, uniform or badge or otherwise represent
himself to be connected with the police reserve force, unless he is in fact a member thereof in good standing. (1994 Code, sec. 33.28; Ordinance
00-11 adopted 4/13/00)
ARTICLE 2.07 MUNICIPAL COURT*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 2.07.001–2.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fines, Costs and Special Expenses†
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/438
Sec. 2.07.031 Technology fund
(a) Established.
(1) There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, herein known as the “fund,” pursuant to article
102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(2) The fund [shall] be maintained in an interest-bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account.
(b) Amount of fee; assessment and collection.
(1) The fee shall be in the amount set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(2) The fee shall be assessed and collected from a defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as
a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(A) Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person;
(B) The person is placed on deferred disposition; or
(C) The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence.
(3) The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed on or after this section is adopted. (The fee may only be
assessed and collected on offenses occurring on or after September 1, 1999. The fee may not be assessed or collected retroactively
if the fund is established at a later date than September 1, 1999.)
(4) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal treasurer, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal
court technology fund.
(c) Designated use; administration.
(1) The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of or to maintain technological enhancements for the municipal court.
Technological enhancements shall include any and all items described in article 102.0172(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(2) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(1994 Code, sec. 35.11; Ordinance 00-04 adopted 1/6/00; Ordinance 2005-09 adopted 7/7/05; Ordinance 2012-71 adopted 12/12/12; Ordinance
adopting 2016 Code)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
Sec. 2.07.032 Building security fund
(a) Established. There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund (the “fund”) pursuant to article 102.017 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) Amount of fee. The municipal court is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee (the “fee”) in the
amount set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal
court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee.
(c) Persons considered convicted. A person is considered to have been convicted in a case if:
(1) Judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person;
(2) The person is placed on deferred disposition; or
(3) The court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence.
(d) Effective date. The fee shall be collected on convictions for offenses committed on or after this section is adopted.
(e) Collection. The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the city treasury. All fees so
collected and paid over to the city treasury shall be segregated in the fund.
(f) Designated use. The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or services for the building or
buildings housing the municipal court. Security devices and/or services shall include any and all items described in article 102.017(d-1) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure.
(g) Administration. The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council.
(1994 Code, sec. 35.12; Ordinance 2012-70 adopted 12/12/12; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
ARTICLE 2.08 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 2.08.001 Definition of city records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other
information-recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic, and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted
under the laws of the state, created or received by the city, or any of its officers or employees, pursuant to law or in the transaction of public
business, are hereby declared to be the records of the city, and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/438
of this article, or procedures authorized by it, and in no other manner. (Ordinance 91-03 adopted –/–/91; 1994 Code, sec. 37.01; Ordinance
2014-03 adopted 2/7/14)
Sec. 2.08.002 Additional definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Department head. The officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives
records.
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency or disaster, to the
re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by the state library and archives commission, listing the records maintained by the city, their
retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require, and adopted by the city.
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of
records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the adoption of state library
records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the
economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and
the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 2.08.005 of this article.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 2.08.006 of this article.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions
associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ordinance 91-03 adopted –/–/91; 1994 Code, sec. 37.02; Ordinance 2014-03 adopted 2/7/14)
Sec. 2.08.003 City records declared public property
All city records as defined in section 2.08.001 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by
virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to city records, even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The
unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of city records is prohibited. (Ordinance 91-03 adopted –/–/91; 1994 Code, sec. 37.03;
Ordinance 2014-03 adopted 2/7/14)
Sec. 2.08.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution,
organization, maintenance, use and disposition of all city records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management
of records, from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and
accepted records management practice. (Ordinance 91-03 adopted –/–/91; 1994 Code, sec. 37.04; Ordinance 2014-03 adopted 2/7/14)
Sec. 2.08.005 Designation of records management officer
The city secretary, and the successive holders of that office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law,
each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the state library within 30 days of the initial
designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. (Ordinance 91-03 adopted –/–/91; 1994 Code, sec. 37.05; Ordinance 2014-03 adopted
2/7/14)
Sec. 2.08.006 Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must
contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential
records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records
management officer to effectively carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article.
(b) Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs,
commissions, bureaus, boards, committees or similar entities of the city, and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or
disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department
head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article, and the records management plan adopted under it, and
may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(Ordinance 91-03 adopted –/–/91; 1994 Code, sec. 37.06; Ordinance 2014-03 adopted 2/7/14)
Sec. 2.08.007 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and
department, to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/438
expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city;
(5) Develop standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all local government departments by preparation of a manual or
manuals of procedure and policy, and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission to determine if
the records management program and the city's copies of the records control schedules are up-to-date and in compliance with the
most recently adopted state schedules;
(9) Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to
local government records;
(10) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, scanning, destruction, or other disposition of the city [records] is
carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law;
(11) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records
microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of the disposal or disposition;
(12) Report annually to the city manager on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city,
including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (11) above;
(13) Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies and
procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act.
(Ordinance 91-03 adopted –/–/91; 1994 Code, sec. 37.07; Ordinance 2014-03 adopted 2/7/14)
Sec. 2.08.008 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the
efficient and economical management of records, and in carrying out the requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department
head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, scanning, destruction, or other disposition
only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this
article.
(Ordinance 91-03 adopted –/–/91; 1994 Code, sec. 37.08; Ordinance 2014-03 adopted 2/7/14)
Sec. 2.08.009 Updating of records control schedules
The records management officer shall regularly review state library and archives commission records control schedules, which were adopted by
the city by the submission of form SLR508, and update the city's copies according to the updates and changes made by the state. (Ordinance
91-03 adopted –/–/91; 1994 Code, sec. 37.09; Ordinance 2014-03 adopted 2/7/14)
Sec. 2.08.010 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedules
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2.08.006 shall be implemented by
department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending
on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or the department head requests in writing to the records
management officer that the record be retained for an additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the
records management officer from the city council.
(Ordinance 91-03 adopted –/–/91; 1994 Code, sec. 37.10; Ordinance 2014-03 adopted 2/7/14)
Sec. 2.08.011 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the
same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule, and the records management officer has listed the record on the records
destruction documentation. (Ordinance 91-03 adopted –/–/91; 1994 Code, sec. 37.11; Ordinance 2014-03 adopted 2/7/14)
Sec. 2.08.012 Records center
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2.08.006, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records
management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records
management plan developed under section 2.08.006. (Ordinance 91-03 adopted –/–/91; 1994 Code, sec. 37.12; Ordinance 2014-03 adopted
2/7/14)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/438
Sec. 2.08.013 Electronic records program
Unless an electronic records program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city manager, all scanning and/or digitizing of
records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish
policies and procedures for the microfilming [digitizing] of local government records, including policies to ensure that all digitizing is done in
accordance with standards and procedures for the digitizing of local government records established in the rules of the state library and archives
commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for digitizing, and protocols for ensuring that an electronic
records program that is exempted from the centralized operations is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer
as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with commission rules. (Ordinance 91-03 adopted –/–/91; 1994 Code, sec.
37.13; Ordinance 2014-03 adopted 2/7/14)
State law reference–Electronic storage of records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 205.
ARTICLE 2.09 FINANCES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.09.001 Five-year expense projection required for certain actions
The city council shall not authorize any contract, project, undertaking, or enterprise which involves the use of city property, the expenditure of city
funds, or a reduction in the city's revenue, unless same is provided for in the city budget for the current fiscal year, until the city manager shall
have prepared and filed with the city council a five-year projection of the costs of the action. If the matter is proposed at a meeting of the city
council before the projection shall have been furnished, the matter shall be continued to a subsequent meeting of the city council at or prior to
which the projection shall be furnished by the city manager. (1966 Code, ch. 1.0, art. I, sec. 15; Ordinance 88-11 adopted 12/1/88; 1994 Code,
sec. 35.01)
Sec. 2.09.002 Purchasing generally; applicability of state law
Tex. Loc. Gov't Code section 252.002 hereby supersedes article VIII, section 8.17, of the home rule charter of the city. (1994 Code, sec. 35.02;
Ordinance 97-07 adopted 2/6/97)
Charter reference–Purchase procedure, sec. 8.17.
State law reference–Authority to provide that Local Government Code chapter 252 supersedes municipal charter, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
252.002.
Sec. 2.09.003 Purchasing authority of city manager
Pursuant to the provisions of section 8.17 of article VIII of the home rule charter of the city, as amended, the city council does hereby confer upon
the city manager general authority to contract for expenditures without further approval of the city council for all budgeted items with a cost to the
city that is less than the legal dollar amount for which mandatory competitive bidding is required as prescribed by law. (Ordinance adopted
6/14/62; 1966 Code, ch. 1.0, art. I, sec. 14; Ordinance 77-17 adopted 12/1/77; 1994 Code, sec. 31.15; Ordinance 01-16 adopted 8/2/01;
Ordinance 2009-15 adopted 8/6/09; Ordinance 2016-20 adopted 10/10/16)
Sec. 2.09.004 Investment policy
The city council does hereby adopt the revised Investment Policy and Investment Strategy attached to Resolution 99-14 and directs its
implementation. The city council will annually review the policy and strategy for compliance with the Local Government Code. (1994 Code, sec.
35.03; Res. 99-14 adopted 6/3/99)
State law references–Public Funds Investment Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 2256; Public Funds Collateral Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 2257.
Secs. 2.09.005–2.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fund Balance Policy
Sec. 2.09.031 Purpose
The purpose of this policy is to establish a key element of the financial stability of the city by setting guidelines and parameters for fund balance
of the various funds used by the city. Unassigned fund balance is an important measure of economic stability. It is essential that the city maintain
adequate levels of unassigned fund balance to mitigate financial risk that can occur from unforeseen revenue fluctuations, unanticipated
expenditures, and similar circumstances. Advantages of a fund balance policy are as follows:
(1) Enhances the quality of decisions by imposing order and discipline.
(2) Promotes consistency and continuity in decision-making.
(3) Demonstrates a commitment to long-term financial planning objectives.
(Ordinance 2014-30, exh. A, sec. 1, adopted 8/26/14)
Sec. 2.09.032 Definitions
Fund balance. An accounting distinction is made between the portions of fund equity that are spendable and non-spendable. These are broken
up into five categories:
(1) Non-spendable fund balance. Includes amounts that are not in spendable form or are required to be maintained intact.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/438
(2) Restricted fund balance. Includes amounts that can be spent only for the specific purposes stipulated by external resource
providers either constitutionally or through enabling legislation.
(3) Committed fund balance. Includes amounts that can be used only for the specific purposes determined by a formal action of the
government's highest level of decision-making authority. Commitments may be changed or lifted only by the government taking the
same formal action that imposed the constraint originally.
(4) Assigned fund balance. Comprises amounts intended to be used by the government for specific purposes. Intent can be
expressed by the governing body or by an official or body to which the governing body delegates the authority. In governmental funds
other than the general fund, assigned fund balance represents the amount that is not restricted or committed. This indicates that the
resources in other governmental funds are, at a minimum, intended to be used for the purpose of that fund.
(5) Unassigned fund balance. Is the residual classification of the general fund and includes all amounts not contained in other
classifications. Unassigned amounts are technically available for any purpose.
Fund equity. A fund's equity is generally the difference between its assets and its liabilities.
(Ordinance 2014-30, exh. A, sec. 2, adopted 8/26/14)
Sec. 2.09.033 Policy statement
(a) Committed fund balance. The city council is the city's highest level of decision-making authority and the formal action that is required to be
taken to establish, modify, or rescind a fund balance commitment is an ordinance or resolution approved by the council at the city council
meeting. The ordinance or resolution must either be approved or rescinded, as applicable, prior to the last day of the fiscal year for which the
commitment is made. The amount subject to the constraint may be determined in the subsequent period.
(b) Assigned fund balance. The city council has authorized the city manager or finance director as the officials authorized to assign fund
balance to a specific purpose as approved by this fund balance policy.
(c) Unassigned fund balance. The unassigned fund balance for the general fund of the city will be maintained at a level sufficient to provide the
required resources to meet operating cost needs, to allow for unforeseen needs of an emergency nature, and to permit orderly adjustment to
changes resulting from fluctuation of revenue sources.
(Ordinance 2014-30, exh. A, sec. 3, adopted 8/26/14)
Sec. 2.09.034 Order of expenditure of funds
When multiple categories of fund balance are available for expenditure, the city will start with the most restricted category and spend those funds
first before moving down to the next category with available funds. (Ordinance 2014-30, exh. A, sec. 4, adopted 8/26/14)
Sec. 2.09.035 Funding levels
The city establishes the following funding levels concerning fund balances in the various funds used by the city:
(1) The annual budget shall be presented to the council, with each fund reflecting minimum ending funds balances as follows:
(A) General fund: 25% of the next year's budgeted expenditures or 90 days.
(B) Debt service funds: An amount not to exceed one (1) month of the next year's budget for principal and interest.
(C) Water, wastewater and electric funds and environmental services: 50% of the next year's budgeted expenditures or 180
days.
(2) Fund balances which exceed the minimum levels established for each of the funds may be appropriated as shown in the
financial projections section of the city's five-year plan.
(3) Fund balances which exceed the minimum levels established for each of the funds may be appropriated for non-recurring
capital projects or programs. The council recognizes that any such funds should be appropriated for non-recurring expenditures as
they represent prior year surpluses that may or may not materialize in subsequent fiscal years.
(4) The city will exercise diligence in avoiding the appropriation of fund balances for recurring operating expenditures. In the event a
fund balance is appropriated for recurring operating expenditures to meet the needs of the community, the budget document shall
include an explanation of the circumstances requiring the appropriation and the methods to be used to fund this operating expenditure
in the future.
(Ordinance 2014-30, exh. A, sec. 5, adopted 8/26/14)
Sec. 2.09.036 Monitoring and reporting
The city manager and the finance director shall annually prepare a report documenting the status of the fund balances with this policy and
present it to the council in conjunction with the presentation of the comprehensive annual financial report and also in conjunction with the
development of the annual budget. (Ordinance 2014-30, exh. A, sec. 6, adopted 8/26/14)
Sec. 2.09.037 Replenishment of funds
Should the fund balances fall below the targeted level, the council must approve and adopt a plan to restore the balance to the targeted level
within two (2) years. If restoration cannot be accomplished within such period without severe hardship, then the council will establish a different
but reasonable time period. (Ordinance 2014-30, exh. A, sec. 7, adopted 8/26/14)
ARTICLE 2.10 TAXATION*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/438
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.10.001 Hotel occupancy tax
(a) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, for the purpose of this section, except where the context clearly indicates another
meaning, are respectively defined as follows:
Hotel. Has the meaning assigned by section 156.001 of the Texas Tax Code, as may be amended.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms, sleeping space, bed or other facility in a hotel
for any purpose.
Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms, sleeping space, bed or facility
in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement.
Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms or sleeping space or other facility in a
hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the
period.
Person. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel.
Price. The amount paid for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room or space in a hotel, not including the cost of
food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person, except for those services related to cleaning
and readying the room for use or possession.
Quarterly period. The regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March; the
second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth
quarter being the months of October, November and December.
(b) Levy of tax; rate; exceptions.
(1) There is hereby levied a tax upon the price of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel located within the city
limits and the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, where the cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day. The tax shall be
equal to 7% of the price for occupancy.
(2) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident.
(3) A state governmental entity, including an agency, institution, board or commission of the state, shall pay the tax imposed by this
section. This provision does not include an institution of higher education as defined by section 61.003 of the Education Code. An
entity described by this subsection shall be entitled to refund of any tax paid under this section.
(4) A state officer or employee of a state governmental entity described by subsection (b)(3) who is entitled to reimbursement for
the cost of lodging, and for whom a special provision or exception to the general rate of reimbursement under the General
Appropriations Act is not applicable, shall pay the tax imposed by this section. The state governmental entity with whom the person is
associated, however, is entitled to a refund of the tax paid.
(c) Collection.
(1) Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel located within the city limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction shall
collect for the city the tax imposed in subsection (b).
(2) A person who collects the tax as required by this section and pays over to the city the tax authorized by this section may retain
no more than 1% of the amount collected and required to be reported as reimbursement to the person for the costs in collecting the
tax.
(3) The reimbursement provided by this section shall be forfeited if the person fails to file a report as required by subsection (d) of
this section, in addition to the other penalties set forth in subsection (e) herein.
(4) If a person who is liable for the payment of a tax under this section is the owner of a hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to
the seller or the seller's assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient to pay the amount due, until the seller
provides a receipt by the chief financial officer to provide the receipt showing that the amount has been paid, or a certificate showing
that no tax is due.
(5) The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price as required by this section is liable for the
amount required to be withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price.
(6) The purchaser of a hotel may request that the chief financial officer providing a receipt under this subsection issue a certificate
stating that no tax is due, or issue a statement of the amount required to be paid before a certificate may issued. The chief financial
officer shall issue the certificate or statement no later than the sixtieth day after the date that the person receives the request.
(7) If the chief financial officer providing a receipt under subsection (c)(4) fails to issue the certificate or statement within the period
provided by subsection (c)(6), the purchaser is released from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due.
(d) Reports to be filed; payment and collection.
(1) On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required hereby to collect the tax imposed by this
section shall file a report with the city, showing the price paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of tax
collected on the city's behalf on such occupancies, and any other information that the city may reasonably require. Such persons shall
pay over the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. There shall also be furnished to the city, at the time of
payment of the tax, a copy of the tax report filed with the state comptroller in connection with the state hotel occupancy tax.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/438
(2) The city council shall adopt such procedures, rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to effectively collect the tax
levied herein. Upon request of any person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel, the city secretary shall furnish a copy
of the procedures, rules and regulations for the guidance of that person, and facilitate the collection of the tax as is required herein.
The person required to collect the tax shall be permitted to have access to books and records during reasonable business hours as
shall be necessary to enable the person to determine the correctness of the amount due under the provisions of this section, or to
determine whether or not a report should have been filed and the amount, if necessary, of taxes due.
(e) Use and allocation of revenue.
(1) Revenue generated by the hotel occupancy tax levied by this section shall be used by the city council for the purposes set forth
under section 351.101 of the Tax Code, as amended.
(2) Allocation of the revenue generated by the tax imposed by this section shall be in accordance with section 351.103 of the Tax
Code, as amended.
(3) This revenue may not be used for the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the city.
(f) Penalties; additional remedies.
(1) If any person required by the provisions of this section to collect the tax, make reports as required herein, and pay to the city the
tax imposed herein shall fail to collect such tax, shall fail to file such reports, or shall fail to pay such tax, or if any person shall file a
false report, that person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine in accordance with
the general penalty provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. Any person who shall fail to file a report as required herein, or who shall
fail to pay to the city the tax as imposed herein when the report or payment is due, shall forfeit 5% of the amount due as a penalty,
and after the first 30 days he or she shall forfeit an additional 5% of the tax. Provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less
than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of 6% per annum, beginning 60 days from the date due.
(2) In addition to the fine established by this subsection, the city may bring suit against a person who is required to collect the tax
imposed by this section and pay the collections over to the city, and who has failed to file a tax report or pay the tax when due, to
collect the tax not paid or to enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction until the tax is paid or
the report filed, as applicable, as provided by the court's order. In addition to the amount of any tax owed under this section, the
person is liable to the city for:
(A) The city's reasonable attorney's fees;
(B) The costs of an audit conducted under subsection (f)(3), as determined by the city using a reasonable rate, but only if:
(i) The tax has been delinquent for at least two complete municipal fiscal quarters at the time the audit is conducted; and
(ii) The city has not received a disbursement from the comptroller, as provided by section 156.2513 of the Tax Code,
related to the person's concurrent state tax delinquency described by section 351.008 of the Tax Code; and
(C) A penalty equal to 15% of the total amount of the tax owed if the tax has been delinquent for at least one complete
municipal fiscal quarter.
(3) If a person required to file a tax report under this section does not file the report as required, the city may determine the amount
of tax due by:
(A) Conducting an audit of each hotel in relation to which the person did not file the report as required; or
(B) Using the tax report filed for the appropriate reporting period under section 156.151 of the Tax Code in relation to that
hotel.
(4) If the person did not file a tax report under section 156.151 of the Tax Code for that reporting period in relation to that hotel, the
city may estimate the amount of tax due by using the tax reports in relation to that hotel filed during the previous calendar year under
this section or section 156.151 of the Tax Code. An estimate made under this subsection is prima facie evidence of the amount of tax
due for that period in relation to that hotel.
(5) The authority to conduct an audit under this section is in addition to any other audit authority provided by state statute or
ordinance. The city may directly perform an audit authorized by this section or contract with another person to perform the audit on an
hourly rate or fixed-fee basis. The city shall provide at least 30 days' written notice to a person who is required to collect the tax
imposed by this section with respect to a hotel, before conducting an audit of the hotel under this section.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.0, art. II, secs. 1–7; Ordinance 77-9 adopted 9/1/77; Ordinance 91-05 adopted 3/7/91; 1994 Code, sec. 36.11; Ordinance 95-
16 adopted 12/7/95; Ordinance 96-19 adopted 12/5/96; Ordinance 98-31 adopted 12/3/98; Ordinance 99-34 adopted 12/2/99; Ordinance 00-28
adopted 12/14/00; Ordinance 01-17 adopted 9/6/01; Ordinance 01-23-A adopted 12/6/01; Ordinance 02-25 adopted 12/5/02; Ordinance 2005-28
adopted 12/1/05; Ordinance 2006-23 adopted 12/7/06; Ordinance 2007-18 adopted 12/6/07; Ordinance 2010-24 adopted 10/25/10; Ordinance
2011-36 adopted 10/18/11; Ordinance 2013-18 adopted 5/8/13; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, ch. 351.
Secs. 2.10.002–2.10.030 Reserved
Division 2. Property Tax*
Sec. 2.10.031 Tax freeze for residence homestead of elderly or disabled persons
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the terms “elderly,” “disabled,” and “surviving spouse” shall be defined herein in accordance
with article VIII, section 1-b, subsection (h) of the Texas Constitution, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/438
(b) Residence homestead exemption and tax limitation established. A person who is disabled or who is 65 years of age or older (“elderly”)
shall receive a residence homestead exemption prescribed or authorized by article VIII, section 1-b, subsection (h) of the Texas Constitution. For
such persons, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed by the city shall not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that
person or that person's spouse who is disabled or 65 years of age or older and receives a residence homestead exemption on the homestead.
(c) Limitation extended to surviving spouses. If a disabled person or an elderly person dies in a year in which the person received a residence
homestead exemption prescribed by this section or any other ordinance, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed by the city may not be
increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person's surviving spouse if the spouse is 55 years of age or older at the time of the
person's death as prescribed and authorized by article VIII, section 1-b, subsection (h) of the Texas Constitution.
(d) Base tax year. The base tax year is hereby established as the 2006 tax year.
(1994 Code, sec. 36.14; Ordinance 2007-06 adopted 6/7/07)
State law reference–Limitation of municipal tax on homesteads of disabled and elderly, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.261.
Secs. 2.10.032–2.10.060 Reserved
Division 3. Sales and Use Tax*
Sec. 2.10.061 Levy of tax
There is hereby levied a 1% local sales and use tax within the city. (Ordinance 69-2 adopted 6/10/69; 1994 Code, sec. 36.10)
Sec. 2.10.062 Tax on residential use of gas and electricity
The imposition of the 1% city sales tax on residential use of gas and electricity in the city shall be continued, and residential users of gas and
electricity in the city shall not be exempted from the city sales tax. (Ordinance 78-18 adopted 12/7/78; 1994 Code, sec. 36.12)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
Sec. 2.10.063 Tax on telecommunications services
(a) A tax is hereby authorized and levied on all telecommunication services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of
telecommunication services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other
communication originates. If the point of origin of the call or other communication cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address
to which the call or other communication is billed.
(b) The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city for all other local sales and use taxes authorized
by state law.
(c) The application of the tax exemption for the sales of telecommunication services is hereby repealed to the extent as authorized by Texas
Tax Code section 321.210(b).
(d) The city secretary shall forward to the comptroller of the state, by United States registered or certified mail, a copy of this section as
adopted.
(e) The tax imposed by this section shall not affect or offset any amounts payable to the city by a provider of telecommunication services
pursuant to any license, franchise, ordinance, charter provision or state or federal law.
(1994 Code, sec. 36.15; Ordinance 2009-17 adopted 8/27/09)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sale of telecommunications services, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.210.
Secs. 2.10.064–2.10.090 Reserved
Division 5. Tax Abatement in Reinvestment Zones
Sec. 2.10.091 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Abatement. The full or partial exemption from ad valorem taxes of certain real estate property in a reinvestment zone designated by city for
development purposes.
Agreement. A contractual agreement between a property owner and lessee and the city for the purposes of tax abatement.
Base year value. The assessed value of eligible property on January 1 preceding the execution of the agreement plus the agreed-upon value of
eligible property improvements made after January 1 but before the execution of the agreement.
City council. The governing body of the City of Cuero.
Deferred maintenance. Improvements necessary for continued operations which do not improve productivity or alter the process of technology.
Economic life. The number of years a property improvement is expected to be in service in a facility.
Expansion. The addition of buildings, structures, fixed machinery or equipment for purposes of increasing production capacity.
Facility. Property improvements completed or in the process of construction which together comprise an integral whole.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/438
Manufacturing facility. Buildings and structures, including fixed machinery and equipment, the primary purpose of which is or will be the
manufacture of tangible goods or materials or the processing of the goods or materials by physical or chemical change.
Modernization. The replacement and upgrading of existing facilities which increases the productive input or output, updates the technology or
substantially lowers the cost of the operation. Modernization may result from the construction, alteration, or installation of buildings, structures,
fixed machinery, or equipment. It shall not be for the purpose of reconditioning, refurbishing, or repairing.
Multifamily housing facility. A building or buildings containing dwelling units designed to be leased to residential tenants. To qualify as a
multifamily housing facility, the facility must provide not less than ten housing units for rent.
New facility. A property previously undeveloped which is placed into service by means other than or in conjunction with expansion or
modernization.
Other basic industry. Buildings and structures, including fixed machinery and equipment not elsewhere described, used or to be used for the
production of products or services which result in the creation of new permanent jobs within the city and inject new wealth into the city.
Regional distribution center. Buildings and structures, including fixed machinery and equipment, used or to be used primarily to receive, store,
service, or distribute goods or materials owned by the facility operator.
Regional entertainment facility. Buildings and structures, including fixed machinery and equipment, used or to be used to provide entertainment
through admission of the general public.
Regional service facility. Buildings and structures, including fixed machinery and equipment, used or to be used to service goods.
Reinvestment zone. Any area within the city or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction which is designated a reinvestment zone for tax abatement
purposes. It is the intent of the city council to designate reinvestment zones on a case-by-case basis in order to maximize the potential incentives
for eligible enterprises to locate or expand within the city.
Research facility. Buildings and structures, including fixed machinery and equipment, used or to be used primarily for research or
experimentation to improve or develop new tangible goods or materials or to improve or develop the production processes thereto.
(Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec. 36.25; Ordinance 95-03 adopted 2/8/95)
Sec. 2.10.092 Eligibility criteria
(a) Eligible facilities. A facility may become eligible for abatement if it is located within a designated reinvestment zone and is a:
(1) Manufacturing facility;
(2) Research facility;
(3) Regional distribution center facility;
(4) Regional service facility;
(5) Regional entertainment facility;
(6) Other basic industry;
(7) Multifamily housing facility.
(b) Effect of commencement of construction. The city council shall not establish a reinvestment zone or enter into a tax abatement agreement
if it finds that the application for designation of a reinvestment zone and/or the abatement was filed after the commencement of construction,
alteration, or installation of improvements related to proposed modernization, expansion, or new facility.
(c) Abatement of new value. Abatement may only be granted for the additional value of eligible property improvements made subsequent to an
application for tax abatement. Eligible property improvements must be in the abatement application and must be included in the tax agreement
between the city and the property owner and lessee, subject to the limitation as the city council may require.
(d) New and existing facilities. Abatement may be granted for new facilities and improvements to existing facilities for purposes of
modernization or expansion.
(e) Property value eligible for abatement. Abatement may be extended to the value of buildings, structures, fixed machinery, and equipment,
site improvements plus that office space and related fixed improvements necessary to the operation and administration of the facility.
(f) Ineligible property. The following types of property shall be fully taxable and ineligible for abatement:
(1) Land;
(2) Inventories;
(3) Supplies;
(4) Furnishings and other forms of movable personal property;
(5) Vehicles;
(6) Vessels;
(7) Aircraft;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/438
(8) Deferred maintenance investments;
(9) Hotels and motels;
(10) Property to be rented or leased except as provided in subsection (g);
(11) Improvements for the generation and transmission of electrical energy the majority of which is not consumed by a new facility
or expansion;
(12) Any improvements, including those to produce, store or distribute natural gas, fluids or gases, which are not integral to the
operation of the facility;
(13) Property owned or used by the state or its political subdivision; or
(14) Property owned by any organization which is owned, operated, or directed by a political subdivision of the state.
(g) Owned or leased facilities. If a leased facility is granted abatement, the agreement shall be executed with the lessor and the lessee.
(h) Economic qualification (non-housing). In order to be eligible for tax abatement, the planned new facility or planned expansion of an existing
facility must be reasonably expected to increase the appraised value of the property in the amount of $250,000.00 after completion of
construction or within two years after the abatement agreement is entered into, whichever is earlier; be reasonably expected to prevent the loss
of employment, retain, or create employment for at least three people on a full-time permanent basis at the site of the eligible facility; be
necessary because capacity cannot be provided efficiently utilizing existing improved property; and be reasonably expected to contribute to the
economic development of the reinvestment zone and the city.
(Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec. 36.26; Ordinance 95-03 adopted 2/8/95; Ordinance 98-12 adopted 5/26/98)
Sec. 2.10.093 Term and percentage of abatement
(a) Term of abatement. Abatement shall be granted according to the terms contained in subsections (b) and (c) below, effective with the
January 1 valuation date immediately following the date of execution of the agreement.
(b) Percentage of abatement (non-housing).
(1) If the eligible properties are of a value of at least $250,000.00 and will prevent the loss of employment, retain or create
employment for at least three people, the taxes on such eligible property shall be abated as follows:
First year 100% abatement
Second year 75% abatement
Third year 50% abatement
Fourth year 25% abatement
Fifth year 0% abatement
(2) If the eligible properties are of a value of at least $500,000.00 and will prevent the loss of employment, retain or create
employment for at least seven people, the taxes on the eligible property shall be abated as follows:
First year 100% abatement
Second year 100% abatement
Third year 75% abatement
Fourth year 50% abatement
Fifth year 25% abatement
(3) If the eligible properties are of a value of at least $1,000,000.00 and will prevent the loss of employment, retain, or create
employment for at least 15 people, the taxes on the eligible properties shall be abated as follows:
First year 100% abatement
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/438
Second year 100% abatement
Third year 100% abatement
Fourth year 75% abatement
Fifth year 50% abatement
(4) If the eligible properties are of a value of at least $15,000,000.00 and will prevent the loss of employment, retain or create
employment for at least 25 people, the taxes on such eligible property shall be abated as follows:
First year (including construction) 100% abatement
Second year 100% abatement
Third year 100% abatement
Fourth year 100% abatement
Fifth year 100% abatement
Sixth year 75% abatement
Seventh year 50% abatement
Eighth year 25% abatement
(c) Percentage of abatement (multifamily housing facility).
(1) If the eligible properties are of a value of at least $320,000.00 and will prevent the loss of employment, retain or create
employment for at least one person part-time, the taxes on such eligible property shall be abated as follows:
First year 50% abatement
Second year 40% abatement
Third year 30% abatement
Fourth year 20% abatement
Fifth year 20% abatement
(2) If the eligible properties are of a value of at least $1,000,000.00 and will prevent the loss of employment, retain or create
employment for at least one person full-time, the taxes on such eligible property shall be abated as follows:
First year 65% abatement
Second year 65% abatement
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/438
Third year 50% abatement
Fourth year 40% abatement
Fifth year 30% abatement
(3) If the eligible properties are of a value of at least $3,500,000.00 and will prevent the loss of employment, retain or create
employment for at least two people full-time, the taxes on such eligible property shall be abated as follows:
First year 80% abatement
Second year 80% abatement
Third year 60% abatement
Fourth year 60% abatement
Fifth year 40% abatement
(d) Taxability. From the execution of the abatement contract to the end of the agreement period, taxes shall be payable as follows:
(1) The value of the ineligible property as described in section 2.10.092(f) shall be fully taxable.
(2) The base year value of existing eligible properties as determined each year shall be fully taxable.
(3) The additional value of eligible properties shall be taxable at the non-abated percentage of its value as provided in subsection
(b) [and (c)] above.
(Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89: Ordinance 90-03 adopted 3/22/90; 1994 Code, sec. 36.27; Ordinance 95-03 adopted 2/8/95; Ordinance 98-
12 adopted 5/26/98)
Sec. 2.10.094 Application
(a) Joint application. An application for designation of a reinvestment zone and for tax abatement may be combined and submitted jointly.
(b) Filing. Any present or potential property owner of taxable property in the city may request the creation of a reinvestment zone and tax
abatement by filing a written application at the office of the city secretary.
(c) Contents. The application shall include all information contemplated by these guidelines and criteria in order for the city to evaluate the
applicant's eligibility and to determine whether a reinvestment zone should be designated and tax abatement granted. Specifically, the
application shall include the following:
(1) A list of the kind, number and location of all proposed improvements of the property.
(2) A statement of the uses of the property showing that it is consistent with the general purpose of encouraging development or
redevelopment of the reinvestment zone during the period that the property tax exemptions are in effect.
(3) A map showing existing uses and conditions of real property in the reinvestment zone.
(4) A map showing proposed improvements and uses in the reinvestment zone.
(5) A statement of the new value that will result from the modernization, expansion, or new improvements to be undertaken.
(6) A statement of number of jobs that will be created by the modernization, expansion or new improvements.
(7) Estimated date of start of construction, length of construction, value of new improvements to be completed during each year of
construction and estimated date of completion.
(8) A general written description of the general nature and extent of modernization, expansion, or new improvements to be
undertaken.
(9) A legal description of the property.
(10) In the case of modernization, a statement of the assessed value of the facility, separately stated for real and personal property,
for the tax year immediately preceding the application.
(11) A financial statement of the individual or corporation filing the application, complete with credit references and other documents
which the city may require to enable the city to evaluate the financial capacity and other factors of the applicant.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/438
(12) Any other information that the city may deem appropriate to assist it in determining whether to designate the requested
reinvestment zone and to enter into a tax abatement agreement with the applicant.
(d) Notice of application. Upon receipt of a completed application, the city manager shall mail written notice to the presiding officer of the
governing body of each taxing unit that includes in its boundaries real property that is included in the proposed reinvestment zone. The notice
shall be mailed at least 15 days before the city council takes any action on the application.
(e) Feasibility study. After receipt of an application for the creation of a reinvestment zone and application for tax abatement, the city may
cause a feasibility study to be prepared, which the applicant will be required to pay for, setting forth the impact of the proposed reinvestment
zone and tax abatement. The study shall include, but not be limited to, an assessment of the economic effects of the creation of the zone and the
abatement of taxes. Additionally, the study shall provide a legal description of the property to be included in the reinvestment zone.
(Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec. 36.28; Ordinance 95-03 adopted 2/8/95)
Sec. 2.10.095 Designation of reinvestment zone
(a) Requirements. The city may not designate an area as a reinvestment zone until the city has held a public hearing on the designation at
which time interested persons shall be entitled to speak and present evidence for or against the designation and has found that:
(1) The designation would contribute to the retention or expansion of primary employment;
(2) The designation would attract major investment in the zone that would be a benefit to the property to be included in the zone;
and
(3) Development anticipated to incur in the proposed zone would contribute to the economic development of the city.
(b) Notice of hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be clearly identified on the city's agenda. In addition, notice shall issue as follows:
(1) Notice of the hearing must be published in a newspaper of general circulation not later than the 15th day before the date of the
hearing;
(2) Written notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the presiding officer of the governing body of each taxing unit that includes in its
boundaries real property that is included in the proposed reinvestment zone. The notice shall be mailed at least 15 days before the
hearing.
(c) Date of expiration. The designation of a reinvestment zone shall expire five years after the date of designation.
(1) The designation of a reinvestment zone that has expired may be renewed for periods not to exceed five years.
(2) The expiration of the designation of a reinvestment zone shall not affect existing tax abatement agreements made under these
guidelines and criteria.
(Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec. 36.29; Ordinance 95-03 adopted 2/8/95)
Sec. 2.10.096 Tax abatement agreements
(a) Public hearing. Prior to entering into a tax abatement agreement, the city may, at its option, hold a public hearing at which interested
parties shall be entitled to speak and present written materials for or against the approval of a tax abatement agreement.
(b) Required findings by city council. In order to enter into a tax abatement agreement, the city council must find that:
(1) The terms of the proposed agreement and the property subject to the agreement meet these guidelines and criteria;
(2) There will be no substantial adverse effect on the provision of the city's service or tax base; and
(3) The planned use of the property will not constitute a hazard to public safety, health or morals.
(c) Resolution of city council. After approval, the city council shall formerly pass a resolution and execute an agreement with the owner of the
facility and lessee as required, which shall include the following provisions and conditions:
(1) The condition that the owner of the property shall make specific improvements or repairs to the property as described in the
application.
(2) List the kind, number and location of all proposed improvements of the property.
(3) Permit access to and authorize inspection of the property by city officials, employees and/or their designees to insure that the
improvements or repairs are made according to the specifications and conditions of the agreement, and that the taxpayer is
complying with the agreement.
(4) Limit the uses of the property consistent with the general purpose of encouraging development or redevelopment of the zone
during the period that the property tax exemptions are in effect.
(5) Provide for recapturing property tax revenue lost as a result of the agreement if the owner of the property fails to make the
improvements or repairs as provided by the agreement.
(6) A map showing existing uses and conditions of the real property in the reinvestment zone.
(7) A map showing proposed improvements and uses in the reinvestment zone.
(8) Estimated value to be abated and base year value.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/438
(9) Percent of value to be abated each year as provided in section 2.10.093(b) [and (c)].
(10) The commencement and termination dates of the abatement.
(11) The proposed use of the facility, nature of construction, time schedule and property description.
(12) Provisions for default, violation of terms and conditions, delinquent taxes, recapture, administration and assignment as
provided in these guidelines and criteria and any other provisions that may be required for uniformity or by state law.
(13) Amount of investment and average number of jobs involved.
(14) Any other provisions that the city deems necessary in order to carry out the intent and purpose of these guidelines and criteria.
(d) Execution. The agreement shall normally be executed within 60 days after the applicant has forwarded all necessary information and
documentation to the city.
(Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec. 36.30; Ordinance 95-03 adopted 2/8/95)
Sec. 2.10.097 Default; recapture of taxes
(a) Notice of default; cure period. Should the city determine that the company or individual is in default according to the terms and conditions
of its agreement, the city shall notify the company or individual in writing at the address stated in the agreement, and if such is not cured within
60 days from the date of such notice (“cure period”), then the agreement may be terminated by the city.
(b) Elements of default. The taxpayer shall be considered in default under the terms of the agreement in the event that the taxpayer:
(1) Allows its ad valorem taxes owed to the city to become delinquent without timely and proper protest and contest;
(2) Fails to increase the appraised value of the property in the amount and within the time provided by the agreement, fails to
prevent the loss of employment, retain, or create employment for the number of people contemplated by the agreement or otherwise
violates any of the terms and conditions of the abatement agreement; or
(3) Discontinues producing product or service for any reason excepting fire, explosion or other casualty or accident or natural
disaster for a period of one year during the abatement period after the facility is completed and begins producing product or service.
(c) Termination of agreement. Termination of the tax abatement agreement shall be retroactive to the beginning of the agreement. Termination
shall be effected by resolution of the city council and written notice mailed to the taxpayer.
(d) Recapture. On termination, the taxpayer shall then become liable for the payment of all taxes that would have otherwise become due but
for the abatement agreement for all calendar years during which the abatement agreement was in effect. The taxes shall be paid to the city
within 60 days from the date of receipt of notice of termination. All taxes due shall include statutory penalty and interest from the date they would
otherwise have become delinquent until date they are actually paid.
(Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec. 36.31; Ordinance 95-03 adopted 2/8/95)
Sec. 2.10.098 Duties of chief appraiser
The chief appraiser of the county shall, as a normal consequence of his duties, annually determine an assessment of the real and personal
property comprising the reinvestment zone. Each year, the company or individual receiving abatement shall furnish the assessor with the
information as may be necessary for the abatement. Once value has been established, the chief appraiser shall notify the affected taxing
jurisdictions which levy taxes in the reinvestment zone of the amount of the assessment. (Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec.
36.32; Ordinance 95-03 adopted 2/8/95)
Sec. 2.10.099 Compliance inspections
All compliance inspections will be made only after the giving of 24 hours' notice and will only be conducted in such manner as not to
unreasonably interfere with the construction and operation of the facility. All inspections will be made with one or more representatives of the
company or individual and in accordance with its safety standards. (Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec. 36.33; Ordinance 95-03
adopted 2/8/95)
Sec. 2.10.100 Annual evaluations
Upon completion of construction, the city shall annually evaluate each facility receiving abatement to ensure compliance with the agreement and
report possible violations to the city council and city attorney. (Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec. 36.34; Ordinance 95-03
adopted 2/8/95)
Sec. 2.10.101 Notice requirements
Any notice required to be given to the city hereunder shall be in writing, and mailed or personally delivered to the city secretary. Notices to the
taxpayer shall be addressed to its designated representative at the address provided in its application or the tax abatement agreement.
(Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec. 36.35; Ordinance 95-03 adopted 2/8/95)
Sec. 2.10.102 Variances
An application for a variance from the provisions of these guidelines and criteria may be made in writing, mailed or personally delivered to the
city secretary. The total duration of an abatement shall in no instance exceed eight consecutive years commencing January 1 following the date
of the tax abatement agreement. The request shall include a complete description of the circumstances explaining why the applicant should be
granted such a variance. Approval of a request for variance requires at least a three-fourths vote of the city council. (Ordinance 89-07 adopted
7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec. 36.36; Ordinance 95-03 adopted 2/8/95; Ordinance 98-12 adopted 5/26/98)
Sec. 2.10.103 Assignment of agreement
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/438
An abatement agreement may be transferred and assigned by the holder to a new owner or lessee of the same facility, subject to obtaining
written approval by resolution of the city council. Approval shall be conditioned upon the assignee providing whatever proof the city council may
require to show the assignee's financial capability to carry out all the terms and conditions of the tax abatement agreement. Further, the assignee
shall agree in writing by amendment to the original tax abatement agreement that it shall be bound by all the terms, covenants and conditions
contained in the original agreement. No assignment or transfer shall be approved if the parties to the existing tax abatement agreement, the new
owner or the new lessee are liable to the city or any other taxing unit affected by the tax agreement for delinquent taxes, or otherwise in default
of any of the terms, covenants or conditions contained in the tax abatement agreement. Subject to the foregoing conditions, the city council shall
not unreasonably withhold approval of any proposed assignment. (Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec. 36.37; Ordinance 95-03
adopted 2/8/95)
Sec. 2.10.104 Sunset provision
At the end of the two-year effective period of these guidelines and criteria, all reinvestment zones and tax abatement contracts created pursuant
to these provisions will be reviewed by the city council to determine whether the goals have been achieved. Based upon that review, the
guidelines and criteria may be modified, renewed or eliminated. In the event that these guidelines and criteria are not modified or renewed, they
shall automatically terminate two years after their effective date. (Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec. 36.38; Ordinance 95-03
adopted 2/8/95)
Sec. 2.10.105 Effect of modification or termination; amendments
(a) The modification or termination of these guidelines and criteria shall have no effect upon existing tax abatement agreements entered into
while these guidelines and criteria are in effect.
(b) Unless otherwise specifically indicated in the context in which used, the reference to “these guidelines and criteria” means the guidelines
and criteria adopted by the city council.
(Ordinance 89-07 adopted 7/25/89; 1994 Code, sec. 36.39; Ordinance 95-03 adopted 2/8/95; Ordinance 01-22 adopted 9/6/01; Ordinance 03-06
adopted 8/7/03; Ordinance 2005-10 adopted 8/4/05; Ordinance 2009-12 adopted 7/2/09)
CHAPTER 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 3.01.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; reference to the male gender includes the female, and references to any person or animal
without specifying gender include both male and female; the word “shall” is mandatory and directory wherever it is used in this chapter. Other
words defined are as follows:
Animal. Any living creature, except human beings, classified as a member of the kingdom Animalia, and including, but not limited to, mammals,
birds, reptiles and fish.
Animal control facility. An establishment operated by the city or under contract to the city for the temporary confinement, safekeeping, and control
of animals which come into the custody of the city.
Animal control officer. The person designated by the city manager to enforce this chapter, his or her authorized representatives, or any other law
enforcement officer. The animal control officer shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter and any regulations promulgated
hereunder, unless otherwise provided by law.
Animal establishment. Any facility or business that has custody or control of animals within the city, including, but not limited to, pet shops, pet
grooming facilities, animal auction facilities or commercial kennels. This term does not include veterinary or medical facilities, research or other
facilities licensed by government agencies.
Assistance animal. Any animal professionally trained to assist a handicapped person.
At large. An animal (excluding cats) that meets one of the following criteria:
(1) On premises of owner. Any animal not confined to the premises of the owner by some physical means of sufficient height,
strength, length, and/or manner of construction to preclude the animal from leaving the premises of the owner. Any animal being
contained by a fence that, because of the fence's lack of height or general disrepair, cannot properly restrict the animal, shall be
considered at large.
(2) Off premises of owner. Any animal which is not physically and continually restrained by some person by means of a leash or
chain of proper strength and length that precludes the animal from making unsolicited contact with any person, their clothing, their
property, or their premises. The term shall not include animals being trained or exhibited while under the immediate physical or vocal
control of a person, so long as the animal demonstrates complete and immediate compliance with all vocal commands of the person.
Bite. A puncture or tear of the skin inflicted by the teeth of an animal.
Cat. Any live or dead cat (Felis catus); generally, a domestic feline of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized. Cats and related terms are
defined as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/438
(1) Feral cat. Any cat which is too poorly socialized to be handled (and therefore must be trapped and sedated for examination) and
cannot be placed into a typical pet home.
(2) Free-roaming cat. Cats which are not confined to the house or an enclosure and are at large.
(3) Stray cat. Cats which are currently or recently owned which may be lost from their homes.
Dangerous animal.
(1) Any individual animal which, because of its physical nature and/or vicious propensity, would constitute a danger to human life or
property, or any animal that is possessed of tendencies to attack or to injure human beings or other animals;
(2) An animal that commits an unprovoked attack on a human being that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an
enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its
own;
(3) An animal that commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was
reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own, and those acts cause a person reasonably to believe
that the animal will attack and cause bodily injury to that person; or
(4) An animal that makes an unprovoked attack on a domestic animal or domestic fowl that causes bodily injury or death, and which
occurs when such animal is at large.
Dangerous wild animal. Any animal not normally considered domesticated which, because of its size, vicious nature or other natural
characteristic, would constitute a danger to human life, property or domestic animals, or any animal that is restricted from ownership by any state
or federal law, including, but not limited to, the following animals:
(1) Reptiles: Venomous reptiles, crocodiles or alligators;
(2) Birds: Emus, ostriches, rheas, and any species illegal to own under federal or state law;
(3) Mammals: Ocelots, lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, cougars, bobcats, wolves, dingoes, coyotes, jackals, elephants, weasels,
martins, minks, badgers, pandas, bears, raccoons, bats, foxes, skunks, cheetahs, servals, caracals, hyenas, baboons, chimpanzees,
orangutans, gorillas, any species illegal to own under federal or state law, and any animal which is or may be hereafter listed as a
“high risk” animal in the Texas Rabies Control Act; or
(4) Any hybrid of any animal classified as a dangerous wild animal.
Department. The department of state health services.
Dog. Any live or dead dog (Canis familiaris); generally, a domestic canine of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized.
Domestic animal. Animals which are naturally tame and gentle, or which by long association with man have become thoroughly domesticated
and are now reduced to a state of subjection to his or her will so that they no longer possess a disposition or inclination to escape.
Estray. Any unbranded sheep, cattle, horses, or mules found running at large, or any branded sheep, cattle, horses, or mules found running at
large, or any swine found running at large, but it does not mean nor include any unweaned animal specified in this section that is running with its
mother.
Harbor. The act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing premises to which the animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of
three days.
Identification. Any acceptable method such as a registration tag or tattoo readily traceable to the current owner.
Impound. The placing of an animal in an animal control facility, or the taking into custody of an animal for the purposes of transportation to an
animal control facility under contract with the city.
Inhumane treatment of animals. Any treatment of an animal prohibited by any provision of law, including federal, state and local laws, ordinances
or rules.
Livestock. Includes, regardless of age, sex or breed, horses, consisting of all equine species including mules, donkeys, and jackasses; cows,
consisting of all bovine species; sheep, consisting of all ovine species; llamas or alpacas; goats, consisting of all caprine species; and pigs,
consisting of all swine species.
Owner. Any person, partnership, corporation, association or legal entity that harbors, shelters, keeps, controls, manages, possesses or has
whole or part interest in any animal. The occupant, owner or head of household of any premises where an animal remains for 72 hours or more
shall be rebuttably presumed to be the owner of such animal, unless the animal has been reported to the animal control officer as a stray animal.
An occupant of any premises on which a dog or cat remains or customarily returns is a person responsible for it under this chapter. If a person
under the age of 17 years owns an animal subject to the provisions of this chapter, the head of the household of which such person under the
age of 17 years is a member shall be the person responsible for the animal under this chapter. Such household head may himself or herself be
under the age of 17 years and therefore subject to prosecution under this chapter. There may be more than one person responsible for an
animal.
Pet animal. Any animal that may be kept as a pet within the city so long as all of the required provisions of this chapter are met, and is not a
dangerous wild animal or a wild animal, including but not limited to the following animals:
(1) Reptiles. Any non-venomous reptile that is not protected from ownership by any state or federal law;
(2) Birds. Any birds commonly kept as pets that are not protected from ownership by any state or federal law, or any bird kept for
falconry purposes by a state and federally permitted falconer;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/438
(3) Fish. Any fish commonly kept as pets that are not protected from ownership by any state or federal law; or
(4) Mammals. Including but not limited to any mammal commonly kept as pets, including dogs, cats, ferrets, rabbits, guinea pigs,
hamsters, hedgehogs, rats, mice, chinchillas, and sugar gliders.
Public nuisance. The conduct of any owner in allowing an animal to:
(1) Engage in conduct which establishes such animal as a “dangerous animal”;
(2) Damage, soil, defile or defecate on private property other than the owner's or on public property, unless such waste is
immediately removed and properly disposed of by the owner of the animal;
(3) Be “at large” (excluding registered cats);
(4) Cause a disturbance by excessive barking or noise-making near the private residence of another;
(5) Produce odors or unclean conditions sufficient to offend a person of normal sensibilities standing [sic] or which creates a
condition conducive to the breeding of flies or other pests;
(6) Chase vehicles, or molest, attack or interfere with other animals or persons, or is at large on public or private property; or
(7) Create a condition that is dangerous to human life or health; that renders the ground, the water, the air or the food a hazard or
injurious to human life or health or that is offensive to the senses; or that is detrimental to the public health.
Quarantine. To take into custody, place in confinement, and isolate from human beings and other animals. The quarantine period for a dog, cat,
or domestic ferret for rabies observation is ten days or 240 hours from the date and time of the bite, scratch or other exposure, or as
recommended by the regional veterinarian from the department of state health services.
Rabies control authority. The animal control officer.
Registration. A rabies certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian and an identification tag recognized by the animal control officer from an
approved issuing agent.
Restraint. To control an animal by physical means so that it remains on the premises of the owner, or, when off the owner's premises, by means
of a cage, or leash or rope under the direct control of a person of sufficient strength to control the animal.
Sterilized. Any animal, male or female, rendered incapable of breeding or being bred.
Tether. To chain, tie, fasten or otherwise secure an animal to a fixed point so that it can move or range only within certain limits.
Vaccination. The inoculation of an animal with a rabies vaccine that is licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture for use in that
species and which is administered according to the label's directions by a veterinarian for the purpose of immunizing the animal against rabies.
Veterinary hospital. Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and
injuries of animals.
Wild animal. See “Dangerous wild animal.”
(1994 Code, sec. 90.01; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.01.002 Fees
(a) The fees for registration, permits, impoundment and adoption shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) Citations may be issued for failure to pay applicable fees.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.02; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11; Ordinance 2013-30 adopted 8/27/13; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 3.01.003 Records
It shall be the duty of the animal control department to keep or cause to be kept accurate and detailed records of:
(1) Impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into custody;
(2) All bite cases reported to it and its investigation of same;
(3) All complaints received. Any person reporting an unvaccinated dog or cat, a dog or cat running at large in violation of this
chapter or an animal declared to be a nuisance under this chapter or reporting any other violation of this chapter shall sign a sworn
complaint setting out fully the facts on which the complaint is based and the sworn complaint shall be maintained in the records of the
animal control department.
(4) Monies received. Records shall be kept of all monies received under this chapter and shall be open to inspection at reasonable
times by persons responsible for similar records of the city and shall be audited by the city auditor in the same manner as other city
records which are audited.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.25; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.01.004 Display of permits; inspections
It shall be a violation for any person who owns, harbors, or possesses an animal that requires a permit, or for any holder of a special use permit,
to refuse, upon request by the department, to make his/her animal(s), premises, facilities, equipment, and any necessary registration(s) or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/438
permit(s) available for inspection for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (1994 Code, sec. 90.03;
Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.01.005 Enforcement generally; penalty
(a) Any animal that is found to be in violation of this chapter may be impounded by the animal control officer. Additionally, any person or owner
who violates or fails to comply with any portion of this chapter may receive a notice of violation from the animal control officer and shall be
deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and may be fined in an amount in accordance with the general penalty provided in section 1.01.009 of
this code for each animal in violation. Each day of violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) The animal control officer shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this chapter and any other power or duty stated
within the terms of this chapter. If the person being cited is not present, the animal control officer may send the notice of violation to the alleged
offender by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, by depositing the same in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly prevent, interfere with, or obstruct the animal control officer in the performance of their
duties. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any lawful order of the local rabies control authority officer or any animal control
officer of the city.
(d) The local rabies control authority officer, any animal control officer, or any peace officer is authorized to, including but not limited to:
(1) Humanely euthanize an animal which poses an imminent danger to a person or property or when a real or apparent immediate
necessity exists for the destruction of an animal.
(2) Impound an animal which is diseased or endangers the health of a person or another animal.
(3) Impound any animal found to be running at large within the city.
(4) Humanely euthanize an impounded animal if the animal is suffering from injury, disease, or illness.
(5) Humanely euthanize any animal suspected of having rabies, or which animal manifests a disposition to bite, when such
animal(s) is found at large, after having made a reasonable but unsuccessful effort to capture the animal.
(6) Humanely euthanize any impounded dangerous animal immediately upon impoundment, unless there is reason to believe that it
has an owner.
(7) Humanely euthanize any wild animal immediately upon impoundment, so long as such act does not violate state of federal laws.
(8) Humanely euthanize any nursing baby animal impounded without the mother, or where the mother cannot or refuses to provide
nutritious milk, to prevent further suffering.
(9) Humanely euthanize an animal when an owner no longer wishes responsibility for an animal or believes the animal to be in an ill
or injured condition upon the owner signing a waiver, supplied by the animal shelter, allowing the animal to be immediately
euthanized.
(10) Humanely euthanize or transfer to a humane organization any impounded animal that is to be destroyed as a result of the
animal being impounded for more than five days.
(e) In any complaint and in an action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, it shall not be necessary to
negate any exception, excuse, proviso, or exemption contained in this chapter, and the burden of proof of any such exception, excuse, proviso,
or exemption shall be on the owner or defendant as an affirmative defense.
(f) The city shall be entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled to under the authority of federal, state or local
law.
(g) No person shall interfere in any manner or give false information to the local rabies control authority, the local health director, the animal
control officers and other authorized employees of the city in the performance of their duties.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.04; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 3.01.006 Authority of enforcement officers
(a) Impoundment; right of entry. Animal control officers or other law enforcement officers shall have the power to impound animals which
create an animal nuisance per se for the purpose of abating a nuisance and in cases where animal control officers have reason to believe an
animal has been or is being cruelly treated, has rabies or exhibits other violations of law as follows:
(1) On public property, in all cases;
(2) On private property, if:
(A) The consent of the resident or property owner is obtained;
(B) The officer reasonably believes there is immediate and imminent danger or peril to the public if the animal in question is
not impounded; or
(C) Authorized by appropriate courts of law.
(3) The officer has the right to pursue and apprehend animals running at large onto private property while enforcing the provisions
of this chapter.
(b) Animals in immediate danger. Any animal observed by the animal control officer or peace officer to be in immediate danger, in the agent's
or officer's opinion, may be removed from such situation by the quickest and most reasonable means available. It shall be the responsibility of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/438
the animal's owner to repair any damage caused by the removal of the animal from the dangerous situation by the animal control officer or peace
officer.
(c) Abatement orders. The animal control officer or assigned designee may order the abatement of the conditions which are not in accordance
with this chapter, other applicable state or federal regulations or laws, or which otherwise constitute a nuisance. Failure to comply with the written
notice constitutes grounds for the city to obtain any relief available to by law, including but not limited to relief by injunction. Additionally, failure to
comply with the written notice may subject the violator to administrative proceedings and criminal charges.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.10; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.01.007 Abatement of continuing public nuisance
(a) Definition. A continuing public nuisance is defined as a public nuisance that, after notice as described in subsection (c) to the owner of an
animal(s) or person in control of an animal(s), continues unabated, as determined by the animal control officer.
(b) Determination by animal control officer. The animal control officer may determine that a public nuisance exists through an investigation of
any reported or perceived public nuisance, and may interview witnesses and/or conduct such hearings as he or she may determine are
necessary, formally or informally. He or she shall make a determination based on the necessity to preserve the public health, safety and welfare
of the community.
(c) Notice of public nuisance. Upon determining that a public nuisance exists, the animal control officer shall notify the animal owner or the
person in control of the animal(s). This notice shall be in writing and shall contain a statement that such person has a right to appeal. The notice
shall set forth the noncompliance and order the owner to abate the public nuisance described in such notice within seven days. Notice of a public
nuisance shall include, but not be limited to, written notice of the existence of a public nuisance delivered by personal service, certified mail,
return receipt requested, or left at the entrance to the premises where the animal(s) is harbored. A notice that is mailed is deemed received five
days after it is placed in a mail receptacle of the United States Postal Service.
(d) Failure to comply with notice. If such owner fails or refuses to comply with the demand for compliance in the notice within seven days of
such notice or publication, the animal control officer may order the abatement of the public nuisance by one of the following means:
(1) Impoundment of the animal(s) that is the source of the continuing public nuisance and the adoption of the animal(s) as provided
in this chapter, except that the owner, his or her agents or representatives, or family members may not adopt the animal(s) adjudged a
continuing public nuisance; or
(2) Impoundment and humane destruction of the animal(s) that is the source of the continuing public nuisance.
(e) Appeals. An owner or person in control of the animal(s), not later than seven days after the date such person is notified that an animal is a
continuing public nuisance, may appeal the determination of the animal control officer to the municipal court. Upon receiving an appeal, the
municipal court shall hold a hearing at a time and place of their designation.
(f) Compliance after unsuccessful appeal. The owner or person in control of the animal(s) determined to be a continuing public nuisance shall
take action to abate the nuisance within 48 hours of an unsuccessful appeal. The failure to bring such animal(s) into compliance shall be an
offense, and each day thereafter that such person fails to bring such animal(s) into compliance shall constitute a separate offense. If the owner or
person in control of such animal(s) fails to bring such animal(s) into compliance as provided for by the municipal court following appeal, such
animal(s) may be impounded and put up for adoption in accordance with subsection (d) of this section or humanely destroyed.
(g) Search and seizure warrant. The animal control officer shall be authorized, after due process, to obtain a search and seizure warrant for
the purposes of enforcing this section.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.12; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.01.008 Inhumane treatment of animals; other offenses
(a) Animals shall be cared for, treated, maintained, and transported in a humane manner and not in violation of any provision of law, including
federal, state, and local laws, ordinances, and administrative rules.
(b) In addition, a person commits an offense if:
(1) A person other than a licensed veterinarian docks an animal's tail or removes dew claws of a puppy over five days of age, or
crops an animal's ears of any age;
(2) A person physically removes from its mother by selling, giving away, delivering, trading, or bartering any dog, cat, ferret, or
rabbit less than six weeks old or any other animal that is not yet weaned, except as advised by a licensed veterinarian;
(3) A person dyes or colors chicks, ducks or rabbits;
(4) A person abandons or dumps any animal;
(5) A person who is in control of a motor vehicle that strikes a domestic animal fails to report the accident to the city animal control
officer as soon as possible;
(6) A person overdrives, overloads, drives when overloaded, or overworks any animal;
(7) A person tortures, cruelly beats, mutilates, clubs, or by any other means needlessly kills or injures any animal, wild or owned,
within the limits of the city;
(8) A person forces, allows, or permits any animal to remain in its own filth;
(9) A person keeps, shelters, or harbors any animal having a potentially life-threatening infestation of ticks, fleas, or other parasites,
any other obvious life-threatening illness, or injury, or any other communicable illness transmissible to animal or human, without
having sought and obtained proper treatment from a licensed veterinarian for such infestation or illness;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/438
(10) A person causes an animal to fight another animal or person;
(11) A person fails to provide, at all times, his or her animal with adequate wholesome food and potable water, proper shelter and
protection from inclement weather, and veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering;
(12) A person, firm or corporation shall raise or kill a dog or cat for the skin or fur;
(13) A person, firm or corporation shall mutilate any animal, whether such animal is dead or alive (medical or veterinary medical
research, medical or veterinary medical necropsy, and biology class use of animals shall not be considered mutilation);
(14) A person, firm or corporation attaches a collar or harness to an animal that is of an inadequate size so that it restricts the
animal's growth or causes damage to the animal's skin;
(15) A person who owns or is in control of an animal permits such animal to be at large within the city;
(16) A person who creates, maintains, permits or causes a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter; or
(17) A person owns, keeps, harbors, or possesses horses, cattle, or other livestock in any manner that is a violation of this chapter.
(c) The animal control officer shall utilize the authority granted by federal, state and local laws to lawfully seize and impound any animal if the
investigating animal control officer or police officer has reason to believe that an animal has been or is being cruelly treated, pending a hearing
before the municipal court judge on the issues of cruelty and disposition of the animal. Seizure of the subject animal prior to receiving a warrant
is hereby authorized if such a delay endangers the life or well-being of the animal, or if it would unreasonably prolong the suffering of the animal
needing immediate attention.
(d) This section shall not be interpreted to restrict the extermination of rats, mice, insects, other vermin, or any such animal deemed a
nuisance by state law, through the use of traps, poisons, or other commercially available means, when used in accordance with the
manufacturer's directions, as long as reasonable precautions are taken to ensure that no human, pet, or wild animal, other than the targeted
species, comes into contact with the traps, poisons, or other means and that such use does not violate any other section of this chapter.
(e) This section shall not be interpreted to restrict rodeos, livestock shows and livestock show associations, livestock auctions, or the activities
and operations of 4H clubs, FFA chapters, and agricultural science classes.
(1994 Code , sec. 90.07; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
State law references–Cruelty to livestock animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.09; cruelty to nonlivestock animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.092.
Sec. 3.01.009 Leaving animal unattended in vehicle
A person having charge or custody of an animal shall not place or confine such animal or allow such animal to be placed or confined in a motor
vehicle or trailer under such conditions or for such a period of time as may endanger the health of the animal due to heat, lack of food or water,
or such other circumstances as may cause injury or death of the animal. Animal control officers finding an animal being held in violation of this
provision may cite the owner for violating this section, obtain a search warrant pursuant to state or federal law, and/or use reasonable force to
remove an animal from a vehicle whenever it appears the animal's health or safety is or soon will be endangered, and said neglected or
endangered animal shall be impounded and held pending a hearing. It shall be the responsibility of the animal's owner to repair any damage
caused by the removal of the animal from the dangerous situation by the animal control officer or peace officer. (1994 Code, sec. 90.08;
Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.01.010 Tethering dog or other animal
It shall be unlawful for any person to tie or tether a dog or other animal to a stationary object for a period of time or in a location so as to create
an unhealthy situation for the animal or a potentially dangerous situation for a pedestrian as determined by the animal control officer. The terms
“unhealthy situation” and “potentially dangerous situation” shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1) To tether any animal in such a manner as to permit the animal access upon any public right-of-way;
(2) To tether any animal in such a manner as to cause the animal injury or pain or not to permit the animal to reach shelter, food
and/or water or otherwise create an unsafe or unhealthy situation;
(3) To tether any animal in such as manner as to permit the animal to leave the owner's property;
(4) To tether any animal in an area that is not properly fenced so as to prevent any person or child from entering the area occupied
by said animal;
(5) To tether any pet animal in a manner whereby the animal is subject to harassment, stings or bites from outdoor insects, or
attacks by other animals;
(6) To tether any pet animal with a tether that is less than ten feet in length;
(7) To tether any animal with a tether that is not equipped with swivel ends;
(8) To tether any animal in such a manner that does not prevent the animal from becoming entangled with any obstruction, from
partially or totally jumping any fence, or from leaving part of its owner's property;
(9) To fail to remove waste from the tethered area on a daily basis;
(10) To tether any animal without using a properly fitted collar or harness;
(11) To use choke-type collars to tether any animal; or
(12) To use a tether that weighs more than one-fifth of the animal's body weight.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/438
(1994 Code, sec. 90.09; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
State law reference–Unlawful restraint of dog, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 821.076 et seq.
Sec. 3.01.011 Defecation by dogs on public or private property
(a) An owner, harborer, or other person in possession of a dog commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control
allows, the dog to defecate in the city on private or public property and fails to remove and dispose of any excreta the dog deposits.
(b) An owner, harborer, or other person in possession of a dog commits an offense if he or she fails to have in his or her possession materials
or implements that, either alone or in combination with each other, can be used to immediately and in a sanitary and lawful manner both remove
and dispose of any excreta the dog may deposit on the property.
(c) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (a) or (b) that:
(1) The property was owned, leased, or controlled by the owner, harborer, or person in possession of the dog at the time it
defecated;
(2) The dog was specifically trained to assist a person with a disability and was in possession of that disabled person at the time it
defecated or was otherwise present on the property;
(3) The owner of the property or person in control of the property had given prior consent for the dog to defecate on the property; or
(4) The dog is a police canine being used in official law enforcement activities.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.11; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.01.012 Limitation on number of dogs and cats; kennel permit
(a) Except as provided by this section, no residence within the city shall harbor more than four adult dogs, and four adult cats, over the age of
16 weeks. No residence within the city shall harbor more than one litter of puppies and one litter of kittens.
(b) Any persons desiring to keep more than four adult dogs, four adult cats, or more than one litter of puppies or kittens at premises occupied
by them may apply with the animal control officer for a kennel permit. The applicant shall pay an application fee at the time of filing. The applicant
shall be subject to all provisions of the city zoning ordinance.
(c) The city building official is authorized to issue such a permit under the following conditions: A permit may be issued after an inspection of
the premises to determine compliance with the animal services regulations. A permit shall not be issued if it is found that the animals cannot be
maintained without creating noise or odor nuisances, otherwise being detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, or in a healthy or
sanitary environment.
(d) Such permit may be revoked by the city building official for cause, including but not limited to violations of the provisions of this chapter or
the inability of the permit holder to keep the animals without creating noise or odor nuisances, otherwise being detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare, or in a healthy or sanitary environment.
(e) All kennel permits issued under this section shall be valid indefinitely, unless the city building official revokes the permit. When issued, the
permit shall remain the sole property of the city and shall be valid only as to the applicant and location for which it was originally issued. The
permit may not be sold or transferred, voluntarily or involuntarily, to any other person or entity.
(f) Any person either denied a kennel permit, or who has had their permit revoked, may file an appeal with the city manager. Such appeal must
be made in writing within ten days of receiving written notice from the city building official of the permit denial or revocation. If no appeal request
is made within the ten-day period, the denial or revocation of the permit becomes final. Upon receiving an appeal, the city manager shall hold a
hearing at a time and place of their designation. Based upon such hearing, the city manager shall make a final finding.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.15; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.01.013 Feeding of cats prohibited in certain places
(a) Feeding on public property. It shall be unlawful for any person to feed, whether by leaving food for or otherwise, any cat on public property,
including, without limitation, on any property owned in fee simple or controlled by the city as an easement or public right-of-way.
(b) Feeding on private property. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of the property, to feed, whether by leaving food for or
otherwise, any cat on private property without the consent of the owner of the property.
(c) Exception. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (a) of this section that the person feeding a cat on public
property is only placing food within a working trap that has been placed on public property with the written permission of the city manager.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.15A; Ordinance 2014-25 adopted 5/30/14)
Sec. 3.01.014 Parking of vehicles using for hauling animals; disposal of manure
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any truck, trailer, or other vehicle that has been used for the hauling of
livestock, animals or fowl in a residential area of the city when notified by a city enforcement officer that such vehicle is creating a nuisance due
to odors, gases or fumes. Upon such notification, the owner, operator, driver or other person responsible for such vehicle shall move such vehicle
to a location outside of any residential area of the city.
(b) All manure and other excrement shall be disposed of in such a manner as to prevent it from becoming offensive to other persons living
nearby.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.21; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/438
Sec. 3.01.015 Placing and baiting traps; poisoning animals
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to place or place and bait or to permit the placing or placing and baiting of any trap designed for trapping
animals in any highway, street, alley or other public place within the corporate limits of the city unless specific permission by the animal control
officer has been granted. However, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit an animal control officer from placing such traps on public or private
property as may be necessary to capture animals running at large.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, damage, or otherwise tamper with a trap or equipment belonging to or set out by the
animal control officer.
(c) Residents wishing to trap unwanted animals on personal private property may do so with the use of humane cage traps. Any trapping
program must have prior written approval of the land manager or owner, and written notification of activities to the animal control officer.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to place or place and bait or to permit the placing or placing and baiting of any steel-jawed trap
(commonly known as a “bear trap,” “wolf trap,” “leg hold trap,” or “coyote trap”) within the corporate limits of the city.
(e) No person shall place any substance or article that has in any manner been treated with any poisonous substance in any place accessible
to human beings, birds, dogs, cats or other animals with the intent to kill or harm animals. This shall include anti-freeze purposely left exposed to
poison animals. This section, however, does not preclude the use of commercially sold poisons, when applied in accordance with the
manufacturer's directions for such use, in that person's residence, accessory structure or commercial establishment for the elimination of vermin,
provided that such use does not violate any other section of this chapter.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.24; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.01.016 Selling or giving away animals on or near roadway or public property
(a) It is expressly prohibited for any person, firm or entity to sell or give away any animal on or near any public roadway located within the city
limits.
(b) It is expressly prohibited for any person, firm or entity to sell or give away any animal on or near any public property located within the city
limits.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.27; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
ARTICLE 3.02 IMPOUNDMENT*
Sec. 3.02.001 Generally
(a) Animals subject to impoundment.
(1) It is the duty of the animal control officer to capture and impound such animals as are running at large or which are required to
be impounded pursuant to other laws or ordinances or to protect public safety. Any officer of the city is authorized to take up and
deliver in a humane manner to the animal control facility any animal that may be found running at large in the city.
(2) The animal control officer shall impound and quarantine all dogs, cats and other animals exposed to, suspected to be exposed
to, or infected with rabies, whether the dog, cat or other animal to be impounded is at large, on a leash, or confined to its owner's
premises or whether it is currently vaccinated. Any animal which a licensed veterinarian suspects of having rabies shall be humanely
euthanized. Any animal exposed to a rabid animal shall be humanely euthanized or quarantined at the owner's expense for a period
mandated by the department of state health services zoonosis control division, not less than ten days from the date of last known
exposure.
(3) The animal control officer shall impound an animal when the owner of the animal has been arrested, is hospitalized, is missing,
or has died, and there is no person present, 18 years of age or older, who will assume the legal responsibility of providing food, water
and shelter for such animal.
(b) Identification of impounded animals; notification of owner.
(1) The animal control officer, upon receiving an animal for impoundment, shall make a complete registry, including the species,
breed, color and sex of such animal, whether it has traceable identification, and the time and place of taking custody. If the animal has
traceable identification, he or she shall enter the name and address of the veterinary clinic, year, the number of the registration tag,
and any other pertinent information. When kennel space allows, animals with traceable identification shall be kept separate from
animals that do not have identification.
(2) If, by registration tag, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer shall, as soon as possible,
notify the owner by telephone or mail; however, it is the responsibility of the owner to visit the shelter before the expiration of the
designated holding period to reclaim lost pets.
(3) Impounded animals with no means of traceable identification shall be kept for not less than five days, unless earlier reclaimed
by the owner under acceptable conditions or earlier euthanized as allowed by this chapter. It is the responsibility of the owner to visit
the shelter before the expiration of the designated holding period to reclaim lost pets.
(4) Animals with any type of traceable identification shall be kept for not less than ten days, or not less than five days from the time
the owner is notified of their animal being impounded, whichever is the shorter time period, unless earlier reclaimed by the owner
under acceptable conditions or earlier euthanized as allowed by this chapter.
(A) If an animal has a tag that does not list the owner's phone number or address, and the person or business that is in
possession of the owner's contact information will not release it to the animal control officer, then for the purposes of this section
it shall be the responsibility of that person or business to notify the owner of the animal being impounded, and the animal shall
be held for five days after the animal control officer contacts the person or business in possession of the owner's contact
information.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/438
(B) It is the responsibility of the owner to visit the shelter before the expiration of the designated holding period to reclaim lost
pets.
(c) Holding period.
(1) An animal impounded at the request of a peace officer as required by this chapter shall be kept for not less than five days
unless earlier reclaimed by the owner under acceptable conditions or earlier euthanized as allowed by this chapter. It is the
responsibility of the owner to visit the shelter before the expiration of the designated holding period to reclaim such pets.
(2) An impoundment period is not required for an animal voluntarily released to the animal control officer by its owner.
(d) Redemption of impounded animals.
(1) Any owner of an animal that has been impounded under this chapter who wishes to have it returned to him or her shall
personally visit the animal control facility where it is impounded. The animal control officer shall return the animal if the owner can
provide sufficient proof of being the animal's owner and if such release will not impair the safety of the public or the animal. The owner
of the animal must pay any and all fees set forth herein and must agree to abide by all of the requirements of this chapter before the
animal is returned. It is the responsibility of the owner to visit the shelter before the expiration of the designated holding period to
reclaim lost pets.
(2) If an animal that requires a permit or registration is impounded by the animal control officer for violating this chapter and the
owner cannot prove that he or she is in possession of all required permit(s) or registration(s), the owner must meet all requirements of
the required permit(s) or registration(s) and must purchase said permit(s) or registration(s) before the animal may be released from
the animal control facility.
(3) If an animal that requires a rabies vaccination is impounded by the animal control officer for violating this chapter and the owner
cannot prove that the animal has a current rabies vaccination, a citation for failing to vaccinate will be issued. The owner shall then
have five days to provide proof of obtaining a current rabies vaccination to the animal control officer or else he or she shall be cited
again for violation of this chapter. Each subsequent day that passes after the five-day period shall be considered a separate offense.
For the purposes of this section, a rabies tag alone is not sufficient proof of an animal's current rabies vaccination.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.13; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.02.002 Disposition of impounded animals; sterilization of adopted animals
(a) The animal control officer may dispose of impounded animals after the expiration of any required impoundment period by any of the
following methods:
(1) Adoption. The animal control officer shall be authorized to place for adoption dogs or cats impounded by the city under the
following conditions:
(A) The animal control officer shall determine whether a dog or cat is healthy enough for adoption and if its health and age are
adequate for vaccination. However, such decision shall not constitute a warranty, express or implied, of the animal's age, health,
or suitability for any purpose.
(B) There will be an adoption fee for all dogs and cats at an amount set by resolution of the city council. The fee will include
the cost of sterilization, vaccination, and licensing.
(C) All animals adopted from the animal control facility shall be vaccinated against rabies and sterilized before ownership of
the animal is transferred to the adopter. If, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian, there is a legitimate health risk justifying the
delay of this surgery, the person adopting the animal shall sign a written agreement stating that they will have the animal
sterilized. A person who signs a sterilization agreement commits an offense if he or she fails to have the animal sterilized on or
before the sterilization completion date stated in the agreement. For the purposes of this section, a legitimate health risk cannot
be based solely on the animal's age.
(D) If an adopted animal dies on or before the sterilization completion date, the adopting person must provide written
documentation to the animal control officer that the animal has died.
(E) If an adopted animal is lost or stolen before the sterilization date, the adopting person must provide written documentation
to the animal control officer stating that the animal is lost or stolen and a police report verifying the report of theft. The letter shall
be delivered not later than the seventh day after the date of the animal's disappearance and shall describe the circumstances
surrounding the disappearance and the date of disappearance.
(F) The animal control officer may reclaim an adopted animal if he or she has not received confirmation of the sterilization as
required.
(2) The animal control officer may offer the animal to an animal welfare group that has a signed transfer agreement for dogs and
cats on file with the animal control officer, provided that the group sterilizes the animal prior to placing it into an adoptive home.
(3) The animal control officer may temporarily place the animal in a foster home that has a signed foster agreement for dogs and
cats on file with the animal control officer.
(4) The animal control officer may humanely euthanize the animal by methods approved by the American Veterinary Medical
Association or the department of state health services.
(b) The choice of which of these options to use shall be made at the sole discretion of the animal control officer unless otherwise mandated by
a court order.
(c) Any impounded registered or unregistered animal which appears to be suffering from serious injury or disease and which is in great pain
and suffering and probably will not recover or which appears to have an infectious disease which is a danger to humans or to other animals in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/438
the opinion of the animal control officer, or which due to its extremely violent nature poses a substantial risk of bodily harm to the safety of animal
control staff, may be humanely euthanized at any time during its holding period by the animal control officer. In the event such an animal is
wearing an identification tag on its collar or harness, the animal control officer shall attempt to notify the owner by telephone before taking action.
(d) It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution of the owner if he or she can show that, at the time of its impoundment, the animal was at
large due to a major natural disaster, fire, or criminal or negligent acts of a third party who was not residing at the animal owner's residence. In
such event, the owner shall only be subject only to the provisions of this chapter that require a current rabies vaccination and city registration. An
owner's claim of a fire or the criminal or negligent acts of a third party must be proven in one or more of the following manners:
(1) A certified copy of a city police or fire report verifying the incident; or
(2) The affidavit of city police or fire personnel with direct knowledge of the incident.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.14(A)–(D); Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
State law reference–Sterilization of dog or cat released for adoption, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 828.
Sec. 3.02.003 Refusal to deliver animal for impoundment
It shall be unlawful for a person to fail or refuse to deliver an unregistered or unvaccinated animal to an animal control officer or police officer
upon demand for impounding. (1994 Code, sec. 90.14(E); Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.02.004 Animals found or located outside city
The city shall not accept any animal for impoundment that is found or located outside the city limits. The provisions provided for in this section do
not apply to animals found or located within the city limits. (1994 Code, sec. 90.26; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11; Ordinance adopting
2016 Code)
ARTICLE 3.03 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 3.03.001 Vaccination of dogs and cats required
(a) It is the duty of every person keeping a dog or cat over the age of four months to have the animal vaccinated against rabies. All dogs and
cats must be revaccinated annually. Every veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or cat or other animal hereunder shall issue to the owner or keeper
of the animal a numbered vaccination certificate and tag. The certificate shall contain the name and address of the owner or keeper of the
animal, a description of the animal vaccinated, the type of vaccine used, the date of vaccination and the expiration date of the period of immunity.
The tag shall be worn by the dog or cat at all times when off the premises of the person. The tag shall be serially numbered to correspond with
the vaccination certificate number.
(b) Every person who keeps a vaccinated dog or cat or other animal must exhibit his copy of the certificate of vaccination upon the demand of
any person charged with the enforcement of this chapter.
(c) No unauthorized person shall remove from any dog or cat any collar, harness or other device to which is attached a registration tag for the
current year or remove the tag therefrom.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.05; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.03.002 Harboring unvaccinated animal
It is unlawful for any person to keep a dog or cat which has not been vaccinated against rabies as provided herein. (1994 Code, sec. 90.06;
Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.03.003 Duty to report bite cases
(a) It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to the animal control officer the names and addresses of persons
treated for bites inflicted by a mammal, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.
(b) It shall be the duty of every person owning or having custody of a mammal which has bitten a human being to report the same to the
animal control officer.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.16; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.03.004 Reporting requirements; quarantine of animal biting person; area-wide quarantine
(a) Reports of suspected rabies. Every veterinarian who makes a clinical diagnosis of rabies and every person who suspects rabies in a
domestic or wild animal shall immediately report the same to the local health office stating precisely when and where the animal was seen and if
possible where it may be found.
(b) Reports of animal bites. Any person with knowledge that an animal has bitten a human being shall immediately report the incident to the
animal shelter and to the local health office. Every physician or other health care professional who treats a person for the bite shall report the
treatment to the local health office within 12 hours of the treatment. The treatment must specify the name and precise location of the person
bitten.
(c) Quarantine of animal biting person. Whenever it is shown that any dog or other animal has bitten any person, no owner or person having
custody or possession thereof, upon order of the animal control officer, any police officer or health officer, shall fail, refuse or neglect to take or
cause to be promptly taken the animal to a veterinarian to be held in quarantine by the veterinarian for ten days. No dog or animal shall be
released from quarantine without the authorization of the veterinarian in charge. The total cost of confinement shall be borne by the owner, or if
the animal is a stray by the person injured. When the animal under quarantine dies, the animal control department shall immediately send the
head of the animal to the health department for a pathological examination.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/438
(d) Offenses. A person commits an offense if the person fails or refuses to quarantine, or present for quarantine or testing, an animal that is
suspected of being involved in a bite. A person may be issued a citation for noncompliance for violating this provision. The animal control officer
shall be authorized to obtain a search and seizure warrant if there is reason to believe any requirements of this section are violated.
(e) Area-wide quarantine. Should a potential outbreak of rabies within the city be suspected and the danger to the public safety from rabid
animals be reasonably imminent, the animal control officer with the concurrence of the department is hereby authorized to issue a quarantine
proclamation, ordering persons owning, keeping, or harboring dogs, cats or other mammals to muzzle the same or confine them for such time as
may be specified in such quarantine proclamation. Upon the publication of such proclamation by local newspapers, persons owning or harboring
such animals shall confine them to premises unless they are effectively muzzled and under the control of an adult person by leash, cord, chain,
or rope. Animals found at large in violation of this subsection may be destroyed by an officer of the city if such officer is unable with reasonable
effort to apprehend such animals for impoundment.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.17; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
ARTICLE 3.04 DANGEROUS ANIMALS AND DANGEROUS WILD ANIMALS
Sec. 3.04.001 Dangerous animals
(a) Complaints. Upon receipt of a written complaint by any person, animal services officer, or other law enforcement officer charging that a
particular animal is a dangerous animal, the municipal court shall conduct a hearing to determine whether such animal is dangerous unless the
matter is resolved by agreement of all parties prior to such hearing. Such written complaints shall contain at least the following information:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of complainants and witnesses;
(2) A brief description of the incident or incidents which cause the complainant to believe such animal is a dangerous animal,
including date, time and location;
(3) A description of the animal and the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the animal, if known; and
(4) Any other facts that the complainant believes to be important and relevant.
(b) Disposition of animal pending hearing. Such hearing to determine if an animal is a dangerous animal shall be conducted within ten days
after receipt of the complaint, impoundment, or seizure of the animal, whichever occurs later. Any animal awaiting such hearing which was
impounded for being at large, was at large when the incident that caused the dangerous animal complaint to be filed occurred, or which has
bitten or scratched any other person or animal shall be boarded at the owner's expense at the animal control facility or any other state-approved
quarantine facility pending the outcome of the hearing and determination of whether such animal is a dangerous animal.
(c) Unauthorized release of animal. If the animal is quarantined at a facility other than the animal control facility, the facility shall be found to be
in violation of this chapter if the animal is released to any person, lost, stolen, or otherwise not able to be accounted for, unless the quarantine
facility first obtains written permission from the animal control officer to release the animal.
(d) Notice of hearing. Notice of such hearings shall be provided by the animal control officer or his or her designee to the owner of the animal
by certified mail, return receipt requested, and to the complainant by regular mail. At such hearing all parties shall be given opportunity to present
evidence on the issue of whether such animal is dangerous.
(e) Determination by court.
(1) Following the hearing:
(A) The municipal court may find that the animal is not a dangerous animal, in which case it shall be promptly returned to its
owner's custody after all impound and board fees have been paid;
(B) The court shall order the animal destroyed if the court finds that the animal caused the death of a person by attacking,
biting, or mauling a person; or
(C) If the animal has not caused the death of a person, the court may, but is not required to, order the animal destroyed if the
court otherwise finds that the animal is a dangerous animal as defined in section 3.01.001.
(2) If the court determines that the animal is a dangerous animal and further determines that the animal should not be destroyed,
the court may order the animal returned to the owner if the owner has fully complied with the requirements of subsection (g) below.
(3) An owner or person filing the action may appeal the decision of the municipal court in the manner provided for the appeal of
cases from the municipal court. The animal subject to the appeal shall remain in the custody of the animal control officer pending
appeal. The owner shall pay all cost of maintenance of the animal while the appeal is pending. The animal control officer may bill the
owner weekly for the animal's maintenance.
(f) Restrictions on ordering destruction of animal. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (e) above, the court may not order the animal
destroyed if the court finds that the animal caused the serious bodily injury to a person by attacking, biting, or mauling the person and:
(1) The animal was being used for the protection of a person or person's property, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an
enclosure in which the animal was being kept, and:
(A) The enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the enclosure on its own and provided notice of
the presence of a animal; and
(B) The injured person was at least eight years of age, and was trespassing in the enclosure when the attack, bite, or mauling
occurred;
(2) The animal was not being used for the protection of a person or person's property, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an
enclosure in which the animal was being kept, and the injured person was at least eight years of age and was trespassing in the
enclosure when the attack, bite, or mauling occurred;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/438
(3) The attack, bite, or mauling occurred during an arrest or other action of a peace officer while the peace officer was using the
animal for law enforcement purposes;
(4) The animal was defending a person from an assault or person's property from damage or theft by the injured person; or
(5) The injured person was younger than eight years of age, the attack, bite, or mauling occurred in an enclosure in which the
animal was being kept, and the enclosure was reasonably certain to keep a person younger than eight years of age from entering.
(g) Removal of animal from city; registration; requirements for owner. If the court finds that the animal is a dangerous animal, but does not
order the destruction of the animal, the court shall order that the owner comply with one or more of the following requirements:
(1) Removal of the dangerous animal from within the city limits, in which case the owner must provide, in writing, the destination
address of where the animal is to reside and proof that the owner has alerted the agency responsible for animal services in that area
to the animal control officer prior to the animal being released from the animal control facility; or
(2) Registration and compliance with all of the following requirements of this section, at the owner's expense, before the animal is
released from the animal control facility or other state-approved quarantine facility:
(A) Obtaining liability insurance coverage or showing financial responsibility in an amount of at least $250,000.00 to cover
damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous animal causing bodily injury to a person or for damages to any person's
property resulting from the keeping of such dangerous animal. A certificate of insurance or other evidence of meeting the above
requirements shall be filed with the animal control officer;
(B) Registering with the city by providing the name and address of the owner, the breed, age, sex, color and any other
identifying marks of the animal, the location where the animal is to be kept if it is not at the address of the owner, and two color
photographs that clearly identify the dangerous animal;
(C) Having the animal sterilized;
(D) Constructing a cage, pen or enclosure for the dangerous animal that has secure sides, a secure top attached to the sides,
and either a secure bottom attached to the sides or embedment of the sides into the ground no less than two feet. The pen or
enclosure must be completely encircled by a fence constructed in such a manner as to prevent a person or child from being able
to reach the animal's pen or enclosure;
(E) Not allowing the animal to go outside of its cage, pen or enclosure unless the animal is under physical restraint. No person
shall permit a dangerous animal to be kept outside of its cage, pen or enclosure on a chain, rope or other type of leash unless a
person is in physical control of the chain, rope or leash and the person is of competent strength to control the animal at all times.
Dangerous animals shall not be leashed to inanimate objects, such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. All dangerous animals outside
their cage, pen or enclosure must be securely fitted with a muzzle that will not cause injury to the animal nor interfere with its
vision or respiration but shall prevent the animal from biting other animals or human beings;
(F) Posting signs giving notice of a dangerous animal in the area or on the premises in which such animal is confined. Such
signs shall be conspicuously posted at both the front and rear property entrances and shall bear lettering not less than two
inches high, stating “DANGEROUS ANIMAL ON PREMISES.” Such signs shall also display a symbol, that is understandable by
small children, that warns of the presence of a dangerous animal;
(G) Providing the animal with a fluorescent yellow collar visible at 50 feet in normal daylight and attaching a fluorescent
orange tag provided by the animal control officer to the collar that is worn at all times so that the animal can be easily identified;
(H) Registering it for life with the animal control officer; and
(I) Paying the appropriate dangerous animal permit fee annually, as assessed by the city.
(h) Time for compliance. The owner shall have 15 days from the declaration of the animal as dangerous to comply with all of the required
conditions as set forth by the court's order. If the owner fails to meet all of the requirements, the animal may be humanely euthanized on the
sixteenth day by the animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian.
(i) Notification of escape or attack. In the event that a registered dangerous animal escapes its cage, pen or enclosure or attacks a human
being or another animal, the owner of the dangerous animal shall immediately notify the animal control officer. For the purposes of this section,
“immediately” shall be defined as no less than 30 minutes after the owner becomes aware of the escape or attack(s).
(j) Proof of death of animal. In the event that a registered dangerous animal dies, the owner must present the body of the animal to the animal
control officer or a licensed veterinarian for verification before disposal of its body.
(k) Transfer of ownership. Prior to transferring ownership in any way or moving a registered dangerous animal, either inside or outside the city
limits, the owner must obtain, in writing, permission from the animal control officer to transfer ownership or move the animal. If ownership of the
animal is being transferred, the new owner will be required to comply with all provisions of this chapter before the animal can be moved from the
previous owner's custody. If the animal is being moved from the city limits, the owner must provide, in writing, to the animal control officer, the
destination address of where the animal is to be moved to and proof that the owner has alerted the agency responsible for animal services in that
area.
(l) Seizure of animal. In the event that any owner of an animal declared to be dangerous violates any order of the court, the animal may be
immediately seized and impounded by the animal control officer. In addition, the animal shall be seized immediately if the animal bites, injures, or
attacks a human being or another animal. Any animal already declared to be dangerous which is impounded due to any violation of this chapter
or seized for causing injury to a human being or another animal shall immediately become the property of the city and shall not continue to be a
registered dangerous animal.
(m) Euthanization of animal. If an owner of a dangerous animal is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the
dangerous animal be humanely euthanized by the animal control officer or a licensed veterinarian.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/438
(n) Refusal to allow inspection. It shall be a violation for any owner of a permitted dangerous animal to refuse, upon request by the animal
control officer, to make his/her animal(s), premises, facilities, equipment, and any necessary permit(s) available for inspection for the purpose of
ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(o) Bringing dangerous animal into city. The owner of an animal that has been determined to be dangerous by another jurisdiction is prohibited
from bringing such animal into the city limits.
(p) Search and seizure warrant. The animal control officer shall be authorized to obtain a search and seizure warrant if there is reason to
believe any requirements of this section are being violated.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.18; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
State law reference–Dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.041 et seq.
Sec. 3.04.002 Keeping dangerous wild animal
(a) It shall be unlawful to keep any wild animal within the corporate city limits, with the following exceptions:
(1) A person and facility housing such dangerous wild animal(s) who has complied with all applicable federal, state, and local laws
and regulations, including, but not limited to, the acquisition and retention of all applicable permits, prior to final adoption of this
chapter, may retain dangerous wild animals(s) in the above-described facility in compliance with all federal, state and local laws;
(2) A governmental agency or entity acting in an official capacity;
(3) A government-operated zoological park;
(4) A permitted wildlife educational center, and animal exhibitions with valid state or federal permits; or
(5) A holder of an animal dealer or animal establishment with a wild animal permit. The possessor of the dangerous wild animal
shall possess and present upon request all applicable state and/or federal permits required to legally possess the species in question.
(b) Animal establishments or animal dealers with dangerous wild animals permit holders [sic] shall make written application to the animal
control officer to permanently keep each dangerous wild animal in their possession. The application must include the species and location of the
animal, at least two pictures that clearly identify the animal, and proof that the center or person is in possession of the necessary state and/or
federal permit(s) to possess such species.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.19; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
State law reference–Dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.101 et seq.
Sec. 3.04.003 Transfer of ownership of dangerous wild animal; report of dangerous wild animal at large
(a) It shall be a violation for any person to sell, offer to sell, give away, offer to give away, or otherwise transfer or attempt to transfer ownership
of a dangerous wild animal, unless specifically allowed by some other provision of this chapter. Any person who finds a dangerous wild animal
that is at large must immediately notify the animal control officer. This section shall not be interpreted to restrict a person from giving ill, injured, or
orphaned wildlife to a state and/or federally licensed wildlife rehabilitator or to a permitted wildlife educational center.
(b) For the purposes of this chapter, the animal control officer shall make the determination of whether any animal in question is a pet animal,
a wild animal, or a dangerous wild animal. In addition, for the purposes of this section, immediately shall mean within 30 minutes of the person
finding that a wild animal or dangerous wild animal is at large.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.20; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
ARTICLE 3.05 LIVESTOCK, FOWL AND RABBITS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.05.001 Keeping swine
It shall be unlawful for any person other than a veterinarian to keep any live swine within the city limits for a longer period than 24 hours except
as follows:
(1) Swine kept at FFA or 4-H facilities sponsored by a public school district or Texas Cooperative Extension;
(2) Swine kept at a facility owned or sponsored by a livestock show association;
(3) Swine being prepared for sale at a livestock sale facility within the city;
(4) Swine awaiting slaughter at a licensed processing facility.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.22; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.05.002 Estrays
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to allow an estray(s) to be unattended upon any public street, alley, and thoroughfare or
upon the property of another in the corporate city limits. The person, firm, or corporation having ownership or right to immediate control of such
estray(s) shall have the burden to keep such estray(s) off the public streets, alleys, and thoroughfares or the property of another in the city. (1994
Code, sec. 90.23; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
State law reference–Estrays, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code, ch. 142.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/438
Secs. 3.05.003–3.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permit for Keeping Livestock, Rabbits or Pigeons
Sec. 3.05.031 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Horse, cow, mule, jack, jennet, goat, rabbit, hare and pigeon include the male, female, and neuter of each species.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.28; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.05.032 Permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep or harbor within the corporate limits of the city any horse, cow, mule, jack, jennet,
goat, sheep, rabbit, hare or pigeon without first having applied for and obtained a permit so to do from the city. (1994 Code, sec. 90.29;
Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.05.033 Application for permit
(a) Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to keep any animal or animals referred to in section 3.05.032 within the corporate limits of the city
shall make written application under oath to the city building official for a permit so to do.
(b) Such application shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The address of the premises at which the applicant desires to keep the animal or animals;
(3) The number and kind of animals desired to be kept;
(4) The ground space available for harboring the animals;
(5) Such other information as the city building official may require in order to comply with this chapter.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.30; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 3.05.034 Issuance or denial of permit; appeals
The application shall be filed with the city building official, who shall inspect the premises described in the application. He or she shall determine
from such inspection and from such other investigation as he or she may deem necessary whether or not the premises satisfy the requirements
of this chapter and shall grant the permit or reject it as he or she may find proper under the provisions of this chapter. If the city building official
rejects the permit, the applicant may appeal such rejection to the city manager by filing written notice of appeal within ten days of the date of
rejection. The city manager shall conduct a hearing and hear any evidence offered by the applicant and by the city building official within 30 days
after the filing of the appeal and on the basis of his or her findings shall either affirm or overrule the city building official's action. If he or she
overrules the city building official, the building official shall issue the permit. If the city manager fails to rule within 30 days after the date of the
appeal, the ruling of the city building official shall stand as affirmed. The applicant may appeal the decision to the city council. (1994 Code, sec.
90.31; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 3.05.035 Duration of permit; renewal
Any permit issued pursuant to this division shall be valid until January 1 next after the issuance of such. All applications for renewal of the
permits shall be filed within 31 days after the expiration of the permit. (1994 Code, sec. 90.32; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.05.036 Sanitary regulations; minimum area; enclosures
The following sanitary regulations shall be complied with by any person keeping or harboring any animal or animals as defined in section
3.05.032 within the corporate limits of the city:
(1) Not less than 1,600 square feet of ground space shall be provided for each horse, cow, mule, jack, jennet, goat or sheep kept or
harbored within the city.
(2) The premises upon which any horse, cow, mule, jack, jennet, goat or sheep is kept shall be fully enclosed with a good
substantial fence, and every rabbit, hare or pigeon shall be kept enclosed within a good substantial fence, house, pen or other
structure.
(3) No horse, cow, mule, jack, jennet, goat, sheep, rabbit, hare, or pigeon shall be allowed on any part of the premises which is
closer than 50 feet to the exterior limits of the nearest dwelling occupied by any person other than the applicant, owner or permit
holder, unless the applicant, owner or permit holder shall have obtained the written consent of the owner or occupant of the adjacent
dwelling or dwellings. The written consent, if obtained, shall be filed by the applicant with his or her application for permit and shall
remain on file at the city hall. The written consent may be withdrawn by the owner or occupant or any subsequent owner or occupant
of the adjacent dwelling or dwellings at any time.
(4) All grounds, barns, sheds, stalls, standings, hutches, houses, roosts or other structures used for the harboring, housing or
feeding of any animal(s) shall be cleaned daily and shall be treated with some effective fly-breeding control frequent enough to
prevent breeding of flies on the premises.
(5) All premises shall be well graded and drained and water shall not be allowed to stagnate on the premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/438
(6) All manure and other animal wastes from any horse, cow, mule, jack, jennet, goat, sheep, rabbit, hare or pigeon shall be
removed from pens, corrals, standings, picket-lines, houses, barns, hutches or roosts at least once in every 24-hour period. The
material shall be deposited in a manure storage bin of concrete or metal construction provided with a flytight cover, which shall be
kept closed at all times. The manure and other animal wastes shall be removed from the bin at least once every seven days and
removed from the corporate limits of the city by the permit holder. The animal materials shall not be picked up by the city garbage
collectors.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.33; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11)
Sec. 3.05.037 Inspections; revocation of permit
It shall be the duty of the city building official to make frequent inspections of all premises on which any animal or animals may be kept or
harbored. If it shall appear to the city building official that any person holding a permit to keep the animal or animals is violating any provision of
this chapter, he or she shall forthwith notify the city manager in writing of his or her findings. The city manager shall notify the permit holder to
appear before him or her to show cause why the permit should not be revoked and shall conduct a hearing to determine the facts. Upon the
conclusion of the hearing, the city manager may revoke the permit if he finds that the holder has violated any provision of this chapter. The
applicant may appeal the decision to the city council. Otherwise, the permit shall continue in full force and effect until its normal expiration date.
(1994 Code, sec. 90.34; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 3.05.038 Exemptions
All livestock shows or exhibitions shall be exempt from the provisions of this division. (1994 Code, sec. 90.35; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted
11/28/11)
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 4.01.001 Appeals
The zoning board of adjustments created by the city council shall hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the
building official or his representative relative to the application and interpretations of all the adopted building and construction codes. (Ordinance
2015-07 adopted 3/24/15)
ARTICLE 4.02 CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.02.001 Building, plumbing, HVAC and electrical permit fees
(a) Building, plumbing, HVAC and electrical permit fees shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) All permit types shall be valid for one year after issuance. With written request an unexpired permit may be extended for periods of ninety
days. The building official shall collect fees for said extension based on the length of extension as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code.
(Ordinance 2015-04, sec. 1, adopted 1/30/15; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 4.02.002 License and bond for contractors and builders
(a) License required; annual fee; bond or insurance. Every contractor or builder who is required to obtain a permit by the applicable provisions
in the International Codes shall pay an annual license fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code and post a bond in the
amount of $5,000.00 or provide proof of general liability insurance no less than $300,000.00 unless exempted by state law.
(b) Suspension or revocation of license. To suspend or revoke licenses as provided in this code the building official shall cause a hearing
before the zoning board of adjustment to give the licensee an opportunity to provide testimony and witnesses. Upon action of the board after the
hearing the determination shall be made in writing and forwarded to the licensee. Any person aggrieved by the action of the board may appeal
the same to the city council by giving notice of appeal to the city secretary within ten days after the date of such action. In the event of such
appeal, the same shall be placed on the agenda of the first regular meeting of the city council occurring not less than ten days after the date of
such notice of appeal. The ruling of the city council shall be final.
(1966 Code, ch. 2.0, art. VI, secs. I–IV; Ordinance 85-02 adopted 3/7/85; Ordinance 86-01 adopted 2/6/86; Ordinance 90-04 adopted 8/2/90;
Ordinance 93-18 adopted 5/3/93; 1994 Code, sec. 150.15; Ordinance 96-15 adopted 10/3/96; Ordinance 97-08 adopted 3/6/97; Ordinance 97-12
adopted 5/5/97; Ordinance 97-13 adopted 5/5/97; Ordinance 2012-38 adopted 8/28/12; Ordinance 2015-04, sec. 1, adopted 1/30/15)
Secs. 4.02.003–4.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Building Code*
Sec. 4.02.031 Adoption
The city council hereby adopts the International Building Code, 2009 edition, and appendices, as published and filed with the city secretary, as
the official building code of the city for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, removal, repair, demolition, conversion,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/438
occupancy, uses, height, area and maintenance of all buildings and structures in the city, and said code is hereby referred to, incorporated herein
and made a part of this code. The city council hereby expressly adopts any and all subsequently published editions to said code together with all
appendices and amendments thereof as the official building code of the city. (1966 Code, ch. 2.0, art. VI, secs. I–IV; Ordinance 85-02 adopted
3/7/85; Ordinance 86-01 adopted 2/6/86; Ordinance 90-04 adopted 8/2/90; Ordinance 93-18 adopted 5/3/93; 1994 Code, sec. 150.15(A);
Ordinance 96-15 adopted 10/3/96; Ordinance 97-08 adopted 3/6/97; Ordinance 97-12 adopted 5/5/97; Ordinance 97-13 adopted 5/5/97;
Ordinance 2012-38 adopted 8/28/12)
Secs. 4.02.032–4.02.060 Reserved
Division 3. Residential Code†
Sec. 4.02.061 Adoption; amendments
(a) Adopted. The city council hereby adopts the International Residential Code, 2009 edition, and appendices, as published and filed with the
city secretary, as the official residential code of the city to establish minimal requirements to safeguard the public safety, health and general
welfare through affordability, structural strength, means of egress facilities, stability, sanitation, light and ventilation, energy conservation and
safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment and to provide safety to firefighters and emergency
responders during emergency operations in the city, and said code is hereby referred to, incorporated herein and made a part of this code and
shall henceforth control the use and installation of mechanical work [sic] within the area of the jurisdiction of the city. The city council hereby
expressly adopts any and all subsequently published editions to said code together with all appendices and amendments thereof as the official
residential code of the city each subsequently published edition.
(b) Amendments. The International Residential Code adopted in subsection (a) of this section is amended as follows:
Section 107.1, Temporary structures and uses, general, shall be amended to read:
In addition to a construction building permit, a temporary housing permit may be authorized for the use, on premises, of a recreational
vehicle as a residential unit provided such use of temporary housing, in residential zoned districts, shall be limited to single-family
housing for the real property owners only be located on the permitted property, or on property owned or leased by the permittee
adjacent to the permitted property, and be valid for the term of the construction building permit period not to exceed six months, and
may be renewed once for a second six-month period. Such temporary housing use shall completely cease upon completion of
construction or on the expiration of the time limit stated in the permit whichever occurs first.
(1994 Code, sec. 150.21; Ordinance 2012-40 adopted 8/28/12; Ordinance 2017-26 adopted 12/1/17)
Secs. 4.02.062–4.02.090 Reserved
Division 4. Plumbing Code*
Sec. 4.02.091 Adoption; amendments
(a) Adopted. The city council hereby adopts the International Plumbing Code, 2009 edition, and appendices, as published and filed with the
city secretary, as the official plumbing code of the city for regulating the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition
to, use and maintenance of plumbing systems located within the city, and said code is hereby referred to, incorporated herein and made a part of
this code. The city council hereby expressly adopts any and all subsequently published editions to said code together with all appendices and
amendments thereof as the official plumbing code of the city, each subsequently published addition to be effective as of the date a published
copy thereof is filed in the office of the city secretary and stamped with the seal of the city.
(b) Amendments. The International Plumbing Code adopted in subsection (a) of this section is amended as follows:
Section 606.1, Location of full-open valves, shall be amended to read:
3. On the discharge side of every water meter within the first twelve (12) inches or as near as practicable. This valve shall be
separate from valves used for the testing and maintenance of backflow assembly devices.
(1994 Code, sec. 150.17; Ordinance 96-18 adopted 11/7/96; Ordinance 97-09 adopted 3/6/97; Ordinance 2012-44 adopted 8/28/12; Ordinance
2017-26 adopted 12/1/17)
Secs. 4.02.092–4.02.120 Reserved
Division 5. Mechanical Code*
Sec. 4.02.121 Adoption
The city council hereby adopts the International Mechanical Code, 2009 edition, and appendices, as published and filed with the city secretary,
as the official mechanical code of the city for regulating the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation, and
maintenance or use of mechanical systems in the city, and said code is hereby referred to, incorporated herein and made a part of this code and
shall henceforth control the design, construction, installation, quality of materials, location, operation, and maintenance or use of mechanical
systems within the area of the jurisdiction of the city. The city council hereby expressly adopts any and all subsequently published editions to said
code together with all appendices and amendments thereof as the official mechanical code of the city each subsequently published edition.
(Ordinance 87-02 adopted 3/5/87; 1994 Code, sec. 150.18; Ordinance 2012-42 adopted 8/28/12)
Secs. 4.02.122–4.02.150 Reserved
Division 6. Fire Code
Sec. 4.02.151 Adoption
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/438
The city council hereby adopts the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, and appendices, as published and filed with the city secretary, as the
official fire code of the city for regulating the minimal requirements consistent with nationally recognized good practice for providing a reasonable
level of life safety and property protection from the hazards of fires, explosions or dangerous conditions in new and existing structures and
premises to provide safety to firefighters and emergency responders during emergency operations in the city and [said code] is hereby referred
to, incorporated herein and made a part of this code and shall henceforth control a reasonable level of life safety and property protection from the
hazards of fires, explosions or dangerous conditions in new and existing structures and premises to provide safety to firefighters and emergency
responders during emergency operations [in the] area of the jurisdiction of the city. The city council hereby expressly adopts any and all
subsequently published editions to said code together with all appendices and amendments thereof as the official fire code of the city each
subsequently published edition. (1994 Code, sec. 150.22; Ordinance 2012-41 adopted 8/28/12)
Secs. 4.02.152–4.02.180 Reserved
Division 7. Fuel Gas Code
Sec. 4.02.181 Adoption
The city council hereby adopts the International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 edition, and appendices, as published and filed with the city secretary, as
the official fuel gas code of the city for the regulation of fuel gas piping systems, fuel gas appliances, gaseous hydrogen systems and related
accessories as located within the city, and said code is hereby referred to, incorporated herein and made a part of this code. The city council
hereby expressly adopts any and all subsequently published editions to said code together with all appendices and amendments thereof as the
official fuel gas code of the city each subsequently published edition. (1994 Code, sec. 150.23; Ordinance 2012-45 adopted 8/28/12; Ordinance
adopting 2016 Code)
Secs. 4.02.182–4.02.210 Reserved
Division 8. Energy Conservation Code*
Sec. 4.02.211 Adoption
The city council hereby adopts the International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 edition, and appendices, as published and filed with the city
secretary, as the official energy conservation code of the city for the regulation of the design and construction of buildings for the effective use of
energy located within the city as located within the city [sic] and said code is hereby referred to, incorporated herein and made a part of this
code. The city council hereby expressly adopts any and all subsequently published editions to said code together with all appendices and
amendments thereof as the official energy conservation code of the city each subsequently published edition. (1994 Code, sec. 150.24;
Ordinance 2012-46 adopted 8/28/12)
Secs. 4.02.212–4.02.240 Reserved
Division 9. Property Maintenance Code
Sec. 4.02.241 Adoption
The city council does hereby adopt the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, and appendices, as published on April 14, 2009,
with amendments and appendices thereof, and filed with the city secretary, as the official property maintenance code of the city to provide
guidelines and requirements for the continued use and maintenance of plumbing, mechanical, electrical and fire protection systems in existing
residential and nonresidential structures in the city, and said code is hereby referred to, incorporated herein and made a part of this code. The
city council hereby expressly adopts any and all subsequently published editions of the code together with all appendices and amendments
thereof as the official property maintenance code of the city. (1994 Code, sec. 150.19; Ordinance 2009-11 adopted 6/18/09)
Secs. 4.02.242–4.02.270 Reserved
Division 10. Existing Building Code
Sec. 4.02.271 Adoption
The city council hereby adopts the International Existing Building Code, 2006 edition, and appendices, as published and filed with the city
secretary, as the official existing building code of the city to provide guidelines and requirements for the repair, alteration, change of occupancy,
addition, and relocation of existing buildings in the city, and said code is hereby referred to, incorporated herein and made a part of this code.
The city council hereby expressly adopts any and all subsequently published editions to said code together with all appendices and amendments
thereof as the official existing building code of the city each subsequently published edition. (1994 Code, sec. 150.20; Ordinance 2012-39
adopted 8/28/12)
Secs. 4.02.272–4.02.300 Reserved
Division 11. Unsafe Building Abatement Code*
Sec. 4.02.301 Adoption; amendments
(a) Adoption. The Standard Unsafe Buildings Code [Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code], which is attached to Ordinance 96-16,
adopted October 3, 1996, and those terms, provisions, or stipulations of such Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, 1985 edition, as
published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., are hereby adopted by reference in their entirety as if fully set forth herein.
The city council hereby expressly adopts any and all subsequently published editions of said Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code and
amendments thereof.
(b) Amendments. The Standard Unsafe Building [Abatement] Code adopted in subsection (a) of this section is amended as follows:
Section 105.1 is amended so that section 105.1 shall read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/438
105.1 Appointment. A board of adjustments and appeals shall be established for the express purpose of providing for the final
interpretation of provisions of this code. The board shall consist of three (3) members who are not employees of the city who
shall be appointed by the mayor. The composition of the board shall be two members from the construction industry and one
member from the community at large.
Section 201.3 is amended to revise the definition of “unsafe building” to include (k), unsecured unoccupied buildings, and adding a definition of
“unsecured unoccupied building” as follows:
Unsafe building
(k) Any unsecured unoccupied building.
Unsecured unoccupied building
Any structure which currently has no legitimate occupant or tenant and which has missing, unlocked, or inoperable doors,
windows, or other unsecured openings in the building through which unauthorized entry can be made.
Section 301.2 is amended by adding the following:
The following shall be established for the securing of an unoccupied building.
(1) The securing of windows, doors or any other opening allowing access to an unsecured unoccupied building shall be done with
such materials and in such a manner as to effectively bar entrance to the structure. Upon receipt of an order to secure, each and
every accessible means of entry must be secured.
(2) Materials approved for use include plywood, lumber, steel, replacement glass, nails, screws and bolts and other materials
approved by the building official.
(3) The use of cardboard, tar paper, window and door screens or any other material that will not effectively prevent entrance shall
not be sufficient to meet the requirements of this section, or an order issued by the building official.
(4) Work shall be performed in an expeditious and workmanlike manner in accordance with the building official.
(1966 Code, ch. 2.0, art. V, sec. 1; Ordinance 83-18 adopted 10/6/83; Ordinance 84-16 adopted 11/8/84; 1994 Code, sec. 150.16; Ordinance 96-
16 adopted 10/3/96; Ordinance 02-06 adopted 2/7/02)
ARTICLE 4.03 ELECTRICAL WORK*
Sec. 4.03.001 Title
The title of this article shall be the city electrical code, and it may be so cited. It will be referred to in this article as “this code.” (1994 Code, sec.
156.01(A); Ordinance 96-07 adopted 7/2/96)
Sec. 4.03.002 Scope
This code shall govern all installations of electrical conductors or equipment hereafter made and all existing installations which are hereafter
altered or for which the use changes. This code shall apply to all such installations within the corporate limits of the city and to all such
installations outside the city where such conductors or equipment are connected with the electric distribution lines of the city electric department.
(1994 Code, sec. 156.01(C); Ordinance 96-07 adopted 7/2/96)
Sec. 4.03.003 Electrical code adopted; amendments
(a) Adoption. The latest edition of the National Electrical Code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, a copy of which is on
file in the office of the city secretary, shall be the electrical code of the city. As new editions of the National Electrical Code are published by the
National Fire Protection Association, the same shall become the city electric code unless otherwise amended herein.
(b) Amendments. Amendments to the National Electrical Code:
Section 230-70.(A)(1), Readily accessible location, shall be amended to read:
(a) Readily accessible location. A single service disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible location outdoors
nearest the service point.
(1994 Code, sec. 156.01(B), (D); Ordinance 96-07 adopted 7/2/96; Ordinance 2017-26 adopted 12/1/17)
Sec. 4.03.004 Intent
The spirit and intent of this code is to protect the city and its citizens and all persons served by the distribution lines of the city electric department
from the installation of workmanship, materials, and devices that may endanger life and property; therefore, all installations shall be approved
from the standpoint of good mechanical workmanship as well as good electrical workmanship. (1994 Code, sec. 156.13; Ordinance 96-07
adopted 7/2/96)
Sec. 4.03.005 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural includes the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine, and
the feminine includes the masculine. Words used in the National Electrical Code shall have the meanings assigned to them therein. Words
relating to buildings and building use when not otherwise separately defined shall have meanings which conform to the meanings set out in
building ordinances of the city, if set out; otherwise, they shall have their usual meaning.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/438
Apprentice electrician. A person who is learning the trade of an electrician and who works only under the direct supervision of a journeyman
electrician or master electrician, and who has registered as an apprentice as hereinafter provided.
Approval. Inspection and acceptance by the electrical inspector as having met the requirements of this code.
Authorized person. An individual or authorized representative of a firm or corporation who is licensed as hereinafter provided to do work as
permitted under the specific provisions of this code.
Building. A structure which stands alone or which is cut off from adjoining structures by unpierced firewalls extending through the roof.
Conductor. A wire or cable or other form of metal suitable for carrying electrical current or potential.
Dwelling. The abiding place of one or more persons in which the use and management of sleeping quarters and all appliances for cooking,
ventilating, heating, or lighting are under one control, including attached or detached garages and accessory buildings for such use.
Electrical inspector. The chief electric inspector of the city and his authorized assistants.
Electrical work. Any act in connection with the installing, altering, repairing, and/or maintaining of electrical wiring, conduits, apparatus, or other
electrical installation designed or capable of carrying electrical energy, and which ordinarily requires the use of tools.
Journeyman electrician. A person licensed as a journeyman electrician in compliance with the requirements of this code, who works for and
under the general supervision and direction of a master electrician doing electrical work contracted for by the master electrician.
Maintenance. The act of keeping in a safe operating condition or moving and relocating any conductor or piece of equipment used inside or
outside, attached or connected to any building, but does not include addition to or replacement of an existing system or branch thereof.
Maintenance electrician. A person whose electrical work is limited to the keeping in safe repair or moving and relocating of electrical equipment
within a plant or property, and who is the owner or tenant or permanent employee of the owner of the plant or property.
Master electrician. A person licensed as a master electrician in compliance with the requirements of this code, who is engaged in the business of
installing or repairing or contracting to install or repair wires, conductors, and equipment used within or on buildings for the transmission of
electrical current for electric light, heat, power, or signaling purposes, together with the fittings for same, and who performs such electrical work
by himself and/or by the employment of a journeyman or apprentice electrician under his direction.
Meter loop. The service entrance conductors, meter base, service overcurrent units, service disconnects, and the system and equipment
grounding.
Motor. Any device rated in horsepower.
(1994 Code, sec. 156.02; Ordinance 96-07 adopted 7/2/96; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 4.03.006 Penalty
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall upon conviction thereof be punished by fine in accordance with the general penalty
provided in section 1.01.009 of this code, and if such a person is a holder of a license the license may be revoked. Each day's continuance of a
violation of any provisions of this article shall be deemed a separate offense, punishable as stated in this section. (1994 Code, sec. 156.99;
Ordinance 96-07 adopted 7/2/96; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 4.03.007 Electrical inspector
(a) The electrical inspector is hereby designated as the person responsible for the administration and enforcement of the city electrical code
and shall discharge the duties and have the authority as herein provided.
(b) The electrical inspector and his assistants shall not own, be connected with, or have any material interest in any business regulated by the
code, nor shall he or his assistants hold any office or official position in any organization whose members are required to be licensed or
registered under this code. This shall not be construed to prevent him or his assistants from holding membership in such organizations.
(c) The electrical inspector shall, upon application on the proper forms, grant permits for the installation of electrical wiring, devices, and
equipment, and upon the payment of the required fees, he or his assistants shall make inspections of all new electrical installations and make
reinspections of any existing electrical installation at such time as he may deem necessary for the purposes of the safe guarding of life and
property.
(d) The electrical inspector and his authorized assistants shall have the following official duties:
(1) To enforce the provisions of the code.
(2) To issue such permits and collect such fees as shall be provided for under the provisions of this code. All monies collected shall
be transmitted forthwith to the city treasurer.
(3) To enter any house or premises to examine any electric wiring or installation of electrical wiring, fixtures, or equipment therein,
in the performance of his official duties and upon the presentation of proper credentials and during reasonable hours or while any
electrical wiring, fixtures, or equipment are being installed therein.
(4) To order the electric service disconnected where improper or defective wiring exists or where electrical construction or
equipment has been installed without a permit as required herein.
(5) To order compliance with the provisions of this code where a change of occupancy occurs in a building which requires changes
or alterations to the existing wiring.
(6) To disconnect electric service or services in cases of emergency, where necessary for safety of persons or property, or where
electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/438
(7) To attach to electric equipment or electrical meters any official notice or seal to prevent the use of electricity. It shall be unlawful
for any person to use any such seal or break, change, destroy, tear, mutilate, cover, or otherwise deface or injure any such official
notice or seal posted by the electrical inspector.
(8) To order all persons to cease and desist doing any work being done without a permit, where required, and/or where such work
is otherwise being done in violation of this code.
(9) To keep such records of permits, licenses, special rulings, and other matters which he may deem necessary for the proper
discharge of his duties.
(10) To require, when deemed necessary to accomplish the objective of this code, plans, specifications, and a complete feeder
layout of large or special installations of electric work. When such plans, specifications, and layouts are demanded, it shall be a
violation of this code for any person to install any part of the electric work concerned until the electrical inspector approves the
installation.
(11) To inspect all electrical work within the city or connected to the city electric distribution system.
(12) To disconnect or order the discontinuance of electrical service to such wiring, devices, and/or equipment for the installation of
which a permit is required until a certificate of approval has been issued by the electrical inspector authorizing such connection and
the use of such wiring, devices, or equipment.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the electrical inspector or his assistants in the lawful discharge of their duties or to
prevent or in any manner attempt to prevent them from carrying out the provisions of this code.
(1994 Code, sec. 156.04; Ordinance 96-07 adopted 7/2/96)
Sec. 4.03.008 Rights and duties of licensed electricians
(a) Master electricians. The holder of a master electrician's license shall have the right to engage in the business of installing wiring and
electrical apparatus inside or on any building or buildings for use in connection with electric lights, heat, or power. A master electrician shall be
responsible for obtaining all permits and shall be responsible for all layouts and technical supervision of all electrical work.
(b) Journeyman electricians. The holder of a journeyman electrician's license shall work only under the supervision of a licensed master
electrician and shall not independently engage in the business of contracting for electrical work.
(c) Supervision required. A master or journeyman electrician shall be in direct “on the job” supervision of all actual work of installing,
maintaining, altering, or repairing any electrical conductors or equipment for which a permit is required under this code.
(d) Supervisory limit. All apprentice electricians shall work under the direct supervision of a master or journeyman electrician. Not more than
five apprentices may be under the supervision of any one journeyman on any job. If the electrical inspector determines that such supervision is
not being maintained, he or she may, in addition to filing a complaint in municipal court for violation of this code, also order the work stopped until
proper supervision has been instituted.
(1994 Code, sec. 156.07; Ordinance 96-07 adopted 7/2/96)
Sec. 4.03.009 Permits
(a) Required; exceptions.
(1) Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, it shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed, or to
permit any person to install, any electrical wiring, fixtures, or equipment within or on any building, structure, or premises, publicly or
privately owned, or to make any alterations, additions, changes, or repairs within the scope of this code, without first having procured
a permit therefor issued by the electrical inspector.
(2) There shall only be one permit issued or outstanding at the same time for any one installation of electrical equipment.
(3) No meter loop shall be connected to any electrical distribution service system unless a permit shall have been obtained and the
fees paid. The electrical distribution system shall be notified prior to the permanent installation of the meter loop.
(4) No permit shall be required for the following:
(A) The making of minor repairs, such as replacement or minor repairs of lamps, sockets, fuses, drop cords, snap switches, or
other similar items.
(B) The connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles.
(C) Replacement of a motor by another motor of the same horsepower and rating, solenoid valves, low pressure controls, or
other controls when the electrical supply to the same is or has been properly installed by a licensed electrician.
(D) The installation of electrical conductors or equipment to be installed by or for a public utility company in the generation,
transmission, sale, or use of electrical energy; nor [for] the use of such corporation in the transmission of messages.
(E) Any work involved in the manufacturing, testing, servicing, altering, or repairing of electrical equipment or apparatus,
except that this exception shall not include any permanent wiring.
(F) No permit shall be required for the installation of wiring devices or equipment for a telephone, telegraph, district
messenger, or tele-autograph system, or any signaling system operating at 32 volts or less.
(b) Application; payment of fees.
(1) Application for permits shall be made in writing upon forms provided by the chief electrical inspector and shall contain:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/438
(A) The date the application is submitted.
(B) Name of person under whose authority the application is made.
(C) The exact address where the work is to be done.
(D) The name of the owner or occupant of the location of work.
(E) Whether the work will consist of a new installation or addition to or alteration of an old installation.
(F) The size of conductors to be used in computing the required sizes of such conductor.
(G) When required by the electrical inspector, complete plans and specifications for the installation.
(H) Other pertinent information required by the chief electrical inspector.
(I) No deviation shall be made from the installation so described without the written approval of the electrical inspector.
(2) Applications for permits will only be accepted when presented during normal working hours of the inspection department.
Applications must be presented in person.
(3) The permit and inspection fees provided for in this code shall be paid to the city before the issuance of a permit and before any
work is begun. Unless otherwise stated, all such fees shall be delivered to the office of the electrical inspector. The fees set forth in
the fee schedule in appendix A of this code shall be paid for all new electrical work, repairs, renewals, and additions.
(c) Persons eligible to obtain permits.
(1) A permit may be issued to any holder of a master electrician's license.
(2) A homestead owner performing electrical work with his own hands in a dwelling owned by him and registered in the state tax
rolls as his homestead may be issued a permit to do electrical work on his homestead.
(d) Issuance. When the electrical inspector finds the application to be correct and the diagram and plans or specifications are approved, and
when the required fees have been paid, he shall cause the permit to be issued. Upon receipt of such permit, the permittee may start the
proposed job and make the installation described in his application, requesting inspection by the electrical inspector in proper sequence as the
work progresses. If the plans relating to electrical wiring or installation are found to be incorrect or faulty, they shall be disapproved and the
electrical inspector shall notify the applicant, listing the corrections necessary to comply with the code.
(1994 Code, sec. 156.08; Ordinance 96-07 adopted 7/2/96; Ordinance 02-15 adopted 8/1/02; Ordinance 2015-04, sec. 4, adopted 1/30/15;
Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 4.03.010 Inspections; correction of defects; notification tags
(a) No electrical work for which a permit is required shall be concealed in any manner from access or sight until such work has been inspected
and accepted by the electrical inspector, and no electrical work shall be connected to a source of energy until such electrical work is completed
and all outlets supplied with approved devices or covers, except the connection of fixture wiring.
(b) All requests for inspection shall be made 48 hours before the electrical work concerned is to be concealed or connected to service, as the
case may be. It shall be the duty of the person, firm, or corporation authorized by issuance of a permit to contact the electrical inspector. The
electrical inspector shall inspect the installation within 48 hours. When the permit electrician refuses to request a final inspection, the owner or
person in control of the premises on which electrical work has been performed may request the final inspection.
(c) (1) If the electric wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment is found to be faulty or incorrectly or defectively installed, the
electrical inspector shall post a red tag in the service switch stating what violations exist. He shall notify the responsible party in
writing of changes necessary to be made in order that the work may conform to this code. The notification shall also state the time
within which such changes, repairs, or alterations shall be made. If such changes, repairs, or alterations are not made by the person
so notified within the time set forth in such notice, the electrical inspector shall report such failure to the city attorney for such action as
may be necessary to protect lives, welfare, and property.
(2) When such red tag has been posted and until it has been removed by the electrical inspector, it shall be unlawful to cover any
part of the electrical installation. The permittee shall within 48 hours from time of notification make or start to make the changes
ordered and shall proceed with the work until same is completed. Upon completion thereof and payment of the reinspection fee, the
permittee shall notify the electrical inspector to the effect that faulty work has been corrected. A reinspection shall then be made, and
if the work is found to comply with this code, a signed inspection card noting thereon the date of approval of the work [shall be
issued]. If the electrical inspector shall again find the work incorrectly installed, the permittee shall be notified in the same manner of
necessary changes. The permittee shall again pay a reinspection fee. If the permittee fails to correct the faulty work within a
reasonable time, the electrical inspector shall refuse to issue any such person any further permits until said work in question is
corrected and approved.
(d) (1) If upon inspection it is found that all work covered by the permits is completed and complies with the provisions of this
code, the electrical inspector shall issue to the permittee a green tag of final approval, which shall be posted in the service switch box.
This will authorize connection of service and the use of the installation. Such authorization shall be sent to the utility furnishing the
electrical service.
(2) A white tag may be issued authorizing the connection and use of a certain specific portion of an incomplete installation. When a
certificate is issued authorizing the connection and use of temporary work, such certificate shall be issued not to exceed 120 days and
shall be revocable by the electrical inspector at his discretion.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the electrical inspector or employees of the city electrical department, to remove
any notification tag as provided by above, until after connection has been made to the electrical service and the installation is in use.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/438
(e) When a master electrician does not have the contract for the finishing of the electrical work covered by his permit, he shall deliver his final
inspection request in writing when his part of the electrical work is completed and must state in writing the part of the electrical work installed by
him.
(1994 Code, sec. 156.09; Ordinance 96-07 adopted 7/2/96)
Sec. 4.03.011 Connection to electrical distribution system
(a) Inspections of wiring and equipment. The electrical inspector shall make a thorough inspection of all electrical wiring and electrical
apparatus to be served by the electrical distribution system, wherever deemed necessary and where wires or electrical apparatus are in
dangerous or unsafe conditions, or are in violation of the requirements of the code.
(b) Approval required prior to connection. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make connections from a source of
electrical energy to any electrical wiring, devices, or equipment for the installation of which a permit is required, until a certificate of approval has
been issued by the electrical inspector authorizing such connection and the use of such wiring devices or equipment.
(c) Reconnection. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to make connections from a source of electrical energy to any
electrical wiring devices or equipment which has been disconnected by the electrical inspector [until a certificate has been obtained from the
electrical inspector] authorizing the reconnection and use of such wiring, devices, and equipment.
(d) Payment for wiring and poles for new construction. Prior to connection of any new construction, payment must be made in advance of all
wiring and erection of utility poles necessary for the connection to the city electric distribution system.
(e) Changing location of meter. If alterations in the building or wiring require changing the location of the meter, the utility department shall be
notified before the meter is disconnected. Contractors, licensees, or any other person shall not handle nor in any way interfere with the meters or
their connections or close meter loops, except approved employees of the electrical department.
(1994 Code, sec. 156.10; Ordinance 96-07 adopted 7/2/96)
Sec. 4.03.012 Location of service entrance; installation of meter
(a) The contractor or master electrician shall secure from the electric utility department the location at which the services are to be brought out
of the building and the method and type of metering desired by them. In the case of power services, the electric utility department shall be
notified before work is begun of the amount of power consumption estimated and type of equipment to be used.
(b) The electric utility department shall be consulted in regard to space required for all metering purposes, and its ruling will be approved by
the electrical inspector. All other questions of meter installation must meet the joint approval of the electric utility department and the electrical
inspector.
(1994 Code, sec. 156.11; Ordinance 96-07 adopted 7/2/96)
ARTICLE 4.04 MOVING OF BUILDINGS*
Sec. 4.04.001 Permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, the owner or person in charge of any building of a permanent nature, to move same from
one part of the city to another part of the city, or from some part of the city to some place outside of the city limits, or from some place outside the
city limits to some place within the city limits, without first obtaining a permit authorizing the move and furnishing bond or surety as herein
provided. No permit shall be issued unless all taxes which may be due the city on the building and the lot on which it is situated are paid or
satisfactory arrangements therefor are made with the city council. (1966 Code, ch. 2.0, art. I, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 150.30)
Sec. 4.04.002 Application for permit; fee
(a) Any person desiring to move a building first shall file with the building official a written application setting forth the following information:
(1) The type and kind of building to be moved.
(2) The original cost of the building and the approximate value of the building at the time the application for a moving permit is filed.
(3) The extreme dimensions of the length, height and width of the building.
(4) Its present location and proposed new location by lot, block, subdivision and street numbers.
(5) The approximate time the building will be upon the streets, and the contemplated route that will be taken from the present to the
new location.
(b) The applicant shall sign and swear to the correctness of the statements contained in the application before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgments and jurats in Texas, and shall deposit with the city the application and a fee for the permit as set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code, if same is granted.
(1966 Code, ch. 2.0, art. I, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 150.31; Ordinance 2015-04, sec. 1, adopted 1/30/15; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 4.04.003 Insurance or bond
The building official, as a condition precedent to the issuance of the permit, shall require general liability insurance no less than $300,000.00 or a
bond to be executed by the person desiring the removal permit, with corporate surety to his satisfaction. The bond shall be made payable to the
city and for the amount as the building official describes. It shall indemnify the city against any damage caused by the moving of the building to
streets, curbs, sidewalks, shade trees, highways and any other property which may be affected by the moving of a building. The surety bond
shall also be conditioned upon and liable for strict compliance with the terms of the permit, as to the route to be taken and the limit of time in
which to effect the removal and to repair or compensate for the repair and to pay the city as liquidated damages an amount not exceeding
$50.00 to be prescribed by the building official for each and every day's delay in completing the removal or in repairing any damage to property
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/438
or public improvement or in clearing all public streets, alleys or highways of all debris occasioned thereby. (1966 Code, ch. 2.0, art. I, sec. 4;
1994 Code, sec. 150.32; Ordinance 2015-04, sec. 1, adopted 1/30/15)
Sec. 4.04.004 Denial of permit
If, in the opinion of the building official, the moving of any building will cause serious injury to persons or property or serious injury to the streets
or other public improvements, or the building to be moved has deteriorated more than 50% of its original value by fire or other element, or the
moving of the building will violate any of the requirements of this article or of the city zoning regulations, the permit shall not be issued and the
building shall not be moved over the city streets. (1966 Code, ch. 2.0, art. I, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 150.33)
Sec. 4.04.005 Time limit for allowing building to remain in street
Any building being moved for which a permit was granted shall not be allowed to remain in or on the city streets for more than 48 hours. (1966
Code, ch. 2.0, art. I, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 150.34)
Sec. 4.04.006 Notice to agencies affected by removal
Upon issuance of moving permits, the building official shall cause notice to be given to the chief of the fire department, the telephone or light
companies, or others whose property may be affected by the removal. All notices shall set forth the route that will be taken, time started and
approximate time of completion. (1966 Code, ch. 2.0, art. I, sec. 5; 1994 Code, sec. 150.35)
Sec. 4.04.007 Issuance of permit; waiting period
The application for a moving permit and the bond shall remain on file five days before any permit shall be granted, and if, upon investigation of
the application, it has been found that the statements in the application are true and the bond is in compliance with the requirements of this
article, and the permit fee and any taxes due the city on the property have been paid, the city clerk shall issue the permit, without any liability
being imposed upon the city for any injuries or damages resulting therefrom. (1966 Code, ch. 2.0, art. I, sec. 6; 1994 Code, sec. 150.36)
Sec. 4.04.008 Public safety requirements
(a) Lights required. Every building which occupies any portion of public property after sundown shall have sufficient lights continuously burning
between sunset and sunrise for the protection of the public.
(b) Number and location of lights. There shall be a minimum of five red lights placed on each street side of the building; such red lights shall be
attached to the building in a fashion as to indicate extreme width, height and size.
(c) Flares required. There shall be placed, in addition to the red lights on the building, flares at regular intervals for a distance of 200 feet up
the street on each side of the building.
(d) Flaggers required. When more than 50% of the street, measured between curbs, is occupied at night by the building, or when, in the
opinion of the building official, flaggers are necessary to divert or caution traffic, the owner or person moving the building shall employ, at their
expense, two flaggers, one at each street intersection beyond the building. The flaggers shall remain at these intersections, diverting or
cautioning traffic from sunset to sunrise. Red lights shall be employed in flagging traffic at night.
(1966 Code, ch. 2.0, art. I, sec. 7; 1994 Code, sec. 150.37)
ARTICLE 4.05 VACANT BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY (DOWNTOWN HISTORIC DISTRICT)
Sec. 4.05.001 Purpose
The city and the city Main Street organization focuses on the revitalization of the downtown commercial district through marketing, promotions,
events and historic preservation. As such, the city council finds that:
(1) Buildings that are vacant and unsecured and/or not properly maintained are a blight and cause deterioration and preservation
and financial instability in the downtown historic district.
(2) Buildings that are vacant and unsecured and/or not properly maintained are declared to be public nuisances and pose serious
threats to the public's health and safety.
(3) Buildings that are vacant and unsecured and/or not properly maintained are vulnerable to being set on fire.
(4) Buildings that are vacant and unsecured and/or not properly maintained attract vagrants, gang members and criminals as prime
locations to conduct illegal criminal activities.
(5) Abatement and rehabilitation of buildings that are vacant and unsecured and/or not properly maintained is necessary.
(Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 4.05.002 Definitions
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates a different meaning: The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is permissive. All
public officials, bodies, and agencies to which reference is made are those of the city, unless otherwise indicated.
Administrator. The city's chief building official.
Board. When used as a verb means to cover an opening with lumber, wood panels or other material.
Boarded building. A building on which any opening to the outside is covered with lumber, wood panels or other materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/438
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy to which this article applies, and includes an enclosed
building, open building, and partially open building.
Owner. The owner of record in the county where the real property is situated; anyone identified as the owner on a registration form; the holder of
an unrecorded contract for deed; a mortgagee or vendee in possession; a mortgagor or vendor in possession; and an assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee, or other person in possession or with the right to control of the premises or a portion of the premises. Any person who
is included in this definition as an owner has joint and several obligations for compliance with the provisions of this article. A tenant who does not
have the right of possession or control of a portion of the building that is unoccupied is not an owner for the purposes of this article.
Properly maintained. Taking measures to:
(1) Prevent the physical deterioration of the building;
(2) Prevent a decline in the appearance of the building, including keeping painted surfaces with a secure and intact coating and
preserving signage without physical deterioration;
(3) Keep a building in a clean, safe, secure, and sanitary condition, compliant with all applicable codes; and
(4) Prevent the building from becoming an attractive nuisance.
Property maintenance ordinances include, but are not limited to, the following code of ordinances' provisions:
(1) International Building Code: Section 4.02.031.
(2) Unsafe Building and Abatement Code: Section 4.02.301.
(3) International Plumbing Code: Section 4.02.091.
(4) International Mechanical Code: Section 4.02.121.
(5) International Property Maintenance Code: Section 4.02.241.
(6) International Existing Building Code: Section 4.02.271.
(7) International Residential Code: Section 4.02.061.
(8) International Fire Code: Section 4.02.151.
(9) International Fuel Fire Code: Section 4.02.181.
(10) International Energy Conservation Code: Section 4.02.211.
(11) Electrical Code: Section 4.03.001.
Residential use. The primary use of property is limited to one of the following:
(1) Apartment means a room or a group of related rooms, among similar sets in one building, designed for use as a dwelling; or a
multifamily building type that is comprise of three or more dwelling units, each having an entrance to a hallway, stairway, or balcony in
common with at least one other dwelling unit. Apartments may be leased, rented, or owned in a condominium style of ownership;
(2) Attached single-family dwelling;
(3) Detached single-family dwelling; or
(4) Duplex means a single-family attached building which contains two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the
other by:
(A) An unpierced wall extending from foundation to roof (“side-by-side” duplex); or
(B) A ceiling/floor that extends from exterior wall to exterior wall, pierced only by a stairway that is not inside of either dwelling
unit (“over-under” duplex).
Secure. To take measures to ensure that the building is weatherproof and watertight and that the interior of the building cannot be accessed by:
(1) Unauthorized persons; or
(2) Birds, rodents or other animals through broken windows or other openings in the structure.
Secured by normal measures. The use of structural components of a building, including fixtures, such as doors, unbroken windows, locks,
latches, electronic security systems, storm shutters, and security shutters which were installed while the building was constructed or added to the
building while the building was occupied and being used for lawful purposes.
Secured by other than normal measures. A building secured by means other than those used in the design of a building or that are normally
installed and utilized while a building is occupied and being used for lawful purposes. The term includes boarding any window or door opening.
Unoccupied. Not being used for a lawful occupancy.
Vacant building. A building that is any of the following:
(1) Occupied by an unauthorized person(s) and unsecured;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/438
(2) Unoccupied and unsecured;
(3) Unoccupied and/or utilities have not been provided to the building space for a continuous period of time over six (6) months; or
(4) Unoccupied and has had two or more violations of property maintenance ordinances within the previous twelve (12) month
period.
(Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 4.05.003 Procedures
(a) Notice of vacant building.
(1) Upon reasonable observation that a building may be a vacant building as determined by the administrator, or receipt of a
complaint about a vacant building, the administrator may, upon their discretion, inspect or cause an inspection of the property, by the
administrator or their designee, in order to determine if the building should be classified as a vacant building.
(2) If the administrator determines that a building may be classified as a vacant building under this article, the administrator:
(A) Shall attempt to contact the owner or an agent of the owner, identified by any sign posted on the property, or as identified
in the county appraisal district records, by telephone or electronic and written communication, and advise the owner or agent
that the building is a vacant building in the downtown historic district and provide them with written property and building
maintenance options and financial grant opportunity information from the city development corporation to bring the property and
building into compliance. The property owner will be advised that they have twenty-four (24) days to contact the administrator
with a plan to remediate maintenance items and advise on lease or sale proceedings. If the property owner fails to contact the
administrator within the twenty-four (24) days, then the administrator will require the following measures to be taken by the
owner:
(i) File a completed vacant building registration within fourteen (14) days from receipt of the notice given, pursuant to
section 4.05.004 of this article;
(ii) Pay the registration fee required by section 4.05.005;
(iii) Take action to correct any code violations; and
(iv) Take measures to secure the building temporarily by normal or other than normal measures within fourteen (14)
days from receipt of the notice given pursuant to this section and by normal measures within ninety days (90) from receipt
of the notice given, in accordance with the design standards set forth in section 4.05.008 (b)(1)–(3);
(B) Shall mail certified notice to the owner, with a copy to any agent identified by any sign posted on the property, or as
identified in the county appraisal district records, which advises the owner that the building is a vacant building and that the
following measures need to be taken by the owner:
(i) File a completed vacant building registration as more particularly described in section 4.05.004 within fourteen (14)
days from receipt of the notice given pursuant to this subsection;
(ii) Pay the registration fee required by section 4.05.005;
(iii) Take action to correct any code violations; and
(iv) Take measures to secure the building temporarily by normal or other than normal measures within fourteen (14)
days from receipt of the notice given pursuant to this section, and by normal measures within ninety days (90) from receipt
of the notice given, in accordance with the design standards set forth in section 4.05.008(b)(1)–(3);
(C) May post notice on the building that it appears that the building is a vacant building and that the following measures need
to be taken by the owner:
(i) File a completed vacant building registration as more particularly described in section 4.05.004 within fourteen (14)
days from the receipt of the notice given pursuant to subsection (a)(2)(B) of this section;
(ii) Pay the registration fee required by section 4.05.005;
(iii) Take action to correct any code violations; and
(iv) Take measures to secure the building temporarily by normal or other than normal measures within fourteen (14)
days from receipt of the notice given pursuant to this section, and by normal measures within ninety days (90) from receipt
of the notice given, in accordance with the design standards set forth in section 4.05.008(b)(1)–(3); and
(D) May issue a citation or file a complaint in municipal court for any violations of this article or other applicable provisions of
this code.
(E) The notice under this section must comply with the applicable requirements of the V.T.C.A., Local Government Code
section 54.005.
(F) If the owner disputes the administrator's determination that the building should be classified as a vacant building under
this article, the owner shall file a written notice of appeal with the administrator within fifteen (14) days from receipt of the notice
provided in this section. The administrator shall schedule a hearing before the board of adjustments and appeals to determine
whether the building should be classified as a vacant building in accordance with the provisions set forth in the city's unified
development code, part 5 administration, article 14 permits and procedures, division 14.400 public hearing procedures, section
14.401 appeals of administrative decisions, within forty-five (45) days.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/438
(G) The owner may appeal the decision rendered by the board of adjustments and Appeals in accordance with the provisions
set forth in the city's unified development code, part 5 administration, article 14 permits and procedures, division 14.400 public
hearing procedures, section 14.401 appeals of administrative decisions, subsection G. appeals of zoning board of adjustment
decisions. Recourse from written decisions of the zoning board of adjustment shall be filed within 10 days to the courts as set
out in section 211.011, judicial review of board decision, of the Texas Local Government Code.
(b) Exceptions. Upon an owner's written request to the administrator for an exception to the registration fee requirement, and a finding by the
administrator that a vacant structure qualifies as described below, the following shall be exceptions from the registration fee requirements of this
chapter:
(1) A vacant structure that has a city building permit issued for remodel/repair, which complies with the city's unified development
code division 14.100 required permits and approvals, section 14.304 miscellaneous permits, subsection E. building permits, (5)(a)–(b)
as follows:
(A) If the work described in any building permit has not begun within 90 days from the date of issuance, the building permit
shall expire and be canceled by the building official. Written notice shall be given to the persons affected.
(B) If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within one year of the date of issuance,
the building permit shall expire and be canceled by the building official. Written notice shall be given to the persons affected,
together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a special building
permit has been obtained.
(2) A vacant structure that is being actively marketed for sale or lease for less than twelve (12) months by a licensed real estate
broker or an owner who is regularly advertising the property; or
(3) A vacant structure that is under a contract for sale or lease for less than twelve (12) months.
(Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 4.05.004 Registration
(a) The owner of a vacant building shall register with the administrator, in accordance with this section, no later than fourteen (14) days after
the owner receives written notice under section 4.05.003. The registration must be verified under a notary public, shall be on a form prescribed
by the administrator, and shall at a minimum contain the following information:
(1) A description of the premises, including its address and legal description;
(2) The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners with a right of control over the property;
(3) If owner designates an agent with the authority to independently act on the owner's behalf to repair or maintain the property, the
contract, notarized affidavit or power of attorney reflecting such authority and the ability for the agent to receive and accept notices
from the city on behalf of the owner shall be submitted;
(4) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner's property manager or agent, and whether the property manager or
agent has the authority to independently act on the owner's behalf to repair or maintain the property;
(5) The name, address, and telephone number of the owner's property manager or agent, authorized to respond to any emergency
or alleged violation relating to the vacant building;
(6) Identify a time frame the building will remain vacant and a plan for maintenance of the building during the period of vacancy with
certification from the administrator that the building is compliant with all applicable codes;
(7) Measures the owner will employ to secure the building, which may include one or more of the methods as required pursuant to
the design guidelines, under section 4.05.008(b)(1)–(3);
(8) Administrator's action on registration. The registration submitted by the owner must be approved by the administrator as being
complete and sufficient to secure the vacant building;
(9) Term. A registration is valid for one year from January 1st to December 31st of the given year, which will also apply if the
ownership of the vacant building changes; new registration required;
(10) Annual registrations. The owner of a vacant building shall be required to annually register until such time as the building is
returned to an authorized occupancy. The annual registration must be verified under a notary public, shall be on a form prescribed by
the administrator and contain a certification from the owner that the information on file with the administrator is true and correct;
(11) Change in ownership. The owner of a registered vacant building shall be required to disclose to any buyer that the property is
under registration with the city as a vacant building. The owner shall also disclose the requirement for the buyer to advise the
administrator of a proposed development plan within ninety (90) days of closing;
(12) Updates. If a change other than described in subsection (5) of this section occurs during the period that a registration is
otherwise valid, the owner shall be required to update the information with the city within fourteen (14) days of the change.
(Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 4.05.005 Registration fees
The owner of each vacant building shall pay to the administrator a vacant building registration fee in accordance with the below referenced chart:
(1) Annual registration fee. $100.00 to be paid on the date of registration of the vacant building and shall extend for one year from
the date of registration. The registration fee shall be paid annually each year thereafter for as long as the registration remains valid.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/438
(2) Annual inspection fee. The administrator shall assess an inspection fee of $50.00 for inspections of a vacant building against
the owner of the vacant building. This fee will be charged annually for inspections associated with registration and thereafter as
inspections are warranted in accordance with this article.
(3) Late payment charge. Any fee required by subsections (1) or (2) of this section, which is not timely received by the
administrator, shall be assessed an additional fee of:
(A) Late registration fee if the annual registration fee is not paid on the date of registration of the vacant building or on each
anniversary date of each year thereafter during such time as said registration is valid (excluding first time registration): $50.00.
(B) Late inspection fee if annual inspection fee is not paid on the date of registration of the vacant building or on each
anniversary date of each year thereafter during such time as said registration is valid (excluding first time registration): $50.00.
(Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 4.05.006 Inspections
(a) The administrator shall provide for the building inspection and coordinate a fire marshal's inspection of each registered vacant building at
the time of registration and thereafter not less than annually.
(b) In addition to the inspection referenced in subsection (a) of this section, if there is probable cause to believe that a code violation may be
present in the vacant building or on the premises where the vacant building is located, the administrator shall provide for an additional building
and/or fire marshal's inspection of the vacant building and/or premises.
(c) All inspections shall be conducted to determine compliance with this article and all applicable codes.
(d) The results of the inspection shall be provided to the owner of the vacant building and the person designated by the owner to facilitate a
response to any emergency or alleged violation related to the vacant building.
(Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 4.05.007 Maintenance of vacant building and premises
(a) Compliance with applicable laws. Any repairs, improvements, or alterations to the vacant building or on the property must comply with all
applicable laws, codes, and regulations, and as further defined under section 4.05.002, property maintenance ordinances.
(b) Duty to clean.
(1) The owner of a vacant building shall remove any garbage and/or rubbish from the interior of the building.
(2) The owner of a vacant building shall remove any garbage, rubbish, high weeds and/or brush from the premises on which the
vacant building is located.
(3) The owner shall keep the premises on which the vacant building is located properly maintained until the building is returned to
an authorized occupancy or demolished.
(c) Duty to secure.
(1) The owner of a vacant building shall lock or secure all doors, windows, and other openings to the vacant building.
(2) The owner shall keep a vacant building secured, safe, and properly maintained.
(3) If securing a vacant building by normal measures fails to keep the vacant building secure, the owner must use other than
normal measures to secure the building, including boarding the vacant building in accordance with the design guidelines, under
section 4.05.008(b)(1)–(3).
(4) Failure of the owner to maintain a vacant building in a secured condition, which failure results in abatement by the city, is
subject to lien placement and/or any applicable penalties.
(d) Duty to remove or repair. The owner of a vacant building shall promptly remove or repair any element of the building or on the premises
that is in a condition of decay or partial ruin by reason of neglect, misuse, or deterioration.
(Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 4.05.008 Standards for boarding a vacant building
(a) The owner shall take measures to secure the building temporarily by normal or other than normal measures within fourteen (14) days from
receipt of the notice given pursuant to section 4.05.003 of this article, in accordance with the following:
(1) All unsecured doorways, windows, or other exterior openings must be covered by exterior grade wooden structural panels or
other means as approved in writing by the administrator in order to ensure that such doorways, windows and other exterior openings
are secured and not easily penetrated.
(2) The materials used to secure the building shall be:
(A) Flat, square, and level;
(B) In a manner accepted as good workmanship; and
(C) The administrator has the sole discretion to determine if the work was performed in a manner that meets the requirements
and intent of this code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/438
(3) All exterior materials used to board a vacant building must be painted or coated the same color that is the predominant color of
the building.
(4) All broken glass and any other loose material must be removed from the opening before the covering systems are installed.
(5) Exterior access to floor areas above the first floor, such as fire escapes and ladders, must also be secured.
(6) Fascia signs, overhanging signs, roof signs, and all other appurtenances, such as sun visors or awnings must be removed if
they are in a dangerous condition or could create such a condition.
(7) All loose or defective materials, trim, or structural elements on the exterior of the building must be removed.
(8) Any condition which may become a hazard or danger to the public must be corrected.
(b) The owner shall secure the building by normal measures within ninety days (90) from receipt of the notice given, in accordance with the
design standards set forth in the city historic district design guidelines and described, in part, below:
(1) Doors.
(A) Maintain and/or repair original location, design, surrounds, frames, sill, transoms and sidelights of doors to preserve the
building's historic integrity.
(B) Maintain the original amount of glazing in the door appropriate to the period of the buildings construction.
(C) If repair is not possible, replacement doors and surrounds on primary facades should be designed to duplicate the original
as closely as possible.
(D) Any inappropriately designed, nonoriginal door or surround should be replaced with a more appropriate door or surround
based on documentary or photographic evidence. If evidence of the original is lacking, the design of the replacement door or
surround should be compatible with the character of the facade in which it is located.
(2) Windows.
(A) Maintain and/or repair original location, design, sash, light-configuration and other defining characteristics of the buildings
original windows.
(B) If repair is not possible due to advanced deterioration, replacement windows should duplicate the original in design,
material, sash and light-configuration as closely as possible.
(C) Any inappropriately designed, nonoriginal windows should be replaced with appropriately designed ones based on
documentary or photographic evidence. If evidence of the original is lacking, the design of the replacement windows should be
compatible with the character of the facade in which it is located.
(D) Uncover any original windows that have been covered or filled in over time.
(E) Upper story windows should never be painted over or filled in with any material. If the original windows no longer exist in
the window opening, replacement windows that match the originals should be added.
(F) Stabilize deteriorated or damaged windows as a preliminary measure prior to undertaking appropriate preservation work.
(G) Protect and maintain the wood and architectural metals which comprise the window frame, sash, muntins, and surrounds
through appropriate surface treatments such as cleaning, rust removal, limited paint removal, and re-application of protective
coating systems.
(H) Make windows weather tight by re-caulking and replacing or installing weather stripping. These actions also improve
thermal efficiency.
(3) Awnings and canopies.
(A) Maintain and/or repair any appropriately designed existing canopies or awnings.
(B) When repair or replacement is required, the canopy should align with the architectural features of the building.
(C) Newly constructed canopies should be a structural canopy built of steel or wood rather than of cloth or canvas. Such
structural canopies should be suspended, cantilevered, or column-supported.
(D) Maintain canopy depth with adjacent historic canopies.
(Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 4.05.009 Notice and order to abate
(a) Upon finding a violation of this article, the administrator shall serve, in person or by certified mail, return receipt requested, a written notice
and order to abate upon the owner.
(b) The notice must advise the owner of the violation and comply with the requirements of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code section 54.005.
(c) If the owner fails to abate the violation within the period stated in the notice or within any additional time as the administrator may grant, the
administrator may, without further notice, enter upon the property and abate the violation. The owner is liable for the costs incurred by the city to
secure the premises and to abate the violation, including any administrative expenses, materials, and labor.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/438
(Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 4.05.010 Notice of costs incurred by city; lien
(a) The administrator shall mail a notice to the owner and lienholder of the property upon which the nuisance has been abated of the costs
incurred or expended by the city to abate the nuisance.
(b) The notice must advise the owner and lienholder that the city proposes to assess its costs against the property and place a lien on the
property to collect the costs incurred by the city.
(c) The administrator shall file a lien against the property for the city's costs.
(d) Any lien filed pursuant to this section shall be security for the expenditures made.
(Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 4.05.011 Enforcement authority
(a) The administrator is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to make all necessary inspections, to issue citations, to give
notice, to file applicable charges and to otherwise cooperate in the enforcement of this article, pursuant to the city code of ordinances, chapter 1
general provisions, general penalty for violations of code, section 1.01.009.
(A) Any person who violates any provision of this code for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not to exceed:
(1) $2,000.00 in all cases arising under municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning and public health and sanitation
other than vegetation and litter violations.
(2) $500.00 in all other cases provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the
same or a similar offense under the laws of the state.
(B) If the maximum penalty provided by this code for any such offense is greater than the maximum penalty provided for the same
or a similar offense under the laws of the state, then the maximum penalty for violation as provided by state statute shall be the
maximum penalty under this code. Each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
Statutory reference–Maximum fine for general violations, see Texas Local Government Code, section 54.001.
State law reference–Penalties for violations, V. T. C. A., Local Government Code, section 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor, V. T. C. A., Penal Code,
section 12.23; requirement of culpability, V. T. C. A., Penal Code, section 6.02.
(b) General enforcement authority of municipalities; penalty. Texas Local Government Code title 2, organization of municipal government,
subtitle D, general powers of municipalities chapter 54, enforcement of municipal ordinance, section 54.001.
(1) The governing body of a municipality may enforce each rule, ordinance, or police regulation of the municipality and may punish
a violation of a rule, ordinance, or police regulation.
(2) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance, or police regulation may not exceed $500.00 except that:
(A) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance, or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning, or public health
and sanitation, other than the dumping of refuse, may not exceed $2,000.00; and
(B) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance, or police regulation that governs the dumping of refuse may not
exceed $4,000.00.
(3) This section applies to a municipality regardless of any contrary provision in a municipal charter.
(Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 4.05.012 Appeals
Any owner, lien holder or mortgagee of record of property jointly or severally aggrieved by an order of the commission issued under this section,
may seek relief pursuant to article 2.03, division 4, building and standards commission, of this code. (Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 4.05.013 Judicial review
(a) Any owner, lienholder or mortgagee of record of property jointly or severally aggrieved by an order of the commission issued under this
division may file a verified petition in a county civil district court:
(1) Setting forth that the commission decision is illegal, either in whole or in part; and
(2) Specifying the grounds of the illegality.
(b) The petition must be presented within 30 calendar days after the date a copy of the final decision of the commission is personally
delivered, mailed by first class mail certified receipt requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation
service to all record owners and each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the records in the county clerk's office,
and all mortgagees of record.
(c) Upon the filing of the petition, the court may issue a writ of certiorari directed to the city to review the commission order, and shall prescribe
in the writ the time within which the city must make a return on the writ. Such time must not be less than ten days and must be filed with and
served on the city secretary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/438
(d) The city shall not be required to return the originals of papers called for in the writ, and it shall be sufficient for the city to return certified or
sworn copies of such papers or parts thereof.
(e) In the return, the city shall set forth other facts that may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the commission order. The return
must be verified.
(f) The issuance of the writ does not stay the order.
(g) The appeal in the district court shall be limited to a hearing under the substantial evidence rule. The court may reverse or affirm, in whole or
in part, or may modify the commission order. Costs may not be allowed against the commission.
(h) If the commission order is affirmed or not substantially reversed but only modified, the district court shall allow the city all attorney's fees
and other costs and expenses incurred by the city, and shall enter a judgment for those items, which may be entered against the property
owners, lienholders or mortgagees, as well as all persons found to be in occupation of the property subject to the proceedings before the
commission.
(i) A lienholder does not have standing to bring a proceeding under this section on the grounds that the lienholder was not notified of the
proceedings before the commission or was unaware of the condition of the property, unless the lienholder had first appeared before the
commission and entered an appearance in opposition to the proceedings.
(j) If no appeals are taken from the decision of the commission within the required period, the decision of the commission is, in all things, final
and binding.
(Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 4.05.014 Preservation of historic properties
(a) Prior to the issuance of notice for a hearing under section 2.03.095, the building inspector shall request a hearing before the city council if
the building or structure which is the subject of the hearing:
(1) Is designated or pending designation as:
(A) Highly significant endangered property; and
(B) A historic and cultural landmark;
(2) Is located in an area designated or pending designation as a historic and cultural landmarks district; and
(3) Is not a single-family dwelling.
(b) The building inspector may secure the structure from entrance until the requirements in subsection (c) below are completed.
(c) The city council shall review the condition of the building or structure to determine whether it can be reasonably rehabilitated and shall
submit a written report of its findings and recommendations to the building inspector within 60 calendar days from the date of the initial city
council hearing.
(d) If the city council determines that the building or structure cannot be rehabilitated, the building inspector may proceed as provided in
section 2.03.097, and the commission may order its demolition.
(e) If the city council determines that the building or structure can be reasonably rehabilitated, the city may not permit the building or structure
to be demolished for at least 90 calendar days after the date the report is submitted to the building inspector. During this 90-calendar-day period,
the building inspector shall notify the building or structure's owner to afford the owner an opportunity to attempt to identify a feasible alternative
use for the building or structure or to locate an alternative purchaser to rehabilitate and maintain the building or structure.
(f) If the city is not able to locate the owner or if the owner does not respond within the 90- calendar-day period, the building inspector may
proceed as provided by section 2.03.096, and the city may file suit pursuant to Texas Local Government Code section 214.003 for the
appointment of a receiver. A receiver may not be appointed for a building or structure that is an owner-occupied single-family residence.
(g) The building inspector may proceed as provided in section 2.03.096, and the commission may order the demolition of a building or
structure, if after the expiration of the 90-calendar-day period the city is not able to:
(1) Identify a feasible alternative use for the building or structure;
(2) Locate an alternative purchaser to rehabilitate and maintain the building or structure; or
(3) Appoint a receiver for the building or structure as provided by Texas Local Government Code section 214.003.
(h) An owner of a substandard building or structure declared to be in violation of this article is not liable for penalties related to the building or
structure that accrue during the 90-calendar-day period provided for disposition of historic property under subsection (e) above.
(Ordinance 2017-05 adopted 6/9/17)
CHAPTER 5
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/438
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 5.02 GARAGE SALES
Sec. 5.02.001 Definitions
Garage sale. The sale or exhibition for sale at retail of used personal property on any open or unimproved lot or at any garage, porch, carport,
patio, driveway, lawn or on or in any residential property.
Occupant. A person who owns or leases the real property on which the garage sale is conducted and dependent members of the immediate
family of such owner or lessee.
(Ordinance 93-21 adopted 8/5/93; 1994 Code, sec. 101.01)
Sec. 5.02.002 Permit required; fee
No person shall conduct a garage sale within the city without first having filed an application and received a permit for such sale from the city
secretary. A fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code shall be charged for issuance of each such permit. The permit shall
contain the name of the occupant, the address of the premises at which the sale is to be conducted, and the date or dates on which the sale is
permitted. Such permit shall be prominently displayed on the premises. (Ordinance 93-21 adopted 8/5/93; 1994 Code, sec. 101.02; Ordinance
adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 5.02.003 Conduct of sale; restrictions
(a) No person other than the occupant of the premises shall conduct any garage sale. No occupant shall conduct more than four garage sales
per year. There must be at least 30 days between each garage sale.
(b) No person shall sell or offer for sale at a garage sale any merchandise other than used and discarded items of personal property belonging
to the occupant conducting the sale, except that the occupant may allow neighbors to sell their used or discarded items so long as the majority of
the items offered for sale are owned by the occupant as herein defined.
(c) No permit shall be issued and no garage sale shall be conducted for longer than two successive calendar days. If an occupant who is
issued a permit is unable to commence the garage sale on the day for which the permit is issued, no new permit is required if the sale is
commenced within ten days of the original beginning date.
(Ordinance 93-21 adopted 8/5/93; 1994 Code, sec. 101.03)
ARTICLE 5.03 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 5.03.001 Applicability of state law
This article is passed pursuant to and is referable to the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code (TABC), and the provisions of such code are hereby
adopted insofar as the same are applicable, and shall govern the administration and enforcement of this article. (1994 Code, sec. 110.01;
Ordinance 2014-06 adopted 2/7/14)
Sec. 5.03.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, all definitions, words, terms and phrases set forth in the TABC, as amended from time to time, are hereby adopted
and made a part hereof. (1994 Code, sec. 110.02; Ordinance 2014-06 adopted 2/7/14)
Sec. 5.03.003 Violations; penalty
(a) A licensee or permittee who sells an alcoholic beverage without first having paid the fees levied under this article, or who fails to pay the full
amount of the fees levied under this article when due, commits a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty
provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to all
the other remedies provided herein. Any violation of this article may be used as grounds for cancellation, suspension or denial of a license or
permit.
(b) Any person, firm or entity who sells, offers for sale, or delivers alcoholic beverages outside of the hours set forth in section 5.03.004 shall
be deemed guilty of an offense, and shall be liable for a fine in accordance with the general penalty provided in section 1.01.009 of this code.
Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Proof of a culpable mental state shall not be required to establish a violation of
this article.
(1994 Code, sec. 110.99; Ordinance 2014-06 adopted 2/7/14; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 5.03.004 Hours of sale
(a) Extended hours of sale.
(1) The holder of a mixed beverage late hours permit issued by the state may sell and offer for sale mixed beverages in the
corporate limits of the city between midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any day in accordance with TABC section 105.03.
(2) The holder of a retail dealer's on-premises late hours license may sell, offer for sale, and deliver beer between midnight and
2:00 a.m. on any day in accordance with TABC section 105.05.
(b) Conflicts with state law. In the event of a conflict between this division and TABC section 105.03 or section 105.05, the TABC shall control.
Terms used in this division that are defined in the TABC shall have the meaning set forth in the TABC.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/438
(1994 Code, secs. 110.16, 110.17; Ordinance 2014-06 adopted 2/7/14)
State law reference–Hours of sale and consumption, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, ch. 105.
Secs. 5.03.005–5.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Permits and Licenses
Sec. 5.03.031 Fees established
(a) Pursuant to the authority granted to cities in TABC section 11.38, there is hereby prescribed and levied a permit fee for each premises
located within the city that is required to obtain and hold a permit issued under the provisions of TABC chapter 11. The fee is hereby established
as an amount equal to one-half of the state permit fee, payable for and with respect to each such premises, save and except the applicable
exemptions to the fee identified in TABC section 11.38(d), as amended, shall apply.
(b) Pursuant to the authority granted to cities in TABC section 61.36, there is hereby prescribed and levied a license fee for each premises
located within the city that is required to obtain and hold a permit issued under the provisions of TABC chapter 61. The license fee is hereby
established as an amount equal to one-half of the state license fee, payable for and with respect to each such premises, save and except the
applicable exemptions to the fee identified in TABC section 61.36(a), as amended, shall apply.
(1994 Code, sec. 110.03; Ordinance 2014-06 adopted 2/7/14)
State law references–Local fee authorized on alcoholic beverage permits, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 11.38; local fee authorized on alcoholic
beverage licenses, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 61.36.
Sec. 5.03.032 Payment of fees; display of receipt
All fees required pursuant to this article shall be paid in advance to the city secretary, shall be due and payable to the city at the same time the
initial state fee or state renewal fee, as appropriate, is due and payable, and shall be applicable for the term of the state permit fee. The city
secretary shall issue an appropriate receipt for the payment of each fee, and the holder of the state permit or license involved shall display the
receipt in some conspicuous place on the premises in the same manner that the applicable state license or permit is displayed. (1994 Code, sec.
110.04; Ordinance 2014-06 adopted 2/7/14)
Sec. 5.03.033 Investigation; recommendation to alcoholic beverage commission
For the purposes of obtaining a recommendation as provided for in TABC section 11.41, every person, firm or entity making application for a
permit pursuant to TABC chapter 11 or 61, within the city, shall be required to provide such information as may be reasonably required, including
a copy of the application made to the alcoholic beverage commission (the “commission”), and a personal history, to the chief of police. The chief
of police shall review the application and materials, make as reasonable an investigation as is deemed prudent, and make a written
recommendation pursuant to TABC section 11.41. In the event the chief of police makes written objection to the issuance of any permit or
license, the recommendation shall be communicated to the commission, and no city permit or license shall be issued by the city on the
application until such time, if any, as the commission shall grant the requested permit or license. (1994 Code, sec. 110.05; Ordinance 2014-06
adopted 2/7/14)
State law reference–Recommendation of local officials, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 11.41.
Sec. 5.03.034 Denial, cancellation or revocation
A permit or license issued pursuant to this article may be canceled, denied or revoked as provided in TABC chapter 11, subchapter C, or chapter
61, subchapter C. The city shall have all powers, duties and remedies permitted in TABC chapter 11 or 61. (1994 Code, sec. 110.06; Ordinance
2014-06 adopted 2/7/14)
ARTICLE 5.04 ITINERANT VENDORS, MOBILE FOOD VENDORDS, AND OUTDOOR SALES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 5.04.001 Purpose
This division is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state and of the city, for the public safety, comfort, convenience and
protection of the city and citizens of the city, and all of the provisions hereof shall be construed from the accomplishment of that purpose. (1994
Code, sec. 112.01; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 4/13/00; Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Canvasser. Are individuals who attempt to gather support for a particular political, social, or religious idea without soliciting funds or donations.
Farmers market. An organization designated by resolution from city council consisting of persons who sell home-grown, unprocessed, or
canned/preserved products in accordance with section 5.04.015 herein.
Fixed location. A stationary and established location within the city.
House to house. The practice of going in and upon private property, residential, commercial or industrial.
Itinerant vendor. A retailer who travels to various locations and does not operate any place of business as defined in this section.
Mobile food vendor. Any food establishment that prepares, serves, sells, or distributes any food or beverage from a mobile food preparation
vehicle that is not operating at a permanent fixed location within the city in accordance with section 5.04.016 herein. The term shall include, but
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/438
not be limited to:
(1) Concession carts. Self-contained units that must be moved by nonmotorized means and which only sell prepackaged food and
beverages, or food and beverages which are nonrefrigerated;
(2) Concession truck or trailer. A trailer or vehicle-mounted unit capable of being readily moveable, fully self-contained, and may
sell limited menu items including, but not limited to, hot dogs, corndogs, nachos, corn, popcorn, pretzels, snow cones, funnel cakes,
tea, lemonade, or prepackaged foods; or
(3) Mobile food truck or vehicle. A food establishment that prepares, serves, sells, or distributes any food or beverage from a
mobile food preparation vehicle that is not operating at a permanent, fixed location.
Nonrefrigerated. Edible goods that are not required to be kept at a temperature below forty-one (41) degrees Fahrenheit according to the federal
Food and Drug Administration and the state food establishment rules.
Peddler. A peddler or hawker is a small retail dealer who carries his merchandise with him, traveling from place to place, or from house to house,
exposing his or his principal's goods for sale and selling them.
Place of business. Which is an established outlet, office, or location operated by a retailer, the retailer's agent, or the retailer's employee for the
purpose of receiving orders for taxable items. The term includes any location at which three or more orders are received by a retailer in a
calendar year. A location such as a warehouse, storage yard, or manufacturing plant is not a “place of business” unless at least three orders for
taxable items are received by the retailer during a calendar year.
Solicitor. Are charities, political advocates, or other similar organizations who ask for money on both public and private property to support their
noncommercial purposes.
Temporary. Any business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of
premises for at least one month in or upon which the business is to be operated or conducted.
(1966 Code, ch. 16.0, art. I, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 112.03; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 4/13/00; Ordinance 02-10 adopted 7/2/02; Ordinance
2011-12 adopted 4/5/11; Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.003 Going upon private residences without invitation prohibited
The practice of going in and/or upon private residences within the city by peddlers, or itinerant vendors, which have not been requested or invited
so to do by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of the private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods,
wares, and merchandise and disposing of and peddling or hawking the same, is declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such as a
misdemeanor. (1966 Code, ch. 16.0, art. III, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 112.02; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 4/13/00; Ordinance 2017-32 adopted
1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.004 Hours of operation of solicitors and canvassers
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser to engage in the business of going house to house or place to place prior to 10:00 a.m. or after
6:00 p.m., or at any time on Sundays, or federally designated holidays, except by specific appointment with or invitation from the prospective
customer. (1994 Code, sec. 112.04; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 4/13/00; Ordinance 2011-12 adopted 4/5/11; Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.005 Itinerant vendors and peddlers permit required; exhibition
(a) It shall be unlawful for any peddler or itinerant vendor to sell, offer for sale, exhibit for sale or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the
sale of any goods or merchandise in the city without first obtaining a permit and identification cards issued by the city. This shall apply to all
persons whether acting separately or as a group of individuals located on the same land or lot, including but not limited to a flea market. Each
permit and identification card is issued by the city on the actual permit with a photo copy of each applicant, and shall be considered valid only
with the city's seal. The identification card shall be displayed at all times on each representative and the permit shall be displayed visibly in the
vehicle windshield.
(b) Every peddler or itinerant vendor shall identify himself or herself as a salesman upon approaching a citizen in a public place or at a private
dwelling and explain his or her purpose, whether it be direct sales, solicitation or orders of the demonstration of goods or merchandise, or any
combination of purposes thereof, and shall produce for inspection, upon request by any person, the solicitor's permit issued by the city.
(1994 Code, sec. 112.10; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 4/13/00; Ordinance 02-10 adopted 7/2/02; Ordinance 2011-12 adopted 4/5/11; Ordinance
2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.006 Permit fees; issuance of permit
(a) Before any permit shall be issued under the provisions of this division, the applicant thereof shall pay to the city a nonrefundable
processing fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code, at least ten (10) days in advance of the issuance of the said permit;
and for permits greater than one day an investigation fee of as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code, per applicant if located in
the state. If the applicant is located outside the state, then the actual cost of the investigation shall be paid to the city.
(b) Note: Permits must be issued in consecutive order from Monday through Friday only.
(1994 Code, sec. 112.05; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 4/13/00; Ordinance 2011-12 adopted 4/5/11; Ordinance 2014-21 adopted 5/12/14; Ordinance
adopting Code; Ordinance 2017-08 adopted 4/11/17; Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.007 Bond
A bond is required in the sum of $5,000.00 executed by the peddler or itinerant vendor as principal and signed, as surety, by some surety
company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned for the sale or delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs,
magazines and newspapers in accordance with the terms of any order. The surety shall be satisfactory to the city building official or his or her
designee, payable to the city for the use and benefit of any person or persons entitled thereto, and conditioned that the principal and surety will
pay all damages to person or persons caused by or arising from or growing out of the wrongful, fraudulent or illegal conduct of the itinerant
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/438
vendor while conducting the sale or exhibit in the city. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for the entire duration of the permit and two
years thereafter. (1994 Code, sec. 112.06; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 4/13/00; Ordinance 2011-12 adopted 4/5/11; Ordinance 2017-32 adopted
1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.008 Application for permit
(a) The peddler or itinerant vendor shall make application to the city building official or his/her designee. Vendors operating from a fixed
location shall make application at least 14 days prior to the contemplated sale or exhibit to be held in the city. Vendors traveling from house to
house or place to place shall make application at least ten days prior to the contemplated sale. The application shall be in the form of an affidavit.
(b) Such application shall show and contain the following:
(1) The full name, home address and local address of the applicant.
(2) The location of the principal office and place of business.
(3) The names and addresses of its officers, if it be a corporation, and the partnership name and the names and addresses of all
partners, if the itinerant be a firm.
(4) Whether the applicant upon any sale or order shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final
delivery.
(5) Whether or not the goods, wares or merchandise for which orders are to be taken will be, at the time the orders are taken, in
another state or will be produced in another state and shipped or introduced into this city in fulfillment of the order.
(6) The period of time during which he shall engage in business within the city.
(7) Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, or any form of fraud, theft, or other crime involving moral
turpitude, and, if so, the complete circumstances thereof.
(8) A statement that the applicant consents to an investigation of the applicant's local, state, and federal criminal records and
authorizes their release to the city for the purpose of investigating the issuance of the permit hereunder.
(c) The application shall be accompanied by:
(1) A statement showing the kind and character of the goods or merchandise to be sold, offered for sale or exhibited.
(2) A certified copy of the charter, if the vendor be a corporation incorporated under the laws of the state.
(3) A certified copy of its permit to do business in the state if the vendor be a corporation incorporated under the laws of some other
state.
(4) Two recent photographic likenesses of the applicant's face, and any solicitor soliciting under the permit, which photographs shall
not exceed one inch square in size. Copy of driver's license, or identification letter or card issued to the registrant by the person, firm
or corporation for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared.
(5) A description of any vehicle to be used by the applicant including make, color, and license plate number.
(6) Whether sales will be conducted house to house and place to place, or from a fixed location.
(7) Written authorization dated and notarized from the property owner or authorized agent of the property at the location where
goods will be displayed or offered for sale, and stating the owner consents to the applicant's use of such property.
(8) A copy of the applicant's state limited sales and use tax permit.
(1994 Code, sec. 112.07; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 4/13/00; Ordinance 2011-12 adopted 4/5/11; Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.009 Investigation of applicant for permit; denial of permit
(a) It shall be the duty of the chief of police or other person designated by the city council to investigate each applicant and make a report
thereof to the city building official before issuance of a permit. Investigation may include but is not necessarily limited to personal interviews with
named individuals, criminal history checks, and verification of references and information contained within the application.
(b) An applicant for a permit may be denied where:
(1) Required application information is incomplete or incorrect;
(2) The applicant is currently wanted on a warrant for arrest;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of an offense reportable by the city to the state department of public safety under the Uniform
Crime Reporting or Crime Index program (for example, murder, nonnegligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, aggravated
assault, burglary, larceny/theft, and motor vehicle theft);
(4) The applicant has received one warning for violation of any provisions of this division;
(5) The applicant has an outstanding bad debt with the city; or
(6) The applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor if the crime directly relates to the conduct of a peddler's and/or
itinerant's business.
(A) In determining whether a criminal conviction directly relates to an occupation, the police department shall consider:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/438
(i) The nature and seriousness of the crime;
(ii) The relationship of the crime to the purposes for requiring a permit to engage in the occupation;
(iii) The extent to which a permit might offer an opportunity to engage in further criminal activity of the same type as that
which the person previously had been involved;
(iv) The relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity or fitness required to perform the duties and discharge the
responsibilities of the permitted occupation;
(v) The evidence of the person's rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release; and
(vi) Other evidence of the person's present fitness, including letters of recommendation from prosecution, law
enforcement, and correctional officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the person, the sheriff
and chief of police in the community where the person resides, and any other persons in contact with the convicted
person.
(B) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to the extent possible to secure and provide to the police department the
recommendations of the prosecution, law enforcement and correctional authorities as required under this section; the applicant
shall also furnish proof in such form as may be required by the permitting authority that he or she has maintained a record of
steady employment and has supported his or her dependents and has otherwise maintained a record of good conduct and has
paid all outstanding court costs, supervision fees, fines and restitution as may have been ordered in all criminal cases in which
he or she has been convicted.
(1994 Code, sec. 112.08; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 4/13/00; Ordinance 04-3 adopted 3/4/04; Ordinance 2011-12 adopted 4/5/11; Ordinance
2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.010 Permit nontransferable
The permit shall not be transferable nor give authority to more than one person to sell or exhibit goods or merchandise as an itinerant either by
agent or by clerk or any other way than his own proper person, but any person having obtained the permit may have the assistance of one or
more persons in conducting the sale or exhibit, who shall have the authority to aid the principal but not to act for or without him. (1966 Code, ch.
16.0, art. I, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 112.11; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 4/13/00; Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Editor's note–Former section 5.04.010 pertaining to registration of persons engaged in interstate commerce, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 2017-32
adopted 1/8/18. Prior to the deletion, this section derived from the following: 1994 Code, sec. 112.09; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 4/13/00; and Ordinance 2011-
12 adopted 4/5/11.
Sec. 5.04.011 Exemptions
This division is not and shall not be held applicable to:
(1) An ordinary commercial traveler who sells or exhibits for sale goods or merchandise to persons, firms or corporations engaged
in the business of buying, selling and dealing in the goods or merchandise, in the commercial districts.
(2) Sales of goods, wares or merchandise donated by the owner thereof, all proceeds of which are to be used and applied to any
charitable, religious or philanthropic purpose.
(3) Sales of goods and merchandise at retail by a member in good standing of the DeWitt County Farmers Market at a market
operated and conducted by the DeWitt County Farmers Market Association in strict adherence to the published bylaws and market
rules and regulations of the market and regulations of the state department of agriculture and of the department of state health
services and of the city health authority.
(1994 Code, sec. 112.12; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 4/13/00; Ordinance 2011-12 adopted 4/5/11; Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.012 Reserved
Sec. 5.04.013 Duration of permit; renewal
The license shall remain in effect for the length of time requested, not to exceed twelve months from the date of its issuance. An expired permit
may be renewed under the same terms and conditions as the original application and subject to the same fees. The license shall be prominently
displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where, or the truck from which, the sale or exhibit is being conducted and shall remain so
displayed as long as any goods or merchandise are being sold or exhibited. (1966 Code, ch. 16.0, art. I, sec. 4; Ordinance 86-10 adopted
11/6/86; 1994 Code, sec. 112.13; Ordinance 2011-12 adopted 4/5/11; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code; Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.014 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 5.04.014 pertaining to audit required at close of solicitation, was deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18.
Prior to the deletion, this section derived from the following: 1994 Code, sec. 112.14; and Ordinance 2011-12 adopted 4/5/11.
Sec. 5.04.015 Farmers markets
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale fresh fruits, vegetables, or other produce from an open stand or vehicle except at
a farmers market designated by the city council.
(b) Any organization consisting of growers of fresh fruit, vegetables, or other produce may request the designation of a farmers market by the
city council. Any such request shall be accompanied by:
(1) A copy of the bylaws of the organization showing that it will continue to function during the term requested for the designation,
and requiring membership for all persons conducting sales at markets sponsored by the organization; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/438
(2) A copy of the proposed rules and regulations governing health and sanitation at the market and identifying a single person
responsible for enforcing compliance with such rules and regulations.
(c) The city council may designate one or more farmers markets by resolution. A resolution designating a farmers market shall state:
(1) The specific location where the market will be conducted;
(2) The name of the organization sponsoring the market;
(3) The term of the designation; and
(4) The approval of the rules and regulations governing operation of the market. Such rules and regulations may not be amended
after the designation except with the approval of the city council.
(d) The sponsoring organization for a farmer's market location shall file a list of all organization members with the building official within ten
(10) days of designation of the location by the city council. Such members shall not be subject to otherwise applicable provisions of this article
regarding itinerant vendors or commercial outdoor sales. The organization shall file updated lists with the building official as the membership
changes.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any goods for purposes of resale at a farmers market. Fruits and vegetables shall be sold in a
fresh, unprocessed, or canned/preserved state. Honey and syrup must be acquired only from an approved source in a container bearing an
approved label. Additional items that may be sold include container plants, fruit and nut trees, vegetable plants, agricultural commodities of
ornamental nature (dried and ornamental gourds, ornamental corn, dried flowers), homemade soaps, eggs, honey, syrup, herbs, and nuts.
Canned, preserved, and baked items may be sold only if they have been prepared in a certified kitchen and labeled according to regulatory
requirements of the department of state health services or comply with the rules or cottage food production operations promulgated by the Texas
Department of State Health Services. Egg producers selling ungraded eggs to consumers at the farmers market are exempt from licensing by
the Texas Department of Agriculture, but must be permitted by the county health department. The eggs must be stored at a temperature of 45
degrees Fahrenheit or less, and meet requirements specified in applicable Texas Food Establishment Rules.
(Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.016 Mobile food vendors and units
(a) Permit required. Any person desiring to operate as a mobile food vendor shall make application to the building official on a form provided
for that purpose for a mobile food vendor permit for each vehicle or unit used as a mobile food vendor. This shall not include mobile food vendors
operating under the control of the Cuero Turkeyfest Association during the annual city Turkeyfest event.
(b) Contents of permit application. The application for a mobile food vendor permit to be issued pursuant to this division and shall contain at
least the following information:
(1) The true name of the applicant (if applicant is not a natural person, applicant shall list the form of business, state of
incorporation or organization, and location of headquarters), and the applicant's date of birth;
(2) The trade name under which the applicant conducts business;
(3) All addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant;
(4) Photocopy of the applicant's driver's license;
(5) Proof of motor vehicle insurance and registration;
(6) Description of product being sold;
(7) Vehicle and/or unit make, model, vehicle identification number, and license plate numbers.
(c) Six month or one year permit. Application for a six (6) month or one (1) year mobile food vendor permit shall also include the following:
(1) Copy of charter or articles of incorporation (if applicable);
(2) Copy of permits to do business in the state for foreign companies;
(3) Sales tax number with a copy of sales tax;
(4) A copy of satisfactory inspection report by the city fire marshal dated no more than three months before the date of the
application with the city for a mobile food vendor permit.
(d) Additional prerequisites for mobile food vendor permit. In addition to the application, an applicant for a mobile food vendor permit shall
provide the building official with:
(1) The fee required as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code; events sanctioned by the city and special one-day
events operated by local nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from fees;
(2) A copy of the Victoria County Health Department permit issued to the mobile food vendor dated no more than three months
before the date of the application with the city for a mobile food vendor permit;
(3) Each completed application shall be accompanied by a certificate of general liability insurance for each vehicle, naming the city
as an additional insured, in amounts of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for claims for damage to property.
(Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.017 Mobile food vendor permit approval or denial
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/438
(a) Once an applicant is approved for a mobile food vendor permit, a printed permit shall be issued to the qualified applicant. The permit will be
signed by the building official or his/her designee.
(b) A permit may be denied where the required information is incomplete, incorrect, or shows that a person is not otherwise entitled to conduct
business as a mobile food vendor.
(c) A permit may be denied where the required prerequisite permit, testing, and inspections as set forth in section 5.04.016 are incomplete,
incorrect, or fails to pass.
(Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.018 Manner of operation of a mobile food vendor
(a) It shall be unlawful for a mobile food vendor permit holder or any person operating under the authority of a mobile food vendor permit
holder to operate a mobile food vendor in violation of the terms of this section.
(1) No mobile food vendor shall conduct business within a primarily residential area or within 25 feet of a parcel or lot in which a
single-family residence is located, other than during special events approved by the building official.
(2) A mobile food vendor shall not conduct sales at a fixed location:
(A) On any public right-of-way unless authorized by the city council:
(B) In congested areas where the operation of the mobile food vendor impedes vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
(C) In a city-owned park unless approved in writing by the parks supervisor or designee, or on any property owned by the
public;
(D) Unless approved in writing by the governmental entity which owns such property;
(E) No person shall operate a mobile food vendor on any private property without written permission from the property owner
to do so. A copy of written permission to operate in a specific location, signed by the property owner, shall be prominently
displayed within the mobile food vendor at all times;
(F) No person shall park or operate a mobile food vendor on any surface other than a paved surface, such as concrete or
asphalt;
(G) No person shall operate a mobile food vendor for more than two hours at any fixed location without either:
(i) A written agreement from a business within three hundred (300) feet of the mobile food vendor, allowing employees
of the mobile food vendor to use flushable restrooms and handwashing sinks for the duration of the mobile food vendor's
operation at that location; or
(ii) A temporarily placed portable restroom facility within 300 feet of the mobile food vendor.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (a)(2)(G) that the mobile food vendor contains permanently installed and
functional restroom facilities that comply with the restroom requirements set forth in the Texas Food Establishment Rules promulgated by the
Texas Department of State Health Services.
(Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.019 Mobile food vendor operation requirements
(a) Each mobile food vendor shall comply with the state food establishment rules promulgated by the Texas Department of State Health
Services and the industrial waste discharge requirements found in chapter 12 of this code.
(b) Any refrigeration equipment shall be capable of maintaining appropriate temperature requirements set forth in the Texas Food
Establishment Rules.
(c) Each mobile food vendor shall be equipped with a portable trash receptacle, and mobile food vendors shall properly dispose of solid waste
and waste water in the sanitation facility legally accessed by the food service establishment. All disturbed areas must be cleaned following each
stop at a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the sales location.
(d) It shall be unlawful to use external equipment; all food preparation equipment must be contained within or permanently affixed to the
mobile food vendor at all times and must be properly enclosed, except:
(1) Power generation equipment; and
(2) Trash cans.
(e) It shall be unlawful to connect permanent utilities (i.e., plumbing, water, gas,) to the mobile food vendor at any time during operation. At no
time during operation is the mobile food vendor to be attached to a water hose or any other permanent water supply.
(f) To operate a mobile food vendor in the city, both freshwater and wastewater holding tanks must be properly sized, permanently installed on
the unit, and equipped with a valve to empty/fill the tanks from the exterior of the unit in a manner which prevents contamination of ground
surfaces or the mobile unit. Additional wastewater holding tanks are prohibited on site.
(g) A five (5) foot clear space must be maintained between the mobile food vendor and the nearest permanent structure.
(h) A mobile food vendor will be subject to inspection upon permit application through the county health department, the city's building
department, and the city's fire marshal, and may be subject to random inspections after permits are issued.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/438
(i) A “no smoking” sign must be posted next to the order window or area.
(j) A class 2A10BC fire extinguisher is required on all units. In addition, units utilizing oil/grease fryers are required to have a class K fire
extinguisher on the unit. Extinguishers must be inspected/tested annually. Documentation shall be maintained with the unit.
(k) All deep-fat fryers, except those installed under a fire suppression system, shall have a steel baffle at least eight inches in height between
the fryer and surface flames of an adjacent appliance and a positive closing lid with latching mechanisms that secure it in the open and closed
positions.
(l) It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of fourteen (14) to operate or be located within a mobile food vendor.
(m) Units must maintain a state of mobile readiness at all times and shall demonstrate that the vehicle is readily moveable if requested by the
regulatory authority.
(n) Each mobile food vendor shall conspicuously display the name of the business on each side of the vehicle, trailer, or cart.
(o) Fuel gas installations (propane, etc.) shall be installed in accordance with the adopted fire code. The main shut-off valves shall be
accessible from the exterior of the mobile unit and installed between 4 and 6 feet above the ground. Shut-off valves shall be unobstructed and
easily operated.
(p) Documentation shall be available identifying that propane appliances have been tested through an approved testing lab such as UL, CSA,
CGA, AGA, and/or ETL.
(q) Documentation shall be available indicating that an annual pressure test has been conducted on the piping system. This test shall be
completed under the supervision of a certified master plumber with an endorsement from the Texas Railroad Commission.
(r) Mobile food units operating on a public street within the historic downtown district shall:
(1) Have written permission from the city manager, or designee.
(2) Not operate after 7:00 a.m. and before 5:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, without written exception provided by the city
manager or designee.
(Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Sec. 5.04.020 Compliance with article
(a) A person commits an offense if the person:
(1) Operates or allows operation of a mobile food vendor within the city limits without first having obtained a mobile food vendor
permit from the building official's office;
(2) Operates a mobile food vendor within the city limits without displaying a current permit in a conspicuous location within the
mobile food vendor and visible to the public;
(3) Operates a permitted mobile food vendor within the city limits in any manner that violates the standards set forth in section
5.04.019 of this division;
(4) Forges, alters, or counterfeits a mobile food vendor permit required by this division;
(5) Possesses a forged, altered, or counterfeited mobile food vendor permit as required by this division; and
(6) Represents that the issuance of a permit by the City of Victoria constitutes the city's endorsement or approval of any product for
sale.
(b) An offense under this section is a class “C” misdemeanor.
(c) Permit suspension or revocation. Independent of or in addition to the criminal sanctions described in this section, the city manager or
designee may administratively suspend or revoke a mobile food vendor permit for any violations set forth in this section by providing written
notice of the alleged violation and an opportunity for the permit holder to respond to the allegation. Such administrative suspensions or
revocations shall comply with the following:
(1) First violation. A warning may be issued, or the permit may be suspended for three (3) months.
(2) Second violation. Permit shall be suspended for three (3) months.
(3) Third violation. Permit shall be revoked and the vendor shall be ineligible to apply for a new or reissued permit for one (1)
calendar year from the date of the permit revocation.
(4) If an applicant's permit has been denied, the applicant may not reapply for three (3) months.
(Ordinance 2017-32 adopted 1/8/18)
Secs. 5.04.021–5.04.050 Reserved
Division 2. Solicitation of Occupants of Motor Vehicles by Pedestrians*
Sec. 5.04.051 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/438
Person. Includes both singular and plural, and shall mean and include any person, firm, corporation (including nonprofit), association,
partnership, charity or society.
Solicitation and solicit. Any conduct or act whereby a person:
(1) Either orally or in writing, asks for financial aid, a ride, employment, goods, services, monetary gifts or any article representing
monetary value, for any purpose;
(2) Either orally or in writing, sells or offers for sale goods, services or publications;
(3) Distributes without remuneration goods, services or publications; or
(4) Solicits signatures on a petition or opinions for a survey.
Vehicle. Has the meaning given the term in chapter 541 of the Texas Transportation Code as amended.
(1994 Code, sec. 112.76; Ordinance 03-05 adopted 7/3/03; Ordinance 2011-13 adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 5.04.052 Conditions and restrictions for solicitation in right-of-way
(a) Generally.
(1) A person may solicit for a charitable or political purpose in or upon the public right-of-way, except those areas prohibited in this
division.
(2) A person may conduct commercial solicitation in or upon the public right-of-way, except those areas prohibited in this division, if
the solicitor has obtained a permit or who is a member of an organization that has obtained a permit.
(3) Solicitation in the public right-of-way shall be conducted only during the hours of daylight, that is, one-half hour after sunrise and
one-half hour before sunset.
(4) It shall be unlawful for a person younger than 18 years of age to solicit in the public right-of-way.
(5) It shall be unlawful for a solicitor at any time to enter or remain in the traveled portion of the roadway unless the solicitor has
been granted authorization pursuant to Tex. Transportation Code section 552.0071. The restriction on solicitation in the traveled
portion of the roadway does not apply to public residential streets.
(6) It shall be unlawful for a solicitor at any time to enter or remain in the traveled portion of the roadway, except on residential
streets provided that their presence does not impede the flow of traffic on the residential street.
(7) It shall be unlawful for a person to solicit in the public right-of-way that is within 1,000 feet of any public or private elementary or
secondary school between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on days when such school is in session. The measurement of the
distance shall be from the nearest property line of the public or private elementary or secondary school.
(b) Solicitation prohibited in specific places.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, at any time, in the public rights-of-way, within 1,000 feet of U.S. Highway 183 or at
its intersection with Broadway.
(2) The restrictions in this subsection do not apply to a solicitor who has received authorization pursuant to Tex. Transportation
Code section 552.0071.
(1994 Code, sec. 112.75; Ordinance 03-05 adopted 7/3/03; Ordinance 2011-13 adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 5.04.053 Permit required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit any motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city unless that person has obtained a valid
permit from the city council as required in this division for the solicitation of motor vehicles.
(b) No person shall hereafter solicit a motor vehicle on or over the streets of the city without having first obtained from the city council, under
the provisions of this division, a permit.
(1994 Code, secs. 112.77, 112.78; Ordinance 03-05 adopted 7/3/03)
Sec. 5.04.054 Application for permit
(a) Any person desiring to solicit a motor vehicle upon or over the streets of the city shall make sworn application to the city council. The
application shall be filed with the city manager's office at least 14 days prior to any regular city council meeting for consideration at that regular
meeting. The application shall be made on a form to be furnished by the city manager and shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The address of the office or offices of the solicitor's business;
(3) The reason for the solicitation;
(4) The hours during which the solicitation will occur, which shall be only during daylight hours of the day;
(5) The exact location of the solicitation; and
(6) Any further information as the city council may require.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/438
(b) The application shall be accompanied by:
(1) A certified copy of the charter, if the applicant is a corporation incorporated under the laws of the State of Texas; and
(2) A certified copy of its permit to do business in the State of Texas, if the applicant is a corporation incorporated under the laws of
some other state.
(1994 Code, sec. 112.79; Ordinance 03-05 adopted 7/3/03)
Sec. 5.04.055 Investigation of applicant for permit
(a) It shall be the duty of the chief of police or other person designated by the city council to investigate each applicant and make a report
thereof to the city manager before issuance of a permit. Investigation may include but is not necessarily limited to personal interviews with
named individuals, criminal history checks, verification of references and information contained within the application.
(b) It shall be the duty of the chief of police or other person designated by the city council to investigate each applicant as shall be reasonably
necessary to protect the public and make a report thereof to the city manager before issuance of a permit.
(c) An applicant for a permit may be denied where:
(1) Required application information is incomplete or incorrect;
(2) The applicant is currently wanted on a warrant for arrest;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of an offense reportable by the city to the state department of public safety under the Uniform
Crime Reporting or Crime Index program (for example, murder, non-negligent manslaughter, forcible rape, robbery, aggravated
assault, burglary, larceny/theft, and motor vehicle theft);
(4) The applicant has received one warning for violation of any provisions of this division; or
(5) The applicant has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor if the crime directly relates to the conduct of a peddler's business.
(A) In determining whether a criminal conviction directly relates to an occupation, the police department shall consider:
(i) The nature and seriousness of the crime;
(ii) The relationship of the crime to the purposes for requiring a license to engage in the occupation;
(iii) The extent to which a license might offer an opportunity to engage in further criminal activity of the same type as that
in which the person previously had been involved;
(iv) The relationship of the crime to the ability, capacity or fitness required to perform the duties and discharge the
responsibilities of the permitted occupation;
(v) The evidence of the person's rehabilitation or rehabilitative effort while incarcerated or following release;
(vi) Other evidence of the person's present fitness, including letters of recommendation from prosecution, law
enforcement, and correctional officers who prosecuted, arrested, or had custodial responsibility for the person; the sheriff
and chief of police in the community where the person resides; and any other persons in contact with the convicted
person.
(B) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to the extent possible to secure and provide to the police department the
recommendations of the prosecution, law enforcement and correctional authorities as required under this section; the applicant
shall also furnish proof in such form as may be required by the permitting authority that he has maintained a record of steady
employment and has supported his dependents and has otherwise maintained a record of good conduct and has paid all
outstanding court costs, supervision fees, fines and restitution as may have been ordered in all criminal cases in which he has
been convicted.
(1994 Code, sec. 112.80; Ordinance 03-05 adopted 7/3/03; Ordinance 04-3 adopted 3/4/04; Ordinance 2011-13 adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 5.04.056 Permit nontransferable
The permit, if one is issued, shall be nontransferable. (1994 Code, sec. 112.81; Ordinance 03-05 adopted 7/3/03)
Sec. 5.04.057 Duration of permit; number per year
(a) Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be effective for one day, with that day specified in the permit. In the event
of the permittee being unable to solicit on the day permitted due to inclement weather, the permittee shall be allowed to solicit on another day
within 14 days of the original permitted day. The permittee shall contact the building official or designee and give notice of the alternate
solicitation day.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (a) above, each request for the solicitation of a motor vehicle for another day will require the applicant to
reapply for a new permit. Each request shall be considered a separate request which must go before city council.
(c) There shall be 90 days between each one-day solicitation, and an applicant may be granted no more than four permits per calendar year.
(1994 Code, sec. 112.82; Ordinance 03-05 adopted 7/3/03; Ordinance 2011-13 adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 5.04.058 Revocation or suspension of permit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/438
A permit issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police or his or her designee if the holder or
any of its servants, agents or employees acting in the course of his or her employment:
(1) Has violated any of the provisions of this division;
(2) Causes any disruption with the flow of traffic;
(3) Endangers themselves or any motorist; or
(4) Has conducted solicitation during times of poor visibility as determined by the chief of police.
(1994 Code, sec. 112.83; Ordinance 03-05 adopted 7/3/03)
Sec. 5.04.059 Exemptions
This division does not apply to:
(1) A person summoning aid or requesting assistance in an emergency situation;
(2) A law enforcement officer in the performance of his or her official duties;
(3) A facility operated by or for the city, and designated by the city manager as a place where the solicitation of employment or
services is permitted;
(4) A private parking area; and
(5) Any corporation (including a nonprofit corporation) created by, for, and/or on behalf of the city.
(1994 Code, sec. 112.84; Ordinance 03-05 adopted 7/3/03)
ARTICLE 5.05 CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES AND SHOWS
Sec. 5.05.001 Permit required
(a) It shall be unlawful to hereafter hold, sponsor, operate, or run a carnival in the city limits unless a permit to hold such carnival is first
obtained from the city in accordance with this article.
(b) Each person aiding or abetting in the holding of such carnival or its subsidiary shows, concessions, amusements, and businesses shall be
equally guilty of a violation of this article when that carnival, circus, or temporary show operates or runs without such permit.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.01)
Sec. 5.05.002 Application for permit
A permit shall be issued by order of the city manager to hold such carnival or circus only when a proper application in writing is made therefor.
Such application shall state in detail the different component parts of the carnival including all concessions, shows, amusements, and
businesses; the proposed location of the carnival; the time it is to run; the number of persons regularly traveling therewith, if any; and the number
of local persons connected therewith; and shall give a complete and full plan of the proposed carnival. (1994 Code, sec. 111.02)
Sec. 5.05.003 Fees; issuance of permit
The applicant for a permit, if the city manager shall determine that a permit shall be issued, shall then pay a license fee of as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code together with a fee as set forth in the fee schedule per extra police officer, for the number of officers that the
city manager shall determine shall be necessary per day as set forth in section 5.05.005, for so many days that the carnival is issued a permit to
run. The city clerk shall issue the permit specifying the length of time and the location. The applicant shall also be subject to any and all
additional inspection fees as may be provided by existing ordinances governing such. (1994 Code, sec. 111.03)
Sec. 5.05.004 Approval or disapproval of permit by council
Any application for a permit may be referred by the city manager to the city council for their approval or disapproval, and such action by the city
council shall be final. (1994 Code, sec. 111.04)
Sec. 5.05.005 Police control and supervision
(a) If the proposed carnival appears to be entirely composed of lawful amusements and lawful enterprises, the city manager shall determine
the number of extra police necessary to properly superintend such carnival and regulate the anticipated crowds and carnival. The city manager
shall instruct the city clerk as to how many extra officers shall be needed and whether to issue such permits.
(b) The chief of police shall have supervision of the policing of those carnivals, circuses, and shows.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.05)
Sec. 5.05.006 Protection of public health and safety
All electrical wiring, eating establishments, and other activities where the public health, safety, and interest is involved must meet the approval of
the chief of police and the city inspector. (1994 Code, sec. 111.06)
Sec. 5.05.007 Unlawful activities prohibited; revocation of permit
If the proposed carnival or show consists in whole or in part of any unlawful games, the permit shall be refused. If such carnival is issued a permit
and it conducts itself in an unlawful manner in whole or in part, its permit may be revoked by the city manager and fees paid shall be forfeited.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/438
(1994 Code, sec. 111.07)
Sec. 5.05.008 Location restricted; operating without valid permit
It shall be unlawful for any carnival, circus or temporary show to operate in whole or in part within 200 feet of any private residence, church, or
school, or after its permit expires or is revoked for cause. All persons assisting in such operation shall be deemed guilty of violating this article.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.08)
Sec. 5.05.009 Exemptions
Fairs or local shows composed of local people for purely local charitable purposes without profit may be exempt from the provisions of this article
as applicable to fees charged for permits or licenses upon approval of the city council, except the council may levy another fee commensurate
with any additional expense placed upon the operation of such local fairs or shows. (1994 Code, sec. 111.09)
ARTICLE 5.06 COIN-OPERATED MACHINES*
Sec. 5.06.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Coin-operated machine. Any kind of machine or device operated by or with a coin or other United States currency, metal slug, token, electronic
card, or check, including a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine.
Music coin-operated machine. Any kind of coin-operated machine, including a phonograph, piano, or graphophone, that:
(1) Dispenses music or is used to dispense music;
(2) Is operated by inserting a coin, metal slug, token, or check; and
(3) Is not an amusement machine designed exclusively for a child.
Operator. A person who exhibits or displays, or permits to be exhibited or displayed, a coin-operated machine in this state in a place of business
that is not owned by the person.
Owner. A person who owns a coin-operated machine in this state.
Person. An individual, association, trustee, receiver, partnership, corporation, or organization or a manager, agent, servant, or employee of an
individual, association, trustee, receiver, partnership, corporation, or organization.
Service coin-operated machine. Any kind of machine or device, including a pay toilet or telephone, that dispenses only a service. The term does
not include a machine or device that dispenses merchandise, music, skill, or pleasure.
Skill or pleasure coin-operated machine. Any kind of coin-operated machine that dispenses, or is used or is capable of being used to dispense,
or is used or is capable of being used to dispense [sic] or afford amusement, skill, or pleasure or is operated for any purpose other than for
dispensing only merchandise, music, or service. The term:
(1) Includes a marble machine, marble table machine, marble shooting machine, miniature racetrack machine, miniature football
machine, miniature golf machine, miniature bowling machine, billiard or pool game, or machine or device that dispenses merchandise
or commodities or plays music in connection with or in addition to dispensing skill or pleasure; and
(2) Does not include an amusement machine designed exclusively for a child.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.0, art. I, sec. 2; Ordinance 82-1 adopted 2/4/82; 1994 Code, sec. 111.15; Ordinance 02-11 adopted 7/2/02)
Sec. 5.06.002 Occupation tax levied
(a) Amount. There is levied upon and there shall be collected from every owner of coin-operated machines within the city an occupation tax in
an amount equal to one-quarter of the state tax levied.
(b) Duration of license or receipt. Any license or receipt issued pursuant to this section shall expire on December 31 of the year the license,
permit or receipt was issued, or [upon] the death or dissolution of the license holder.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.0, art. I, sec. 1; Ordinance 82-1 adopted 2/4/82; 1994 Code, sec. 111.16; Ordinance 02-11 adopted 7/2/02)
Sec. 5.06.003 Payment of occupation tax; issuance of receipt
The occupation tax levied shall be paid to the city tax collector, who shall issue an occupation tax receipt. The receipt shall be attached to the
coin-operated machine mentioned in the receipt and shall bear the serial number of the particular machine. (1966 Code, ch. 20.0, art. I, sec. 4;
Ordinance 82-1 adopted 2/4/82; 1994 Code, sec. 111.17)
Sec. 5.06.004 Sealing of machines on which tax has not been paid
Any machine located in the city on which the occupation tax has not been paid shall be sealed. A fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix
A of this code shall be charged for the release of any machine sealed. (1966 Code, ch. 20.0, art. I, sec. 4; Ordinance 82-1 adopted 2/4/82; 1994
Code, sec. 111.18)
Sec. 5.06.005 Location of machines near schools
No coin-operated amusement machines shall be exhibited within 300 feet of a school in the city. (1966 Code, ch. 20.0, art. I, sec. 3; Ordinance
82-1 adopted 2/4/82; 1994 Code, sec. 111.19)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/438
Sec. 5.06.006 Exempt machines
This article does not apply to:
(1) A stamp vending machine;
(2) A service coin-operated machine; or
(3) If subject to an occupational or gross receipts tax:
(A) A gas meter;
(B) A food vending machine;
(C) A confection vending machine;
(D) A beverage vending machine;
(E) A merchandise vending machine, or
(F) A cigarette vending machine.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.20; Ordinance 02-11 adopted 7/2/02)
Sec. 5.06.007 Exempt organizations
A corporation or association owning, leasing, or renting a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine is exempt from this article if the
corporation or association is organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, educational, or benevolent purposes. (1994 Code, sec.
111.21; Ordinance 02-11 adopted 7/2/02)
Sec. 5.06.008 Exemption of persons owning machine for personal use
An individual who owns a music or skill or pleasure coin-operated machine for personal use and amusement in the individual's private residence
is not required to pay a tax under this article. (1994 Code, sec. 111.22; Ordinance 02-11 adopted 7/2/02)
Sec. 5.06.009 Machines and devices prohibited by state law
This article does not authorize or permit the keeping, exhibition, operation, display, or maintenance of a machine, device, or table prohibited by
the constitution of this state or the Texas Penal Code. (1994 Code, sec. 111.23; Ordinance 02-11 adopted 7/2/02)
ARTICLE 5.07 GAME ROOMS AND AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINES
Sec. 5.07.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Amusement redemption machine. Any electronic, electromechanical or mechanical contrivance that, for a consideration, affords the player an
opportunity to obtain anything of value, the award of which is determined solely or partially by chance, even though accompanied by some skill,
whether or not the prize is automatically paid by the contrivance, including but not limited to gambling device versions of bingo, keno, blackjack,
lottery, sweepstakes, roulette, video poker, tic-tac-toe, eight-liner or similar electronic, electromechanical or mechanical games, or facsimiles
thereof, that operate by chance or partially so.
City official. A code enforcement officer or building official of the city or any peace officer of the state.
Game room. A building, facility or other place that is open to the public and that contains one or more operational amusement redemption
machines.
Game room owner. A person who has any ownership interest in a game room, or an owner, director or officer of a business entity that has any
ownership interest in a game room.
Operational machine. A machine that is ready to be played and accessible to the public.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.50; Ordinance 2013-29 adopted 8/13/13)
Sec. 5.07.002 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith shall be deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor, and
upon conviction shall be fined not to exceed the maximum amount allowable by law. This offense is hereby declared to be a strict liability offense,
and the culpable mental state required by section 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is hereby specifically negated and clearly dispensed with. Each
day that the violation occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. (1994 Code, sec. 111.57; Ordinance 2013-29 adopted 8/13/13)
Sec. 5.07.003 Game room license
(a) Required; fee. An owner, operator or lessee of an amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to secure a license
annually. An amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to secure a license by paying to the city an annual inspection and
amusement redemption machine game room license fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. The application shall not be
approved until a completed application has been submitted and found to meet all application requirements.
(b) Application. An applicant for a license or permit shall file with the city secretary a written application, on a form provided for that purpose,
which shall be signed by the applicant, who shall be the owner, operator or lessee of the amusement redemption machine game room. Should
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/438
an applicant maintain an amusement redemption machine game room at more than one location, a separate application must be filed for each
location. The following information is required in the application:
(1) Location, by address, of the proposed operation;
(2) A copy of the certificate of formation if the business is registered with the secretary of state, or the applicant's d/b/a, if
applicable;
(3) Name, address, telephone number and driver's license number of the following persons, if applicable:
(A) The applicant if a natural person;
(B) All persons who own 25% or more interest in the amusement redemption machine game room;
(C) All corporate officers, if any, of the business;
(D) If a partnership, each of the general and limited partners;
(E) The property owner; and
(F) The manager of the property and/or business;
(4) The previous occupation(s) of the applicant and, if applicable, all corporate officers and partners of the applicant within the
preceding five years;
(5) Whether a previous license or permit of the applicant, or, if applicable, a corporate officer or partner of applicant, has been
revoked within two years of filing of the application;
(6) Number of amusement redemption machines in the amusement redemption machine game room;
(7) An authorization to conduct a background check for all individuals included in subsection (b)(3) above. The license will be
denied if any individual has any convictions, guilty pleas, or deferred adjudications related to gambling or organized crime;
(8) A sworn statement that:
(A) All the facts contained in the application are true and correct;
(B) The location and operation of the amusement redemption machine game room will not violate any applicable deed
restrictions; and
(C) The amusement redemption machine game room will be operated in accordance with all laws and city ordinances,
including chapter 47 of the Texas Penal Code; and
(9) Name, address and telephone number of an emergency contact person who can be reached after hours.
(c) Expiration and renewal.
(1) Expiration. An annual amusement redemption machine game room license issued by the city shall automatically expire on
December 31 following its issuance, except as otherwise stated herein. The license shall automatically expire if the licensee sells the
property or the business, transfers equity to accomplish same, or otherwise disposes of such devices. An amusement redemption
machine game room license is not assignable or transferable. The city shall not refund any portion of a license after the license is
issued, nor shall it prorate or reduce in amount any fee due to the city.
(2) Late fee. Upon the expiration of a license, the licensee shall obtain a renewal if the licensee wishes to continue operating an
amusement redemption machine game room. Failure to obtain the renewal within 30 days after expiration will require the licensee to
pay an additional late fee in the amount set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code, in order to obtain reinstatement of his
license. Nothing herein authorizes the licensee to operate after the expiration of a license and before a renewal is effective.
(d) Posting. The license shall be conspicuously posted inside the building.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.51(A)–(D); Ordinance 2013-29 adopted 8/13/13)
Sec. 5.07.004 Operation of game room
The following restrictions, regulations, controls and limitations shall apply to all amusement redemption machine game rooms:
(1) Building and zoning requirements. All building and fire code standards must be met. A certificate of occupancy shall be
requested before a license is issued. The game room must be located in an area zoned for that activity.
(2) Conduct of business.
(A) Amusement redemption machines are not allowed outdoors.
(B) The owner, operator or manager of the premises must be present to supervise the operation of the machines. The
machines shall not be left unattended.
(C) Machines must be situated within the premises as to be in full and open public view, which entails being visible to all
patrons of the establishment.
(D) A game room operator must be a person who is at least 18 years of age.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/438
(E) Total number of machines in one establishment shall be limited to 50.
(F) All machines must be permitted according to the permitting requirements of section 5.07.005.
(3) Parking requirements. One space for each two machines, plus one space per employee per shift.
(4) Alcoholic beverages. No amusement redemption machine game room may be located on premises where alcoholic beverages
are sold or served, with the exception of any congressionally chartered nonprofit organization.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.51(E); Ordinance 2013-29 adopted 8/13/13; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 5.07.005 Amusement redemption machine permit
(a) Application. An owner, operator or lessee of an amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to obtain a permit for each
amusement redemption machine. As part of the application, the owner, operator or lessee must submit, at their own expense, each amusement
redemption machine, including hardware and software source code, to an independent gaming compliance and testing laboratory approved in
advance by the city, to ensure that the machine does not generate the resultant outcome independent of the skillful actions of the player. Any
game that is determined to be beyond the ability of a player to predict or control the outcome will not be permitted or allowed to operate within
the incorporated limits of the city.
(b) Issuance. Following approval by the independent gaming compliance and testing laboratory, the city shall issue a permit that will be
permanently affixed to the approved machine. The permit shall include the name of the machine and the machine's serial number.
(c) Sealing or seizure of machines. A person commits an offense if he or she owns an operational machine without a permit or with a
tampered permit. In addition to other criminal or civil remedies outlined in this article, the city shall have the authority to seal or seize any coinoperated
machine located in any amusement redemption machine game room for which a permit is not displayed. If any amusement redemption
machine is found with evidence of permit tampering of any kind, including a permit issued to a different machine or a change in the game's
hardware or software after the date of the permit issuance, the city shall have the authority to seal or seize all amusement redemption machines
in the game room for retesting at the owner's expense, and/or to revoke the owner's license to operate a game room.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.52(A)–(C); Ordinance 2013-29 adopted 8/13/13)
Sec. 5.07.006 Location restricted
Because such businesses in the city are a potential attractive nuisance to minors, and the questioned legality of such activities, the city council
hereby finds such businesses constitute a nuisance to the health, safety and welfare of the city. Accordingly, subsequent to the passage of this
article, no license will be issued for any such establishment within a 500-foot radius of a church, residence, school, day care, hospital or another
business entity operating under a license issued under this article. Any businesses existing as of the time of the passage of this article shall be
permitted to continue. However, if they should cease operations, or violate any of the provisions of this article or any other applicable city, state or
federal law, their license shall be subject to revocation and may not be renewed unless they meet all provisions of any applicable law, including
the above spacing requirements. (1994 Code, sec. 111.52(D); Ordinance 2013-29 adopted 8/13/13)
Sec. 5.07.007 Access to premises by city officials
An owner, manager or employee of a game room or other person exercising control over a game room, a portion of a game room or an
operational amusement redemption machine shall provide a city official with immediate unrestricted access during business hours to all areas of
the game room, and to all operational amusement redemption machines located in the game room. (1994 Code, sec. 111.53; Ordinance 2013-29
adopted 8/13/13)
Sec. 5.07.008 Inspections
(a) A city official may inspect a game room or an operational amusement redemption machine located within the incorporated city limits to
determine whether the game room or the operational amusement redemption machine complies with the city Code of Ordinances and state law.
(b) An owner, manager or employee of a game room or other person who does not allow a city official to inspect a game room or operational
amusement redemption machine commits an offense.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.54; Ordinance 2013-29 adopted 8/13/13)
Sec. 5.07.009 View of interior
(a) Every game room shall have transparent, unobstructed windows or open space on at least one side so that the area is open to view by the
general public passing by on a public street, or using a corridor, lobby or other room to which the public has access and is admitted without
charge. The owner, manager or employee of a game room shall not permit any obstruction of such public view by the use of drawn shades,
blinds, partitions, tinting or other structures or obstructions.
(b) The requirements of subsection (a) above may be waived or modified by the building official if the game room owner can demonstrate:
(1) The game room is located in a structure deemed a historic landmark, or the structure is within a historic district, and deemed to
have architectural or historic significance; and
(2) Compliance with the unobstructed view requirement shall require alterations to the structure that will have a substantially
detrimental effect on its historic or architectural features.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.55; Ordinance 2013-29 adopted 8/13/13)
Sec. 5.07.010 Hours of operation; doors to remain unlocked during business hours
(a) All game rooms shall have their hours of operation clearly marked on every entrance.
(b) All game rooms shall have doors providing ingress and egress from the game room unlocked during the hours of operation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/438
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, conduct or operate any game room for profit, or to allow or permit any game room to remain
open for business or open to the public, before the hour of 10:00 a.m. or after the hour of 12:00 a.m.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.56; Ordinance 2013-29 adopted 8/13/13)
ARTICLE 5.08 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 5.08.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Adult arcade. A commercial establishment where coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or
motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at
any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of “special sexual activities”
or “specified anatomical areas.”
Adult bookstore or adult video store. A commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any
form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations, which depict or describe “specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas”; or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with “specified sexual activities.”
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
(2) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”; or
(3) Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or
similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas.”
Church. A building used principally for religious worship in which persons assemble for religious purposes at least once each week, which is
owned by such persons, or leased by them for a period of at least one year.
Disqualifying offense. Any crime involving an offense against the person, such as those described in Tex. Penal Code, title 5; an offense against
the family, such as those described in Tex. Penal Code, title 6; an offense involving prostitution, obscenity, or controlled substances; an offense
involving organized crime, such as those described in Tex. Penal Code, title 11; or an offense involving a violation of the provisions of this article.
Massage business. Any premises or business location at which massage therapy is offered or performed for the purposes of providing sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer for any form of consideration; provided that any premises or business location at which
massage therapy is offered or performed solely for therapeutic purposes shall not be included within the definition of this term for purposes of
this article. Within this definition, massage therapy shall have the meaning given in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 455, or in any successor
or amendment thereto.
Nude model studio. A commercial establishment where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” is
provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form
of consideration.
Nudity or a state of nudity. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, genitals, or female breasts.
Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, massage business,
or nude model studio.
Specified anatomical areas. Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
Specified sexual activities. Includes any of the following;
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or stimulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) above.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.30; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
Sec. 5.08.002 Location
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business or to sponsor, feature, or allow persons
who perform specified sexual activities to perform said activities in an establishment open to the public within 1,000 feet of:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/438
(1) A church;
(2) A public elementary or secondary school;
(3) A lot devoted to residential use;
(4) Another sexually oriented business; or
(5) A public park.
(b) For the purposes of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest property line of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church,
public elementary or secondary school, residential lot, or other sexually oriented business.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.31; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
Sec. 5.08.003 Existing businesses
The location restrictions contained in section 5.08.002 shall not apply to sexually oriented businesses in existence on May 10, 1995, or to
sexually oriented business operating as of the date of annexation within areas annexed by the city subsequent to May 10, 1995; provided that,
should any such place of business discontinue operation period of more than 30 days, then all location restrictions in section 5.08.002 shall
thereafter apply to the business. (1994 Code, sec. 111.32; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
Sec. 5.08.004 Operational regulations
All premises used in connection with sexually oriented businesses shall be periodically inspected by the chief of police for compliance with the
requirements of this section.
(1) Separate toilet facilities for men and women shall be provided on the premises.
(2) Persons under the age of 18 shall not be permitted on the premises of the business.
(3) Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold or provided on the premises of the business except in compliance with a current valid
license or permit issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission.
(4) For businesses where no alcoholic beverages are sold or provided, the business shall not operate between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on a Sunday or between 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any other day. For the businesses where alcoholic
beverages are sold or provided, the business shall operate at any time when the sale of alcoholic beverages is not prohibited. No
customer shall be permitted to enter upon or remain on the business premises at any time other than during the permitted hours of
operation.
(5) The business shall not have any bedroom, sleeping quarters, residence, or living quarters on the premises of the business.
(6) The business hours of the premises shall be plainly posted at each entrance to the business.
(7) Doors to individual customer service areas, rooms, viewing booths or cubicles shall not be capable of being locked.
(8) Massage therapists shall wear clothing that covers the anus, female breast, and the entire genitals during performing of
massage therapy.
(9) Violation of any provisions of these regulations is a class C misdemeanor.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.42; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 5.08.005 Inspections; access during business hours
(a) The entire premises of every sexually oriented business shall be deemed to be a public place and shall not during business hours have its
entrances or exits located or obstructed in any way so as to prevent free ingress and egress of persons.
(b) The licensee of every sexually oriented business shall allow the inspection of the premises by the police chief at any time during business
hours.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.43; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
Sec. 5.08.006 Enforcement
In addition to penalties provided in section 5.08.004 [sic], the city attorney may file suit in the district court to enjoin any person who shall violate
any provision of this article. (1994 Code, sec. 111.44; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
Secs. 5.08.007–5.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 5.08.031 Required
No person shall operate a sexually oriented business without first obtaining a sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to
the provisions of this article. (1994 Code, sec. 111.33; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
Sec. 5.08.032 Application
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/438
(a) Applications for sexually oriented business licenses shall be filed with the city secretary on a form to be furnished by the city secretary.
Applications shall contain at least the following information:
(1) The type of ownership of the business, such as, whether individual, partnership, corporation, or otherwise;
(2) The trade name under which the business is to be conducted and the type(s) of sexually oriented businesses to be operated on
the premises;
(3) The address and all telephone numbers to be used in connection with the business;
(4) The following information concerning the applicant if an individual or concerning each stockholder holding more than 10% of the
stock of the corporation, and each officer and each director if the applicant is a corporation, or concerning each partner, including
limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, and concerning the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of
the business:
(A) Name, residence address, and residence telephone number;
(B) The two most recent previous addresses;
(C) Date of birth and driver's license number;
(D) Height, weight, color of hair and eyes and sex;
(E) Business history and experience in connection with sexually oriented businesses, including whether or not the person has
previously or is currently participating in the ownership or operation of a sexually oriented business in this or another city or
state; and if a license or permit was or is required for the business whether a permit has ever been denied, revoked, or
suspended and, if so, the reason for that action;
(F) Any convictions for a felony or any misdemeanor involving prostitution, obscenity, or controlled substances, indicating the
type of crime and the date and place of conviction;
(5) Such other information as the police chief deems necessary to determine the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the
application;
(6) Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the
application and the qualifications of the applicant for the license; and
(7) A statement by the applicant under oath that the information contained in the application is true and correct. For this purpose, an
authorized corporate officer may execute the statement on behalf of a corporation, and an authorized partner may execute the
statement on behalf of a partnership.
(b) Each application shall be accompanied by payment of the license fee as established by separate ordinance. License fees shall not be
refundable.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.34; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
Sec. 5.08.033 Investigation; approval of application by chief of police
(a) Upon the city secretary's receipt of an application for a sexually oriented business permit, the chief of police shall conduct an investigation
into the applicant's business and personal history. The chief of police may require a personal interview of the applicant and such further
information as shall bear on the investigation.
(b) The chief of police shall also conduct an investigation on the premises where the sexually oriented business is to be operated to determine
whether the premises comply with the requirements of this article as well as all other applicable building and health regulations.
(c) Before any license is issued under this article, the chief of police shall provide written approval of the application.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.35; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
Sec. 5.08.034 Issuance or denial
(a) The city secretary shall issue a sexually oriented business license within 30 days of receipt of the application unless the chief of police
finds that:
(1) The premises do not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the requirements of this article and the city's
building and health regulations;
(2) The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than 10% of the stock of the corporation or any of the
officers and directors if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership,
or the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business, has been convicted of any disqualifying offense,
unless the conviction occurred at least three years prior to the date of the application; provided that, if the person was incarcerated in
a penal facility in connection with the conviction, then the three-year period shall run from the date of release from incarceration;
(3) Any employee of the applicant's business has been convicted of any disqualifying offense in connection with the business,
unless the conviction occurred at least more than three years prior to the date of the application; provided that, if the person was
incarcerated in a penal facility in connection with the conviction, then the three-year period shall run from the date of release from
incarceration;
(4) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of fact in the course of the application
procedure or in any document required by the city in connection therewith; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/438
(5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business license or permit denied or revoked by the city or any other state or local
agency within three years prior to the date of application.
(b) Sexually oriented business licenses shall contain the name and address of the licensee, the name, address and type(s) of business for
which the license is issued and the expiration date of the license.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.36; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
Sec. 5.08.035 Appeal from denial
(a) Any applicant denied a license shall have the right of appeal to the city council. This appeal shall be taken by filing with the city secretary a
written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal within ten days after notice of the denial is given to the applicant.
(b) The city secretary shall provide for a hearing on the appeal at the earliest convenient regular council meeting and shall notify the applicant
by certified mail and the police chief of the date and time of the hearing. The police chief may file a written response to the appeal with the city
secretary, a copy of which shall be provided by the city secretary to the applicant. The issue at the hearing shall be whether grounds for the
denial exist under section 5.08.034.
(c) The council shall by majority vote either sustain the action of the chief of police or direct the issuance of the license.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.37; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
Sec. 5.08.036 Display
Every sexually oriented business shall display its business license at all times in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the
business. (1994 Code, sec. 111.38; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
Sec. 5.08.037 Separate license required for each location; expiration and renewal
(a) Should any sexually oriented business have more than one location, then a separate license shall be required for each location.
(b) All sexually oriented business licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued. No proration of license fees shall be made
for issuance of licenses during the course of the year.
(c) Sexually oriented business licenses shall not be renewed without following the procedures for applying for the original license.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.39; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
Sec. 5.08.038 Suspension or revocation
(a) Suspension. A sexually oriented business license shall be suspended by the chief of police upon the licensee or the manager of the
business being charged with any disqualifying offense or upon any employee of the business being charged with any disqualifying offense in
connection with the business. The suspension period shall coincide with the time during which the charges remain pending. The chief of police
shall notify the licensee of the suspension at least ten days in the advance of its effective date.
(b) Revocation. A sexually oriented business license shall be revoked for the remainder of its term by the chief of police upon the licensee or
manager of the business being convicted of any disqualifying offense in connection with the operation of the business. The chief of police shall
notify the licensee of the revocation at least ten days in advance of its effective date.
(c) Appeals. Within ten days of receipt of suspension or revocation, a licensee may appeal the police chief's action to the city council by filing a
written notice with the city secretary setting forth specifically the grounds for the appeal. The city secretary shall provide for a hearing on the
appeal at the earliest convenient regular council meeting and shall notify the licensee by certified mail of the date and time of the hearing. The
issue at the hearing shall be whether grounds exist under subsections (a) and (b) of this section for the suspension or revocation. The council
shall by majority vote either sustain or rescind the action of the chief of police.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.40; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
Sec. 5.08.039 Transfer
Sexually oriented business licenses are not transferable. (1994 Code, sec. 111.41; Ordinance 95-07 adopted 5/8/95)
ARTICLE 5.09 OIL AND NATURAL GAS WELL DRILLING AND OPERATIONS*
Sec. 5.09.001 Purpose
The exploration, development, and production of oil and gas in the city are activities that necessitate reasonable regulation to ensure that all
property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to enjoy their property and its benefits and revenues. It is hereby declared to be the
purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards, and regulations for present and future operations related to
the exploring, drilling, developing, producing, transporting, and storing of oil and gas and other substances produced in association with oil and
gas within the corporate city limits and, to the extent allowed or may be allowed by state law, the extraterritorial jurisdiction, to protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the public, minimize the potential impact to property and mineral rights owners, protect the quality of the
environment and encourage the orderly production of available mineral, oil, and gas resources. (1994 Code, sec. 153.01; Ordinance 2012-67
adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.002 Definitions
All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of oil and gas wells not specifically defined shall have the meanings
customarily attributable thereto by prudent operators in the oil and gas industry. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this
article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/438
Abandonment. As defined by the state railroad commission and includes the plugging of a well and the restoration of any well site as required by
this article.
Ambient noise level. The all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources at the
location except for those sources related to oil and gas drilling, production, and compression, constituting the normal or existing level of
environmental noise at a given location.
Base flood. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Best management practices. State-of-the-art mitigation measures applied on a site-specific basis to reduce, prevent or avoid adverse
environmental or social impacts, and, for purposes of this article, best management practices include those practices recommended by the
American Petroleum Institute (API), the United States Environmental Protection Agency's Natural Gas STAR Program, and/or other similarly
recognized program, acceptable to and approved by the city.
Blowout preventer. A mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, or other device or combination of such devices secured to the top of a well casing,
including valves, fittings, and control mechanisms connected therewith, which can be closed around the drill pipe, or other tubular goods which
completely close the top of the casing and are designed to prevent blowouts.
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The term “building” shall be construed as if followed
by the words “or portions thereof.”
Cathodic protection. An electrochemical corrosion control technique accomplished by applying a direct current to the structure that causes the
structure potential to change from the corrosion potential to a protective potential in the immunity region. The required cathodic protection current
is supplied by sacrificial anode materials or by an impressed current system.
City attorney. The city attorney of the City of Cuero.
City code or code. The Code of Ordinances of the city, as amended.
City engineer. The city engineer of the City of Cuero.
City manager. The city manager of the City of Cuero.
City secretary. The city secretary of the City of Cuero.
Closed loop mud system. A system utilized while drilling so that reserve pits are not used and instead steel bins are used to collect all drilling
waste.
Closest edge of construction or surface disturbance. The nearest point or location of the drill site or pad site.
Commission or railroad commission. The state railroad commission, or any successor state regulatory agency.
Completion of drilling, re-drilling, and re-working. The date the work is completed for the drilling, re-drilling, or re-working and the crew is released
by completing its work or contract or by its employer.
Compression facility.
(1) Those facilities that compress natural gas after production-related activities which are conducted at or near the wellhead and
prior to a point where the gas is transferred to a carrier for transport and serves more than one well; and/or
(2) A compressor that serves a pipeline.
Days. Calendar days, unless otherwise noted.
Daytime. The timeframe between 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Derrick. Any framework, tower, mast and/or structure used for lifting and positioning the drilling string and piping above the well bore, and
containing the machinery for turning the drilling bit around in the bore hole and which is required or used in connection with drilling or re-working
a well for the production of oil and/or gas.
Drilling. Digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing oil and/or gas or other hydrocarbons, or for the
purpose of injecting gas, water, or any other fluid or substance into the earth to develop, produce or improve the production of oil and/or natural
gas or other hydrocarbons.
Drilling equipment. The derrick, together with all parts of any apparatus to such structure, and every piece of apparatus, machinery or equipment
used or erected or maintained for use in connection with drilling.
Drill site or pad site. The premises used during the drilling or re-working of a well or wells located there and subsequent life of a well or wells or
any associated operation.
Exploration. Geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for oil, gas, or other subsurface hydrocarbons.
Fire and emergency services. The fire and emergency services department of the city.
Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to a general and temporary condition of partial or complete base flood inundation of normally dry land
areas from the overflow of inland waters or from the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Frac or fracturing. The process of fracture stimulation of a rock formation.
Gas. Any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and which maintains a gaseous or
rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions, and/or the gaseous components or vapors occurring in or derived from
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/438
petroleum or natural gas.
Gas well. Any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of natural gas.
Habitable structure. Any structure suitable for human habitation or occupation, including but not limited to a single- or multi-family residence(s),
hotel, condominium building, building for commercial purposes and enclosed spaces in which individuals congregate for education, worship,
amusement or similar purposes, or in which occupants are engaged at or in labor, and which is equipped with means of egress, light and
ventilation facilities. Each building of a condominium regime is considered a separate habitable structure, but if a building is divided into
apartments, then the entire building, not the individual apartments, is considered a habitable structure.
Inspector. The oil and gas inspector designated by the city manager. Any technical advisor retained by the city pursuant to section 5.09.018 shall
have the authority as the oil and gas inspector, pursuant to section 5.09.003.
Nighttime. The timeframe between 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
Oil well. Any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of oil.
Operation site. The area used for development and production and all operational activities associated with oil and gas after drilling activities are
complete, including any private access roadway utilized for such activities.
Operator. For each well, the person listed on the railroad commission Form W-1 or Form P-4 for an oil and gas well that is, or will be, actually in
charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any well, including, without limitation, a unit operator. If the
operator, as herein defined, is not the lessee under an oil and gas lease of any premises affected by the provisions of this article, then such
lessee shall also be deemed to be an operator. In the event that there is no oil and gas lease relating to any premises affected by this article, the
owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator.
Permit. Any written license granted by the city for the exploration, development, and production of oil and/or gas wells issued pursuant to the
rules and regulations of this article. Three types of permits may be issued by the city, including an oil well permit, a gas well permit, or a
combined permit for the exploration, development, and production of both oil and gas wells as indicated on a single application.
Person. Both the singular and the plural, and means a natural person, a corporation, association, guardian, partnership, receiver, trustee,
administrator, executor, and fiduciary or representative of any kind.
Practicable. Available and capable of being done after taking into consideration existing technology, costs, and logistics in light of the overall
purpose of the activity.
Public building. All buildings used or designed or intended to be used for the purpose of assembly of persons for such purposes as deliberation,
entertainment, amusement, or health care. Public buildings include, but shall not be limited to, theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, armories,
mortuary chapels, dance halls, exhibition halls, museums, gymnasiums, bowling lanes, libraries, skating rinks, courtrooms, restaurants,
churches, and hospitals.
Public park. Any land area dedicated to and/or maintained by the city for traditional park-like recreational purposes, but shall not include
equestrian trails, trailheads, trails, and privately owned or privately managed golf courses.
Re-drill. Re-completion of an existing well by deepening or sidetrack operations extending more than 150 feet from the existing well bore.
Religious institution. Any building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily for purposes
connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
Residence. A house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home, or other building designed for dwelling purposes, including
those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for an oil, gas, or combined well permit is filed with the oil and gas
inspector. The term also includes structures attached to the residence, including but not limited to garages, porches, carports and similar
structures.
Re-working. Re-completion or re-entry of an existing well within the existing bore hole or by deepening or sidetrack operations which do not
extend more than 150 feet from the existing well bore, or replacement of well liners or casings.
Right-of-way. Public rights-of-way including streets, easements, and other property within the city and which is dedicated to the use and benefit
of the public.
School. Any public or private primary, secondary and post-secondary educational facilities providing education up through and including college
or university level courses or instruction; and any licensed day care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the state or by the city that provides
care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than six children under 14 years of age, and for less than 24 hours per day.
Storage tank. Any vessel, having a liquid capacity that exceeds 230 L (60 gallons), containing a flammable or combustible product, that is
intended for fixed installation.
Street. Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area, or other public right-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tank. A container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of oil and gas or other hydrocarbons for holding or
storing fluids.
Tank battery. The point of collection (tanks) and disbursement (tank, meter, lease automated custody transfer (LACT) unit) of oil or gas from
producing well(s).
Technical advisor. Such person(s) familiar with and educated in the oil and gas industry or the law as it relates to oil and gas matters who may be
retained from time to time by the city.
Well. A hole or holes, bore or bores, to any horizon, formation, or strata, used for the purpose of producing oil, gas, liquid hydrocarbon, brine
water, or sulphur water, or used as an injection well for secondary recovery, disposal or production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons from the
earth.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/438
(1994 Code, sec. 153.02; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.003 Oil and gas inspector
(a) The city manager shall designate an oil and gas inspector, who shall enforce the provisions of this article. The oil and gas inspector shall
have the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out the intent and purpose of this article and its particular provisions. Failure
of any person to comply with any such order or directive shall constitute a violation of this article.
(b) The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises covered by the provisions of this article to determine
compliance with the provisions of this article and all applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, or directives of the state. Failure of any person
to permit access to the oil and gas inspector shall constitute a violation of this article.
(c) The oil and gas inspector shall conduct periodic operational inspections of all permitted wells in the city to determine that the wells are
operating in accordance with proper safety parameters as set out in this article and all regulations of the commission.
(d) The oil and gas inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any records that are required by the railroad commission,
including logs, reports and the like, relating to the status or condition of any permitted well. Failure of any person to provide any such requested
material shall be deemed a violation of this article.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.03; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.004 Operator's agent
Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the state, upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may
be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator so designating such agent shall within ten business days notify the city
secretary in writing of any change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within the city are discontinued. (1994 Code, sec.
153.04; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.005 Permit required; restrictions
(a) A person desiring to engage and/or operate in oil and/or gas production activities shall apply for and obtain an oil, gas, or combined well
permit under this article. It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself/herself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor,
or servant for any person to drill any well, assist in any way in the site preparation, re-working, fracturing, or operation of any such well, or
conduct any activity related to the production of oil and/or gas without first obtaining an oil, gas, or combined well permit issued by the city in
accordance with this article. Such activities include, but are not limited to, re-working, initial site preparation, drilling, operation, construction of
derricks or tank batteries, fracturing, and pressurizing.
(1) A permit shall be required for seismic surveys. The operator conducting the seismic survey shall pay the appropriate fee for
such permit, in accordance with the provisions of section 5.09.022, and shall complete a written application for such permit, signed by
the operator or some person duly authorized to sign on his or her behalf, no less than ten business days prior to the commencement
of any seismic survey activities on-site, and in said permit application shall provide the following information to the oil and gas
inspector:
(A) Operator/applicant name, telephone number, address, and, if possible, email address; if the operator is a corporation, the
state of incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners.
(B) Location of the seismic survey.
(C) Date and time the seismic survey will be conducted.
(D) Detailed explanation of the seismic survey method to be used on-site.
(E) Date and time the seismic survey will be completed.
(F) Proof of insurance in the form of a standard commercial general liability insurance policy. This coverage must include
premises, operations, blowout or explosion, products, completed operations, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket
contractual liability, broad form property damage, independent contractors' protective liability and personal injury. This coverage
shall be a minimum combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence location for bodily injury and property damage.
(G) A detailed map showing the location of all vibration and geophone points.
(2) Under no circumstances may explosive charges, including but not limited to dynamite, be used in any way related to the
preparation and/or operation of conducting a seismic survey.
(3) Notwithstanding any provision contained herein, no seismic surveys shall be permitted on city property or in the right-of-way, as
defined in this article.
(b) The operator must apply for and obtain an oil, gas, or combined well permit for the drilling, re-drilling, deepening, re-entering, activating or
converting of each well.
(c) An oil, gas, or combined well permit shall not constitute authority for the re-entering and drilling of an abandoned well. An operator shall
obtain a new well permit in accordance with the provisions of this section if the operator is re-entering and drilling an abandoned well.
(d) When an oil, gas, or combined well permit has been issued to the operator for the drilling, re-drilling, deepening, re-entering, activating, or
converting of a well, such oil, gas, or combined well permit shall constitute sufficient authority for drilling, operation, production gathering or
production maintenance, repair, re-working, testing, plugging and abandonment of the well and/or any other activity associated with mineral
exploration at the site of such well; provided, however, that a new or amended permit shall be obtained before such well may be reworked for
purposes of re-drilling, deepening or converting such well to a depth or use other than that set forth in the then-current permit for such well.
(e) Any person who intends to re-work or re-drill a permitted well using a drilling rig, to fracture stimulate a permitted well after initial
completion, or to conduct seismic surveys or other exploration activities shall give written notice to the oil and gas inspector no less than ten
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/438
business days before the activities begin. The notice must identify where the activities will be conducted and must describe the activities in detail,
including whether explosive charges will be used, the duration of the activities and the time the activities will be conducted. The notice must also
provide the address and 24-hour phone number of the person conducting the activities.
(f) The following requirements shall apply to all fracture stimulation operations performed on a well:
(1) At least three business days before operations are commenced, the operator shall post a sign at the access road entrance of
the well site advising the public of the date the operations are scheduled to commence, said sign to be in accordance with the sign
standards referenced in section 5.09.014(a)(33)(A) herein;
(2) A watchperson shall be required at all times during such operations; and
(3) At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent directly to the atmosphere without first directing the flow through separation
equipment or into a portable tank. All formation fracturing operations shall be conducted during daylight hours unless the operator has
notified and received authorization from the oil and gas inspector that fracturing operations will occur before or after daylight hours to
meet safety requirements.
(g) An oil, gas, or combined well permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended, if drilling is not commenced within 90 days from the
date of the issuance of the permit. Drilling must commence within 90 days from the date of the issuance of the permit on at least one well in
order to maintain the validity of the permit for the multiple wells. A permit may be extended by the oil and gas inspector for an additional 60 days
upon request by the operator and proof that the regulatory standards of the requested permit for such location have not changed. Any permit
issued under this article shall otherwise expire one year after its initial issuance date if no drilling has commenced on the permitted pad site.
Upon the expiration of such permit, within 90 days the operation site shall be restored to its original condition as nearly as practicable.
(h) The oil, gas, or combined well permits required by this section are in addition to and are not in lieu of any permit that may be required by
any other provision of this code or by any other governmental agency.
(i) No additional oil, gas, or combined well permit or filing fees shall be required for:
(1) Any wells existing and approved by the city on the effective date of this article; or
(2) Any wells in existence or on any wells on which drilling has commenced on land annexed into the city after the effective date of
this article.
(j) No oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any public park.
(k) No oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within 750 feet of a floodplain as measured from the closest
edge of construction or surface disturbance. For floodplains identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on the most
current Federal Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), the distance measurement from the closest edge of construction or surface disturbance shall be
calculated in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the base flood elevation
topographic contour.
(l) No oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be issued for any fresh water fracture pond or well.
(m) No oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled on city-owned property without the prior consent of the city
council. The city council shall review the insurance and security requirements, potential environmental impacts, and threats to public health and
safety, on an individual basis, prior to the city council issuing the permit.
(n) No oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within 750 feet of a designated environmentally sensitive area.
The distance from the closest edge of construction or surface disturbance shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the environmentally sensitive area.
(o) Pursuant to section 5.09.019, the oil and gas board of appeals may issue variances to reduce the distance requirements set out in
subsections (k) and (n) of this section. In no event shall such reduction exceed 25% of the prescribed minimum setback distance.
(p) By acceptance of any permit issued pursuant to this article, the operator expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with
the provisions of this article. The terms of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated in any oil, gas, or combined well permit issued pursuant
to this article with the same force and effect as if this article were set forth verbatim in such oil, gas, or combined well permit.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.05; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.006 Application for permit
(a) Every application for an oil, gas, or combined well permit issued pursuant to this article shall be in writing, signed by the operator or some
person duly authorized to sign on his or her behalf, and filed with the oil and gas inspector.
(b) Every application shall be accompanied by an appropriate permit fee that shall be assessed per well and in accordance with the provisions
of section 5.09.022.
(c) An appropriate inspection fee shall be assessed annually per well and in accordance with the provisions of the city oil and gas fee
schedule. Said inspection fee shall be paid annually beginning on the first anniversary of the initial issuance date of the subject oil and/or gas
well permit and each year thereafter on the anniversary date thereof.
(d) The application shall include the following information:
(1) The date of the application.
(2) An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for the oil and/or gas operation, the parcel, and the production
unit and name of the geologic formation as used by the commission. Property recorded by plat shall reference subdivision, block and
lot numbers, as applicable.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/438
(3) A map showing the proposed transportation route and road for equipment, chemicals or waste products used or produced by
the oil and/or gas operation.
(4) Proposed well name(s).
(5) Surface owner name(s), telephone number(s), address(es), and, if possible, email address(es), of the lease property.
(6) Mineral lessee name(s), telephone number(s), address(es), and, if possible, email address(es).
(7) Mineral owner name(s), telephone number(s), address(es), and, if possible, email address(es).
(8) Operator/applicant name(s), telephone number(s), address(es), and, if possible, email address(es); if the operator is a
corporation, the state of incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general partners.
(9) Name, telephone number, address, and, if possible, email address of the individual designated to receive notice.
(10) Name of representative with supervisory authority over all oil and/or gas operation site activities and a 24-hour phone number.
(11) Location and description of all improvements, including water wells, and habitable structures within 1,500 feet of the proposed
drill site.
(12) Owner and address of each parcel of property within 1,500 feet of the proposed drill site.
(13) A site plan of the proposed operation site showing the location of all improvements and drilling equipment, including the
location of the proposed well(s) and other facilities, including, but not limited to, tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators, and
storage tanks, including the location of the potential maximum number of wells to be drilled and associated drilling equipment.
(14) A tree survey prepared pursuant to section 5.09.015(a)(1) (vegetation). A tree survey shall be required from the outer edge of
any improvements, construction areas, development, drilling equipment, materials, temporary roads, access easements, and/or built
structures, extending outward therefrom 500 feet, without regard to intervening structures or objects.
(15) The name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person to be notified in case of an emergency.
(16) The exact and correct acreage and number of wells included in the permit application.
(17) Copies of all reports required by the commission, specifically including a copy of the approved railroad commission Form W-1
and/or P-4.
(18) A signed road maintenance agreement supplied by the city that provides that the operator shall repair, at his or her own
expense, any damage to public roads, streets, or highways caused by the use of heavy vehicles for any activity associated with the
preparation, drilling, production, and operation of oil and/or gas wells.
(19) A description of public utilities required during drilling and operation.
(20) A description of the water source(s) to be used during drilling.
(21) A copy of the approved commission permit to drill together [sic] including attachments and survey plats that are applicable to
the drill and/or operation sites.
(22) A copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan as required by the commission, the state commission on environmental
quality, and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency. A copy of the notice of intent shall be submitted to the city oil and
gas inspector, at least seven business days prior to the commencement of any on-site activity.
(23) A copy of the hazardous materials management plan as required by the city fire chief's office. In addition to the hazardous
materials management plan, all material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous materials that will be located, stored,
transported, and/or temporarily used on the drilling site shall be provided to the oil and gas inspector and fire chief.
(24) A copy of the emergency response plan as required by the city fire chief's office.
(25) A copy of an emergency evacuation plan shall be provided, detailing all persons to be notified in the event of an evacuation,
including, without limitation, all persons residing within one-half mile of the edge of construction or surface disturbance.
(26) The operator shall submit to the city a notarized letter from a hazardous materials cleanup service company, said company to
be approved by the city, affirming that the operator has entered into a contract authorizing said company to perform cleanup services,
at the operator's cost, in the event of a hazardous materials spill, leak, seepage or accident. A contract shall be and remain in full
force and effect during the term of a permit and any change in contractor shall be approved in advance by the city, such approval not
to be unreasonably withheld.
(27) A copy of the determination by the state commission on environmental quality of the depth of usable quality groundwater.
(28) Evidence of insurance and security requirements under this article.
(29) A copy of the noise management plan, prepared by a noise control engineer or other qualified person approved by the oil and
gas inspector, for any equipment used in the drilling, completion, or production of a well, as required in section 5.09.007(i)(5).
(30) A statement, under oath, signed by the operator, or designated representative, that the information submitted with the
application is, to the best knowledge and belief of the operator or designated representative, true and correct.
(31) All required application and well permit fees assessed in accordance with section 5.09.022 herein.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/438
(32) A copy of an environmental protection plan, paid for by the applicant or operator, and prepared by a qualified individual or firm
designated or retained by the city if an environmental survey identified any environmentally sensitive area (ESA) within the proposed
drill site.
(33) A leak detection and compliance plan to ensure all site activities and equipment are in compliance with applicable federal,
state and local rules and regulations. The plan shall outline the methodology to assess and evaluate the impact of drilling, fracturing,
production, and other activities at the pad site and immediate surroundings. Specific elements of such a plan shall include, but are not
limited to, a quarterly leak detection monitoring program, methods and equipment utilized for emission measurements, and a
response plan to address leak issues should they arise, and any other information required by the oil and gas inspector. Monitoring
shall include the evaluation of potential impact to air, soil, surface water and groundwater. Quarterly reporting of the monitoring results
to the city's environmental services division is required with all laboratory data sheets, field logs, data summaries, and actions taken in
the previous quarter. The plan must be created in accordance with guidelines promulgated by the city's environmental services
division.
(34) No permit shall be issued unless an applicant has presented to the city written approval for a drilling site or pad site from the
United States Army Corps of Engineers, verifying that such drilling site or pad site is not located within 3,000 feet of any federal public
work, pursuant to section 408 of title 33 of the United States Code.
(35) A restoration bond payable to the city in the amount of $50,000.00 per acre of the operation site, which shall be valid for a
period of one year following the expiration of an oil and gas well permit. The purpose of the restoration bond is to provide the city with
a mechanism to restore proper grading and vegetation to the pad site and operation site. The city reserves the right to call the bond at
any point during the one-year period after expiration of the permit. The bond shall be returned after the drilling of a permitted well.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.06; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.007 Permitting procedures; well setbacks; performance standards
(a) Permit required. An oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be required for all wells related to developing or producing oil, gas, or other
hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting gas, water, or any other fluid or substance into the earth.
(b) Additional application requirements. An application for an oil, gas, or combined well permit shall include the following information:
(1) All the requirements of section 5.09.006.
(2) A detailed site plan that includes all the information required in section 5.09.006 but also includes specific details as to the
projected location of the major components of the drilling site, impacted environmentally sensitive areas, floodplains, topographic
contours, creeks and other topographic features, adjacent buildings and other structures, and the measured distance from the drilling
site to these major components of the drilling site, impacted environmentally sensitive areas, floodplains, topographic contours,
creeks and other topographic features, adjacent buildings and other structures.
(3) A traffic impact analysis including how much traffic will be generated by drilling and completion operations submitted to TXDOT
and approved by the oil and gas inspector. Must also include plans if needed to deal with increased traffic load.
(4) All application submissions for a permit shall include at a minimum three copies of the application and all associated
documentation, including plats, maps, surveys, and supporting materials, reports, and/or forms.
(c) Permitting procedure.
(1) It is the responsibility of the oil and gas inspector to review and approve or disapprove all applications for oil, gas, or combined
well drilling permits based on the criteria established by this article.
(2) The oil and gas inspector, within 45 days after the filing of a completed application and remittance of all fees, insurance, and
security per the requirements of this article for an oil, gas, or combined well permit, shall determine whether the application complies
in all respects with the provisions of this article and determine if the proposed well to be drilled and/or the drilling equipment to be
installed is in compliance with the distance requirements for the requested permit on the date the completed application is received by
the oil and gas inspector. Once the operator cures or otherwise complies with the conditions specifically noted by the oil and gas
inspector's application comments by a resubmission of the application, such 45-day review period shall commence again.
(3) The provisions of this article shall apply to any habitable structures or buildings for which an application for a building permit has
been submitted on the date the application for an oil, gas, or combined well permit is filed with the oil and gas inspector.
(4) With the exception of those pad sites permitted prior to the effective date of this article, all new and/or proposed construction of
any buildings, habitable structures, streets, roads, and/or applicable improvements to the property upon which any oil and/or gas well
is located must be in conformance with all applicable setbacks required by this article. Prior to the issuance of a building permit by the
city for any of said habitable structure(s) or buildings, the owner or developer of any lot or tract for which a building permit is sought
shall have the following notation placed on any deed, plat or site plan for said lot or tract: “This tract or lot is located less than one
thousand five hundred feet (1,500') from an existing oil or gas well and is subject to the Codes and Ordinances of the City of Cuero.”
The new construction setback may be reduced pursuant to section 5.09.019.
(5) If all the requirements of this article for new oil and gas well permit applications are met, the oil and gas inspector shall issue a
permit for the drilling of the well or the installation of the facilities for which the permit application was made. Prior to the issuance of
such permit, and within 30 days after the oil and gas inspector's determination that the application complies in all respects with the
provisions of this article, notice of the pending permit approval shall be mailed, via hand delivery or United States mail, to all property
owners, as indicated by the most recently approved city tax roll, within 1,500 feet of such site, informing said property owners of a
meeting open to the public at which meeting said property owners may ask questions about and discuss the pending permit
application. All costs of property owner notification shall be borne by the operator and the meeting referenced herein shall occur no
later than 21 days after the date of mailing of property owner notification letters.
(6) If the oil and gas inspector denies a permit application for cause as set out in this article for the requested oil, gas, or combined
well permit, the oil and gas inspector shall notify the operator in writing of such denial stating the reasons for the denial. Within 30
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/438
days of the date of the written decision of the oil and gas inspector to deny the permit, the operator shall cure those conditions that
caused the denial and resubmit the application to the oil and gas inspector for approval and issuance of the permit. Alternatively, the
operator may file an appeal to the oil and gas board of appeals under the provisions outlined in this article pursuant to section
5.09.019.
(d) Well setbacks.
(1) It shall be unlawful to drill, re-drill, deepen, re-enter, activate or convert any oil or natural gas well, for which the closest edge of
construction or surface disturbance is located:
(A) Within 1,500 feet from any public park;
(B) Within 1,500 feet from any residence;
(C) Within 1,500 feet from the property line upon which any religious institution, public building, hospital building or school is
located or for which a building permit has been issued on or before the date the application for a drilling permit is filed with the oil
and gas inspector;
(D) Within 1,500 feet from any habitable structure;
(E) Within 750 feet from any recorded property, lot or tract line, except where otherwise referenced in this section. Further,
where common surface and mineral estate ownership exists for adjacent and abutting tracts, no variance shall be required for
such property, lot or tract lines;
(F) Within 500 feet from any existing storage tank, or source of potential ignition;
(G) Within 750 feet of any public street, road, highway, or right-of-way line; or
(H) Within 1,500 feet from any existing fresh water well.
All distances shall be measured from the closest edge of construction or surface disturbance in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of any object, structure, or recorded property, lot or
tract line listed in subsections (A) through (H) above.
(2) The distances set out in subsection (d)(1) above may be reduced and documented as variances to the requested permit prior to
issuance at the discretion of the oil and gas board of appeals pursuant to section 5.09.019, but said distances shall never be reduced
to less than twenty-five percent of the distances set out in subsection (d)(1) above. No variance shall be permitted for any existing
storage tank or source of potential ignition, pursuant to subsection (d)(1)(F) above, or any public street, road, highway or right-of-way
line, pursuant to subsection (d)(1)(G) above.
(e) Erosion control plan. Erosion control practices shall be conducted for all gas wells. Compost berms that are at least one foot high and two
feet wide, or equivalent erosion control devices, shall be installed near, around and about the downslope portion of the well pad so that off-site
runoff is contained. Damage resulting from sedimentation and/or erosion shall be repaired immediately.
(f) Vehicle routes. Vehicles in excess of three tons gross vehicle weight associated with drilling and/or production shall be restricted to such
streets designated as arterials, collectors or local commercial as delineated in the city's thoroughfare plan. The vehicles shall be operated on
state arterials whenever capable of being used. Such vehicles shall be operated on city arterials, collectors and local commercial only when it is
not possible to use a state arterial to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated. The vehicle routes to be utilized and the
operation of all such vehicles upon and across said vehicle routes shall be subject to approval by the city of a road maintenance agreement.
(g) Work hours. Site development, other than drilling, shall be conducted only between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and
between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturday. Truck deliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and/or production, well
servicing, site preparation and other related work conducted on the well site shall be limited to the same work hour restrictions identified above,
except in cases of fires, blowouts, explosions, and any other emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is necessary to prevent the
cessation of drilling or production. The operator may request a variance from the oil and gas board of appeals, pursuant to section 5.09.019.
(h) Emissions requirements; emissions compliance plan. Gas well sites and production facilities shall comply with all state and federal
emissions and air quality regulations for exhaust emissions, fugitive emissions, greenhouse gas emissions and all other applicable emissions
control and air quality standards for natural gas drilling and production. In the event there are two or more notices of violation during any 12-
month period, as determined by the state commission on environmental quality or the United States Environmental Protection Agency, within 30
days of the second notice of violation, the operator shall submit to the city an emissions compliance plan. An emissions compliance plan shall
include, but is not limited to, 24-hour on-site emissions monitoring and subsequent periodic reporting to the city council for a period of 12 months
of documented compliance, and the installation of appropriate equipment to meet the requirements of the emissions compliance plan, which may
include but is not limited to vapor recovery units or other emissions control technology, to ensure that any emissions are within applicable state
and federal regulations. Thereafter the operator shall employ best management practices to eliminate any emissions in violation of any state and
federal regulations.
(i) Noise restrictions.
(1) No drilling, producing, or other operations shall produce a sound level greater than:
(A) Seventy decibels using the “A weighting filter” (dB(A)) when measured at a distance of 300 feet from the drilling,
producing, or operating equipment in question during the daytime.
(B) Fifty-six dB(A) when measured to the nearest residence, public building, or habitable structure from the drilling, producing,
or operating equipment in question during the nighttime.
(C) Seventy dB(A) during apply to [sic] formation fracturing when measured at a distance of 300 feet from the production
equipment in question during the daytime.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/438
(2) No person shall operate or permit to be operated in connection with the operation of a producing well(s) any compression facility
which creates a sound level that exceeds the ambient noise level by more than three dB(A) when measured at the nearest property
line, residence, habitable structure, or public building, whichever is closer. In addition, if a residence, habitable structure, or public
building for which an application for a building permit has been submitted on or before the date the application for a building permit for
the compression facility is filed with building inspections is present on the property for which the compression facility is proposed, the
sound level shall not exceed the ambient noise level by more than three dB(A) when measured at the proposed residence, habitable
structure or public building. Upon approval by the city, the compression facility shall be totally enclosed and designed to meet
architectural standards complementary of the surrounding area.
(3) Low frequency noise standards. No drilling, production, or other operations shall produce a low frequency sound level that
exceeds the following decibel levels:
(A) 16 Hz octave band: 65 decibels.
(B) 32 Hz octave band: 65 decibels.
(C) 64 Hz octave band: 65 decibels.
(4) Sound level measurements shall conform to the following guidance:
(A) Sound level meters shall conform, as a minimum, to the requirements of the American National Standards Institute.
(B) Sound level measurements shall be taken four feet above ground level.
(C) Sound levels shall be determined by averaging minute-by-minute measurements made over a minimum 15-minute
sample duration, if practicable. Sound level measurements shall be taken under conditions that are representative of the noise
experienced by the complainant (e.g., at night, morning, evening, or during special weather conditions).
(D) In all sound level measurements, the existing ambient noise level from all other sources in the encompassing environment
at the time and place of such sound level measurement shall be considered to determine the contribution to the sound level by
the oil and gas operation(s).
(5) The noise management plan, as approved by the oil and gas inspector, shall detail how the equipment used in the drilling,
completion, transportation, or production of a well complies with the maximum permissible noise levels of this article. The noise
management plan must:
(A) Identify operation noise impacts;
(B) Detail how the impacts will be mitigated. In determining noise mitigation, specific site characteristics shall be considered,
including but not limited to the following:
(i) Nature and proximity of adjacent development, location, and type;
(ii) Seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind directions;
(iii) Vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site;
(iv) Topography;
(v) Operation and site noise management measures, which may include but not be limited to use of critical grade
mufflers on generators and motors; use of structural noise curtains, walls, or enclosures; and best management practices
by limiting or eliminating noisier operations, such as tripping, deliveries of pipe, casing and heavy loads, use of horns for
communication, and operation of vehicle audible backup alarms at night.
(C) Identify the location of noise blankets, sound walls or other applicable noise mitigation effects around the pad site. Noise
mitigation shall be required for all drilling, hydraulic fracturing and production operations.
(j) Liquid storage tanks. Liquid storage tanks (stock tanks) shall not be allowed inside the city limits.
(k) Building permit required.
(1) No building or structure regulated by the current code adopted by the city shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered,
repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, or demolished unless a separate permit for each building or structure has first been
obtained from the code enforcement officer. Notwithstanding the provisions of the city's building codes, compliance with all noise
requirements of this article shall be documented, signed by a noise control engineer or other qualified person approved by the oil and
gas inspector, and submitted to the oil and gas inspector prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of any person, firm, or corporation, upon submittal of an application for a building permit for work
regulated by the current code adopted by the city, to register as a general contractor with the city. Work regulated includes but is not
limited to construction of gates, fencing, plumbing, irrigation, electricity, roadways, entrances, compressors, flow lines, pipelines,
gathering lines, tank batteries, and buildings. Such registration shall be upon forms supplied by the code enforcement officer and shall
become null and void on December 31 of each year. An appropriate fee for registration shall be assessed in accordance with the
provisions of the city oil and gas fee schedule.
(l) All other provisions outlined in this article shall be required.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.07; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.008 Issuance of amended permit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/438
(a) An operator may submit an application to the oil and gas inspector to amend an existing oil, gas, or combined well permit to commence
drilling from a new drill site that is not shown on (or incorporated by reference as part of) the existing permit, to relocate a drill site or operation
site that is shown on (or incorporated by reference as part of) the existing permit, or to otherwise amend the existing permit.
(b) Application for amended permits shall be in writing, shall be signed by the operator, and shall include the following:
(1) The applicant shall submit an appropriate application fee for amended oil and/or gas well permits that shall be assessed per
well and in accordance with the provisions of the city oil and gas fee schedule;
(2) A description of the proposed amendments;
(3) Any changes to the information submitted with the application for the existing permit (if such updated information has not
previously been provided to the city);
(4) Such additional information as is reasonably required by the oil and gas inspector to demonstrate compliance with the
applicable permit; and
(5) Such additional information as is reasonably required by the oil and gas inspector to prevent imminent destruction of property or
injury to persons.
(c) All applications for amended permits shall be filed with the oil and gas inspector for review. Incomplete applications may be returned to the
applicant, in which case the city shall provide a written explanation of the deficiencies; however, the city shall retain the application fee. The city
may return any application as incomplete if there is a dispute pending before the railroad commission regarding the determination of the
operator.
(d) If the amended permit application is in compliance with the provisions of this article, the oil and gas inspector shall approve the amendment
within 30 days after the application is filed.
(e) The failure of the oil and gas inspector to review and issue an amended permit within the time limits specified above shall not cause the
application for the amended permit to be deemed approved.
(f) The decision of the oil and gas inspector to deny an amendment to a permit shall be provided to the operator in writing within 30 days after
the decision is reached, including an explanation of the basis for the decision. The operator may appeal any such denial pursuant to the
procedures outlined in section 5.09.019.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.08; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.009 Transfer of permit
(a) An oil, gas, or combined well permit may be transferred by the operator with the prior written consent of the city if no outstanding violations
of the terms of this article exist, if the transfer is in writing signed by both parties, if the transferee agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions
of the transferred oil, gas, or combined well permit, if all information previously provided to the city as part of the application for the transferred
oil, gas, or combined well permit is updated to reflect any changes, and if the transferee provides the insurance and security required by this
article. The insurance and security provided by the transferor shall be released if a copy of a written transfer meeting these requirements is
provided to the city. The transfer shall not relieve the transferor from any liability to the city arising out of any activities conducted prior to the
transfer.
(b) The operator also shall submit an updated emergency response plan, hazardous materials management plan, and emergency evacuation
plan. The operator shall not be permitted to assume control of the permit until all required documents have been submitted, reviewed and
approved by the oil and gas inspector.
(c) The applicant shall submit an appropriate transfer fee for oil and/or gas well permits that shall be assessed per well and in accordance with
the city oil and gas fee schedule.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.09; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.010 Suspension or revocation of permit
(a) If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or representatives) fails to comply with any requirement of an oil, gas, or
combined well permit (including any requirement incorporated by reference as part of the permit), the oil and gas inspector shall give written
notice to the operator specifying the nature of the failure and giving the operator a reasonable time to cure, taking into consideration the nature
and extent of the failure, the extent of the efforts required to cure, and the potential impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the community
and potential negative impacts upon the surrounding environment. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than 30 days unless the
failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide
periodic reports as required by this article.
(b) If, the operator fails to correct the noncompliance within the designated timeframe, the oil and gas inspector may suspend or revoke the
permit pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(c) No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms of a permit issued under this article during any period of time in which
the permit is suspended or revoked or pending a review of the decision or order of the city suspending or revoking the permit. Nothing contained
herein shall be construed to prevent the necessary, diligent and bona fide efforts to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the
suspension or revocation of the permit was ordered for the safety of persons or as required by the commission.
(d) If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time specified in this article, the oil and gas inspector, upon written notice to the
operator, shall notify the commission and request that the commission take any appropriate action.
(e) Nothing in this section shall prohibit the issuance of a stop work order or other appropriate order by the fire chief or police chief when, in
his/her professional opinion, there exists a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons. In such event, an operator shall comply
with such order and efforts shall be undertaken by an operator and such city official to bring such circumstances or condition into compliance with
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/438
this article or pertinent provisions of the International Fire Code, as amended, and any other applicable local, state or federal regulations giving
rise to the issuance of such order.
(f) An operator may file an appeal of the suspension or revocation of a permit to the board of appeals under the provisions outlined in this
article pursuant to section 5.09.019.
(g) If an application for an oil, gas, or combined well permit is denied by the oil and gas inspector, nothing herein contained shall prevent a new
permit application from being submitted to the oil and gas inspector for the same well.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.10; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.011 Reports and notifications to oil and gas inspector
(a) The operator shall notify the oil and gas inspector of any changes to the following information within seven business days after the change
occurs:
(1) The name, address, and/or phone number of the operator;
(2) The name, address, and/or phone number of the person designated to receive notices from the city (which person must be a
resident of Texas that can be served with such notices in person or by registered or certified mail); and
(3) The operator's emergency action response plan (including “drive-to” maps from public rights-of-way to each drill site).
(b) The operator shall notify the oil and gas inspector of any change to the name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the person(s) with
supervisory authority over drilling or operations activities within ten business days.
(c) Reports on emergencies.
(1) The operator shall immediately notify the oil and gas inspector and fire chief of any incident resulting in product loss from a
hydrocarbon storage facility or pipeline facility, blowout, fire, explosion, incident resulting in injury, death, or property damage, or any
other significant incidents as defined by the commission.
(2) A written report, containing a brief summary of the incident, shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector by 5:00 p.m. on the
first business day of the city following the incident, and a duplicate report shall be submitted to the fire chief by the same time.
(3) A follow-up report, signed and dated by the person responsible for said report, shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector
and the fire chief within 30 days following the incident. The operator responsible for the follow-up incident report shall include the
following information:
(A) Operator/applicant name, phone number, address, and, if possible, email address;
(B) Description of the incident, including, but not limited to, the time, date, location, and cause of the event;
(C) Duration of the incident, that is, when it began and when it terminated to the degree that it no longer constituted a hazard
to the health, safety, and well-being of persons or property, regardless of the distance or separation from the place of incident;
(D) How the incident was brought under control and/or remedied;
(E) A full and complete description of the type of intercompany investigation or other investigation or inquiry that was made
concerning the incident, the findings or results of such inquiry or investigation, and the action taken as a result of the findings
and inquiry concerning the prevention of the existence of future hazards.
(d) The operator shall provide the oil and gas inspector and the fire chief a copy of any incident reports or written complaints submitted to the
railroad commission within 30 days after the operator has notice of the existence of such reports or complaints. This shall include, but not be
limited to, notification of any reportable quantity releases of oil, natural gas, and/or associated minerals, chemicals, or solid and/or liquid wastes,
pursuant to regulatory requirements established by the commission, and notification to the fire marshal of any fire and/or equipment strikes by
lightning.
(e) Beginning on December 31 after each well is completed, and continuing on each December 31 thereafter until the operator notifies the oil
and gas inspector that the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall submit a written report to the oil and gas inspector
identifying any changes to the information that was included in the application for the applicable permit that have not been previously reported to
the city.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.11; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.012 Public information
(a) After approval of a permit application, the operator shall submit in writing an accurate timeline account, which is updated weekly, of planned
operational events associated with the permit to the oil and gas inspector. The account shall state a timeline and description of events that will
occur. Events to be documented shall include but not be limited to site preparation and grading, site construction of the derrick and drilling
equipment and accessory structures, the expected amount of time spent drilling on-site, all casing installation, testing, flaring, disassembly of the
derrick, pipeline installation, fracture stimulation, maintenance, tank battery construction, site cleanup, and production.
(b) The applicant shall submit an educational letter of operations within 15 days of approval of the application to all property owners within
1,500 feet of the edge of construction or surface disturbance. The letter shall detail typical operations associated with oil and gas drilling activity
with an intended audience of the general public. The topics to be detailed shall include, but not be limited to, site preparation, site development
and construction, drilling, casing, fracturing, pipeline construction, production, transportation, and general weekly, monthly, and yearly
maintenance of the operation site.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.12; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/438
Sec. 5.09.013 Bond, letters of credit, indemnity and insurance
(a) General requirements. The operator shall be required to:
(1) Comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the permit issued hereunder.
(2) Promptly clear drill sites and operation sites of all litter, trash, waste, materials, and/or other substances used, allowed, or
occurring in the operations, and after abandonment or completion grade, level and restore such property to the same surface
conditions as nearly as possible as existed before any oil and gas drilling, exploration and production operations were commenced.
(3) Indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees from and against any and all claims, losses, damages,
causes of action, suits and liability of every kind, including all expenses of litigation, court costs, and attorney's fees, for injury to or
death of any person or for damage to any property arising out of or in connection with the work done by operator under an oil, gas, or
combined well permit:
(A) Where such injuries, death or damages are caused by operator's sole negligence or the joint negligence of operator and
any other person or entity; and
(B) Regardless of whether such injuries, death or damages are caused in whole or in part by the negligence of the operator.
(4) Promptly pay all fines, penalties and other assessments imposed due to breach of any requirements and/or terms of the oil,
gas, or combined permit.
(5) Promptly restore to its former condition any public property damaged by the oil and gas drilling, exploration or production
operation.
(b) Bond or irrevocable letter of credit. Prior to the issuance of an oil, gas, or combined well permit the operator shall provide the oil and gas
inspector with a security instrument in the form of a bond or an irrevocable letter of credit as follows:
(1) Bond. A bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance institution authorized to do business in Texas, acceptable to
the city. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the oil, gas, or combined well permit is issued and shall remain in force
and effect for at least a period of six months after the expiration of the permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the
site is fully restored, whichever occurs first. The operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the city, as obligee,
and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the terms and regulations of this article and the city. The original bond shall
be submitted to the oil and gas inspector with a copy of the same provided to the city secretary.
(2) Letter of credit. An irrevocable letter of credit shall be issued in favor of the city by a reliable bank or other financial institution,
acceptable to the city, authorized to do business in Texas, and shall become effective on or before the date the permit is issued and
shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six months after the expiration of the permit term. The city shall require a local
banking association to be named as a confirming bank for purposes of presentment and collection in DeWitt County, Texas. The city
shall be authorized to draw upon such letter of credit to recover any fines or penalties assessed under this article. Evidence of the
execution of a letter of credit shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector by submitting an original signed letter of credit from the
banking or financial institution, with a copy of the same provided to the city secretary.
(3) Amount. The principal amount of any security instrument shall be $50,000.00 for any single well and shall not be less than
$100,000.00 per pad site. If, after completion of a well, the applicant/operator who initially posted a single well or pad site bond has
complied with all of the provisions of this article and such operator's well(s) is (are) in production and all drilling operations have
ceased, the operator may submit a request to the oil and gas inspector to reduce the existing bond to $10,000.00 per well for the
remainder of the time the well produces without re-working. During any re-drilling or re-working, the amount of the bond or letter of
credit shall be reinstated to and maintained at $50,000.00 for any single well and shall not be less than $100,000.00 per pad site.
(4) Increased amount. If, at any time after no less than a 15-day written notice to the operator, the oil and gas inspector shall deem
any operator's bond or letter of credit to be insufficient, the city may require the operator to increase the amount of the bond or letter
of credit up to a maximum of $200,000.00 per well.
(5) Renewal. The operator agrees to renew the bond or irrevocable letters of credit prior to expiration thereof so the bond or letters
of credit shall remain in full force and effect during the entire permit term, including any extension. The operator shall provide the city
evidence that the bond or irrevocable letter of credit has been renewed at least 30 days prior to its scheduled expiration date. If an
operator fails to timely provide the city with such certification of renewal, the city shall be authorized to immediately, and at any time
prior to the expiration date of the bond or irrevocable letters of credit accepted hereunder by the city [assert a claim against the bond
and/or make presentment of the irrevocable letters of credit] by presenting the original thereof, together with an affidavit executed by
the city manager stating that operator is in default under the terms of this article.
(6) Default in performance. Whenever the oil and gas inspector finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any
requirement or condition imposed by this article, a written notice shall be given to the operator. Such notice shall specify the work to
be done, the estimated cost and the period of time deemed by the oil and gas inspector to be reasonably necessary for the
completion of such work. After receipt of such notice, the operator shall, within the time therein specified, either cause or require the
work so identified to be performed, or, failing to do so, shall pay over to the city 125% of the estimated cost of doing the work as set
forth in the notice. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than 30 days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent
destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required
by this article.
(7) Failure to cure default. In the event of the operator's failure or refusal to timely cure such a default, the city shall be authorized
to draw against the irrevocable letter of credit or bond to recover such amount due from the operator. Upon receipt of such monies,
the city shall have the right but not the corresponding obligation to proceed by such mode as deemed convenient to cause the
required work to be performed and completed.
(8) Failure to properly abandon well. In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the
commission at the end of the permit term and the drill site and the operation site restored in conformity with the regulations of this
article, the city shall have the right to assert a claim against the bond and/or make presentment of the irrevocable letters of credit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/438
accepted hereunder by the city by presenting the original thereof, together with an affidavit executed by the city manager stating that
the operator is in default under the terms of this article. If the operator provides a bond, the operator as principal, and the guarantor of
surety on the bond or the operator shall be liable to pay for the cost to properly plug and abandon the well and restore the drill site
and operation site in conformity with the regulations of this article. The surety shall be liable in the amount of the bond. If, however,
the operator provides an irrevocable letter of credit, rather than a bond, then the operator shall be solely liable to pay for the cost to
properly plug and abandon the well and restore the drill site and operation site in conformity with the regulations of this article. Upon
receipt of such monies, the city shall have the right but not the corresponding obligation to proceed by such mode as deemed
convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed.
(9) Termination and return to operator. When the well or wells covered by said irrevocable letters of credit or bond have been
properly abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this article and in conformity with all regulations of the commission and notice
to that effect has been received by the city, or upon receipt of a satisfactory substitute, the irrevocable letter of credit or bond issued in
compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and canceled and returned to the applicant/operator.
(10) Requirements for presentment. The only requirements for presentment of any bond or letter of credit accepted hereunder by
the city shall be the presentation of the original thereof, together with an affidavit executed by the city manager stating that the
applicant/operator is in default under the terms of this article.
(c) Insurance. In addition to the bond or letter of credit required pursuant to this article, the operator shall carry a policy or policies of insurance
issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in Texas. In the event such insurance policy or policies are canceled,
the oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be suspended on such date of cancellation and the operator's right to operate under such oil, gas, or
combined well permit shall immediately cease until the operator files additional insurance as provided herein.
(1) General requirements applicable to all policies.
(A) The city, its officials, employees, agents and officers shall be endorsed as an “additional insured” to all policies except
employers' liability coverage under the operator's workers' compensation policy.
(B) All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for environmental pollution liability (seepage and pollution
coverage) and excess or umbrella liability, which may be written on a claims-made basis.
(C) All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A-: VIII or better rating by the most current version of the A. M. Best Key
Rating Guide or with such other financially sound insurance carriers acceptable to the city.
(D) Deductibles shall be listed on the certificate of insurance and shall be on a “per occurrence” basis unless otherwise
stipulated herein.
(E) Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the city oil and gas inspector, evidencing all the required coverages,
including endorsements, prior to the issuance of a permit.
(F) All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation providing rights of recovery in favor of the city.
(G) Any failure on part of the city to request required insurance documentation shall not constitute a waiver of the insurance
requirement specified herein.
(H) Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the city a minimum 30-day notice of cancellation, nonrenewal, and/or material
change in policy terms or coverage. A ten-day notice shall be acceptable in the event of nonpayment of premium.
(I) During the term of the oil, gas, or combined well permit, the operator shall report, in a timely manner, to the oil and gas
inspector any known loss occurrence which could give rise to a liability claim or lawsuit or which could result in a property loss.
(J) Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be furnished to the city.
(2) Standard commercial general liability policy. This coverage must include premises, operations, blowout or explosion, products,
completed operations, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket contractual liability, underground resources damage, broad form
property damage, independent contractors' protective liability and personal injury. This coverage shall be a minimum combined single
limit of $10,000,000.00 per occurrence location for bodily injury and property damage.
(3) Excess or umbrella liability. $25,000,000.00 excess or umbrella liability coverage. This coverage must include an endorsement
for sudden or accidental pollution. If excess or umbrella liability coverage is written on a “claims made” basis, the operator must
maintain continuous coverage and purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary. The extended coverage period
insurance must provide that any retroactive date applicable to coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the issuance
of the permit by the city.
(4) Environmental pollution liability coverage.
(A) The operator shall purchase and maintain in force, for the duration of the oil, gas, combined well permit, insurance for
environmental pollution liability applicable to bodily injury, property damage, including loss of use of damaged property or of
property that has not been physically injured or destroyed, cleanup costs, and defense, including costs and expenses incurred in
the investigation, defense or settlement of claims, all in connection with any loss arising from the insured site. Coverage shall be
maintained in an amount of at least $10,000,000.00 per loss.
(B) Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of smoke, vapors,
fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste material or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants.
(C) The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage period insurance when
necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that any retroactive date applicable to coverage under the
policy precedes the effective date of the issuance of the permit by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/438
(5) Control of well. The policy shall cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, re-drilling or restoration expenses,
seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the operator and related expenses, including, but not limited to, loss of
equipment, experts and evacuation of residents.
(A) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) per occurrence with no aggregate, if available, otherwise an aggregate of
$10,000,000.00.
(B) Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) sublimit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the
operator has care, custody and control.
(6) Workers' compensation and employers' liability insurance.
(A) Workers' compensation benefits shall be Texas statutory limits.
(B) Employers' liability shall be a minimum of $1,000,000.00 per accident.
(C) Such coverage shall include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city and provide coverage in accordance with
applicable state and federal laws.
(7) Automobile liability insurance.
(A) Combined single limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage.
(B) Coverage must include all owned, hired and non-owned automobiles.
(8) Certificates of insurance.
(A) The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the State of Texas, unless the coverage is written by a
surplus lines insurer.
(B) The insurance set forth by the insurance company must be underwritten on forms that have been approved by the state
board of insurance or ISO, or an equivalent policy form acceptable to the city, with the exception of environmental pollution
liability and control of well coverage.
(C) Shall set forth all endorsements and insurance coverage according to requirements and instructions contained herein.
(D) Shall specifically set forth the notice of cancellation, termination, or change in coverage provisions to the city. All policies
shall be endorsed to read:
THIS POLICY WILL NOT BE CANCELED, NON-RENEWED OR MATERIALLY ALTERED WITHOUT 30 DAYS' ADVANCE
WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND THE CITY EXCEPT WHEN THIS POLICY IS BEING CANCELED FOR
NONPAYMENT OF PREMIUM, IN WHICH CASE 10 DAYS' ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE IS REQUIRED.
(E) Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this section shall be furnished with the certificates of insurance.
(d) Indemnification and express negligence provisions. Each oil, gas, or combined well permit issued by the oil and gas inspector shall include
the following language:
Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge, all claims, demands, actions, judgments, and executions which it ever
had, or now has or may have, or its assigns may have, or claim to have, against the City of Cuero, and/or its departments,
agents, officers, servants, successors, assigns, sponsors, volunteers, or employees, created by, or arising out of personal
injuries, known or unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the
performance of the work performed by the operator under an oil, gas, or combined well permit. The operator shall fully defend,
protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Cuero, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees, from
and against any and all claims, suits, judgments and demands for and including, without limitation, personal injuries and death in
connection therewith which may be made or asserted by operator, its agents, assigns, or any third parties on account of, arising
out of, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a permit.
The operator agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Cuero, Texas, its departments, its officers, agents, servants,
employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from and against any liabilities or damages suffered as a result of
claims, demands, costs, or judgments against the city, its departments, its officers, agents, servants, or employees, created by,
or arising out of the acts or omissions of the city occurring on the drill site or operation site in the course and scope of inspecting
and permitting the oil and gas wells INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, CLAIMS AND DAMAGES ARISING IN WHOLE OR
IN PART FROM THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY OF CUERO OCCURRING ON THE DRILL SITE OR OPERATION SITE IN
THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE OIL, GAS, OR COMBINED WELLS. IT IS
UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED THAT THE INDEMNITY PROVIDED FOR IN THIS SECTION IS AN INDEMNITY EXTENDED
BY THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY AND PROTECT THE CITY OF CUERO, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS,
AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES FROM THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY
OF CUERO, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES, WHETHER THAT
NEGLIGENCE IS THE SOLE OR CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY, DEATH, AND/OR DAMAGE.
(e) Agent for receiving notices. The individual designated to receive notice regarding or related to the oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be
a resident of Texas upon whom all orders and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every
operator shall within ten days notify the oil and gas inspector in writing of any change in such agent or mailing address unless operations in the
city are discontinued and abandonment is complete.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.13; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.014 Technical requirements
(a) On-site requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/438
(1) Abandoned wells. All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the railroad commission; however, all well
casings shall be cut and removed to a depth of at least ten feet below the surface unless the surface owner submits a written
agreement otherwise. Three feet shall be the minimum depth at which all well casings shall be cut and removed. No structures shall
be built over an abandoned well. A permanent abandonment marker pipe, with the well identity and location permanently inscribed,
shall be welded to the casing and shall be at least four inches in diameter with a length of four feet visible above the ground level.
(2) Emergency response.
(A) Annual meeting with city. Each operator shall meet annually with representatives of the city to review emergency
response plans. These reviews shall be in accord with U.S. Department of Transportation and commission requirements and the
operator shall:
(i) Furnish or update a copy of the emergency response plan;
(ii) Review the responsibilities of each governmental organization in response to an emergency or incident;
(iii) Review the capabilities of the operator to respond to an emergency or incident;
(iv) Identify the types of emergencies or incidents that will result in or require contacting the city; and
(v) Plan mutual activities in which the city and the operator can engage in order to minimize the risks associated with oil
or gas well operation.
(B) On-site emergency drill. Within two years of the effective date of the oil/gas permit and every two years thereafter, the
operator shall conduct an on-site emergency drill that includes, but shall not be limited to, the personnel operating the oil or gas
well, local law enforcement personnel, the fire chief or his/her designee, and personnel from the city's oil and gas inspector.
(3) Blowout prevention. Blowout prevention equipment shall be used on all wells being drilled, worked-over, re-worked, re-drilled or
in which tubing is being changed. Protection shall be provided to prevent blowout during oil and/or gas operations as required by and
in conformance with the requirements of the commission and the recommendations of the American Petroleum Institute. The operator
shall equip all drilling wells with adequate blowout preventers, flow lines and valves commensurate with the working pressures
involved as required by the commission.
(4) Chemical and materials storage. All chemicals and/or hazardous materials shall be stored in such a manner as to prevent,
contain, and facilitate rapid remediation and cleanup of any accidental spill, leak, or discharge of a hazardous material. The operator
shall have all material safety data sheets (MSDSs) for all hazardous materials on-site. All applicable federal and state regulatory
requirements for the proper labeling of containers shall be followed. Appropriate pollution prevention actions shall be required and
include, but are not limited to, chemicals and materials raised from the ground (e.g., wooden pallets), bulk storage, installation and
maintenance of secondary containment systems, and protection from stormwater and weather elements.
(5) Closed-loop drilling fluid systems required. Closed-loop drilling fluid systems shall be used instead of lined reserve pits.
(6) Compliance with applicable regulations. The operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and city
requirements.
(7) Discharge of oil, wastes, etc. No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or
discharged any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substance, or any refuse, including wastewater or brine, from any
oil and/or gas operation, or the contents of any container used in connection with any oil and/or gas operation, in, into, or upon any
public rights-of-way, alleys, streets, lots, storm drains, ditches or sanitary sewer drains or any body of water or any public or private
property in the city, or, to the extent allowed or may be allowed by state law, in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
(8) Drilling fluid storage pits prohibited. No drilling fluid storage pits shall be located within the city.
(9) Drip pans and other containment devices. Drip pans and other containment devices shall be placed or installed underneath all
tanks, containers, pumps, lubricating oil systems, engines, fuel and chemical storage tanks, system valves, connections, and any
other areas or structures that could potentially leak, discharge, or spill hazardous liquids, semi-liquids, or solid waste materials,
including hazardous waste that is inseparable by simple mechanical removal processes.
(10) Dust, vibrations and odors. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to minimize, so far as
practicable, dust, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for the
production of oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances. All equipment used shall be so constructed and operated so that vibrations,
dust, odor, or other harmful or annoying substances or effect will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or
production site or from anything incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity; and the site or structures
thereon shall not be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements in industry standards
of drilling and production in this area shall be adopted as they become available if capable of reducing factors of dust, vibration and
odor.
(11) Electric lines. All electric lines to production facilities shall be located in a manner compatible to those lines already installed in
the surrounding area or subdivision.
(12) Electric motors. Only electric prime movers or motors shall be permitted for the purpose of pumping wells or natural gas
gathering compression facilities. No electric power shall be generated on location. All electrical installations and equipment shall
conform to city ordinances and applicable national codes.
(13) Emergency response plan. Prior to the commencement of oil and/or gas drilling, or any other hydrocarbons production
activities, the operator shall submit to the oil and gas inspector an emergency response plan establishing written procedures to
minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion or producing of oil and/or gas wells. Said plan shall use existing guidelines
established by the commission, the state commission on environmental quality, the state department of transportation and/or the
United States Environmental Protection Agency. The emergency response plan shall be kept current with any additions,
modifications, and/or amendments concerning all construction-related activities, oil and/or natural gas operations and, oil and/or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/438
natural gas production. Updated plans shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector within two business days after any additions,
modifications, and/or amendments to said plan(s). A copy of the emergency response plan shall be kept on-site. Further, a copy of the
emergency response plan shall be provided to any potentially impacted independent school district for comment by said school
district, with a copy of said comments provided to the oil and gas inspector. The emergency response plan shall at a minimum provide
for:
(A) Prompt and effective response to emergencies regarding:
(i) Leaks or releases that can impact public health, safety, welfare;
(ii) Fire or explosions at or in the vicinity of an oil or gas well; or
(iii) Natural disasters;
(B) Effective means to notify and communicate required and pertinent information to local fire, police, and public officials
during an emergency;
(C) The availability of personnel, equipment, tools, and materials as necessary at the scene of an emergency;
(D) Measures to be taken to reduce public exposure to injury and the probability of accidental death or dismemberment;
(E) Emergency shut-down of an oil or gas well and related site;
(F) The safe restoration of service and operations following an emergency or incident;
(G) A follow-up incident investigation to determine the cause of the incident and require the implementation of corrective
measures.
(14) Equipment to be painted. All production equipment on the drill site and/or operation site shall be painted and maintained at all
times, including pumping units, buildings and structures. Low VOC paints shall be used.
(15) Fire prevention; sources of ignition. Firefighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire services department and
required by any applicable federal, state, or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the operator's cost, and shall be maintained
on the drilling site and/or operation site at all times during drilling and production operations. The operator shall be responsible for the
maintenance and upkeep of such equipment. Each well shall be equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of
an abnormal change in operating pressure. All well heads shall contain an emergency shut-off valve to the well distribution line. The
operator shall comply with all requirements set forth in chapter 6 (fire prevention) of the Code of Ordinances, as amended.
(16) Fresh water wells. It shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which well bore, at the surface of the ground, is located
within the setbacks as described in section 5.09.007(d) from any fresh water well. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the
closest well bore to the fresh water well bore. Within 120 days of its completion date, each oil and/or gas well shall be equipped with a
cathodic protection system to protect the production casing from external corrosion. The oil and gas inspector may approve an
alternative method of protecting the production casing from external corrosion.
(A) A third party contractor retained by the city shall collect and analyze a “pre-drilling,” “post-drilling” and “post-fracturing”
water analysis and flow rate from any existing fresh water well within 1,500 feet of the gas well. When such third party contractor
is retained by the city for the purpose of collecting and analyzing water well samples, the cost of such fees and charges
assessed by the third party contractor shall be borne by the operator.
(B) Such water tests shall conform to the following testing requirements:
(i) Water samples must be collected and analyzed utilizing proper sampling and laboratory protocol from a United States
Environmental Protection Agency or the state commission on environmental quality approved laboratory.
(ii) Well samples shall be collected and analyzed prior to any drilling activity to document baseline water quality data of
the well. A post-drilling sample shall be collected and analyzed after the conclusion of drilling of each well. A postfracturing
sample shall be collected and analyzed after the conclusion of each fracturing operation.
(iii) Parameters to be tested for include but are not limited to methane, chloride, sodium, barium, and strontium, total
petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH), volatile organic compounds (VOCs), ethene and ethane.
(17) Gas emission or burning restrictions. No person shall allow, cause or permit gases to be vented into the atmosphere or to be
burned by open flame except as provided by law or as permitted by the commission. If the venting of gases into the atmosphere or
the burning of gases by open flame is authorized as provided by law or as permitted by the commission, then such venting or open
flame shall not be located closer than 500 feet from any habitable structure and not used in operations on the drilling site, and such
venting or open flame shall be screened in such a way as to minimize detrimental effects to adjacent property owners. The city's fire
chief and all property owners, as indicated by the most recently approved city tax roll, within 1,000 feet of such venting or open flame,
shall be given 72 hours' advance notice, via hand delivery or United States mail, of any such activities and such notice shall include
the date and time and anticipated length of time such activities will occur.
(18) Gas well stimulation. Only light sand fracture technology or technologies approved by the oil and gas inspector shall be used
to fracture stimulate a well. Fracing operations shall be scheduled to occur during daylight hours unless the operator has notified the
oil and gas inspector that fracing will occur before or after daylight hours to meet safety requirements. The operator shall add nonradioactive
tracing or tagging additives into fracturing fluids and shall notify in writing the oil and gas inspector with the written formula
identifying such additive(s). The written formula submitted by the operator shall be unique for each permitted pad site. Air, gas, or
pneumatic drilling shall not be permitted.
(19) Grass, weeds and trash. All drill sites and operation sites shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds, and combustible trash
within a radius of 100 feet around any gas tank or tanks or producing wells.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/438
(20) Green completions. After fracturing or re-fracturing, an operator shall utilize appropriate equipment and processes to eliminate
natural gas and associated vapor releases into the environment. All salable gas shall be directed to the sales line or shut in and
conserved. All wells that have a sales line shall be required to employ reduced emission completion techniques and methods. The oil
and gas inspector may modify the requirements of this subsection in the event that reduced emission completion techniques or
methods are not feasible or would endanger the safety of personnel or the public.
(21) Hazardous materials plan. The hazardous materials management plan shall be on file with the oil and gas inspector and city's
fire chief. The hazardous materials plan shall be kept current with any additions, modifications, and/or amendments concerning all
construction-related activities, oil and natural gas operations, and oil and natural gas production. Updated hazardous materials plans
shall be submitted to the oil and gas inspector within two business days of any additions, modifications, and/or amendments.
(22) Lights. No person shall permit any lights located on any drill site or operation site to be directed in such a manner that they
shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the drill site or operation site. In addition, no
person shall permit any lights located on any drill site or operation site to exceed four-tenths footcandles at the closest public road,
property line, habitable structure or residence. To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, all such
lighting shall be directed downward and internally so as to avoid glare on public roads and adjacent habitable structures and
residences.
(23) Lubricating oil purification units. Any and all stationary diesel power plants located on the drilling site associated with the
exploration, development, operation, and production of oil, natural gas, or associated minerals shall have a lube oil purification unit
installed, maintained and functional at all times while the diesel plant is operating.
(24) Muffling exhaust. Exhaust from any internal combustion engine, stationary or mounted on wheels, used in connection with the
drilling of any well or for use on any drilling completion or production equipment shall not be discharged into the open air unless it is
equipped with an exhaust muffler, or mufflers, or an exhaust muffler box constructed of noncombustible materials sufficient to
suppress noise and prevent the escape of noxious gases, fumes and ignited carbon or soot. In the event there are two or more
notices of violation during any 12-month period, an emissions compliance plan shall be required, pursuant to section 5.09.007(h).
(25) Organic solvents. Organic solvents, such as trichloroethylene and carbon tetrachloride, shall not be used for cleaning any
element, structure, or component of the derrick, drilling equipment, tools, or pipes. To the maximum extent practicable, high flash point
Varsol shall be used.
(26) Pipe dope. Lead-free, biodegradable pipe dope shall be substituted for American Petroleum Institute (API) specified pipe dope.
(27) Open pits. No open pits of any kind are allowed within the city limits.
(28) Private roads. Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for access to the drill site and the
operation site shall be at least 20 feet from any adjacent property line (where said adjacent property is separately owned), and 25 feet
wide with an overhead clearance of 14 feet. Such roads shall be designed to avoid impact on environmentally sensitive areas, shall
be constructed outside any environmentally sensitive areas, and shall be surfaced with crushed rock, gravel or ore and maintained so
as to prevent dust and mud. Brine water, sulphur water, or water in mixture with any type of hydrocarbon may not be used for dust
suppression. In particular cases these requirements governing the surfacing of private roads may be altered at the discretion of the oil
and gas inspector and the city engineer after consideration of all circumstances, including, but not limited to, the following: distances
from public streets and highways; distances from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the
operator; the purpose for which the property of such nearby property owners, whose surface rights are not leased by the operator, is
or may be used; topographical features; nature of the soil; and exposure to wind. No aspect of this subsection shall be construed to
supersede any permitting, review, standards, and regulations set forth in the International Building Code.
(29) Salt water disposal wells. No salt water disposal (injection) wells shall be located within the city.
(30) Secondary containment system. All pad sites shall be equipped with a secondary containment system, including lining with an
impervious material. The secondary containment system shall be designed to prevent a harmful impact to the property adjacent to the
pad site or to any surface water.
(31) Soil sampling required; remediation of contamination. It shall be unlawful to contaminate any soil, and fail to remediate such
contamination, at any drill site in the city. Soil sampling shall be subject to the following requirements:
(A) Upon application for an oil and gas well permit, soil sampling shall be conducted prior to the commencement of any drilling
activities at the proposed drill site to establish a baseline study of site conditions. A minimum of three soil samples shall be taken
at the location of any proposed equipment to be utilized at the site to document existing conditions at the drill site.
(B) A third party contractor retained by the city shall collect and analyze all “pre-drilling” and “post-drilling” soil analysis. The
cost of such fees and charges assessed by the third party contractor shall be borne by the operator.
(C) Soil samples must be collected and analyzed utilizing proper sampling and laboratory protocol from a United States
Environmental Protection Agency or state commission on environmental quality approved laboratory.
(D) Post-drilling soil samples shall be collected and analyzed after the conclusion of drilling of each well. Subsequent to the
drilling of each well, periodic soil samples shall be taken to document soil quality data at the drill site, as requested by the oil and
gas inspector.
(E) Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements of the commission and as referenced in section 5.09.017,
the operator so abandoning shall conduct post-production soil sampling when equipment is removed from the drill site to
document that the final conditions are within regulatory requirements.
(F) Methodology and parameters to be tested are referenced in subsection (32) below.
(G) If it is found that soil contains a prohibited amount of a hazardous substance, the operator, within 30 days, shall remediate
the location, and thereafter soil sampling shall be collected and analyzed at such locations on the drill site to determine
compliance with this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/438
(32) Soil sampling methodology and parameters. The oil and gas inspector shall have the discretion to require the well operator to
perform soil sampling.
(A) The following selected Texas-Specific Median Background Concentrations (TSBCs) are provided by the state commission
on environmental quality as representations of median concentrations across Texas. It is recommended that a site-specific
background be collected to allow more specific data available unless use of the TSBCs is acceptable to the operator. The
railroad commission guidance concerning releases in sensitive areas provides the minimum criteria acceptable for soil sampling
as illustrated below. If any media other than soil is impacted by operations at the site, consultation with the state commission on
environmental quality and railroad commission will be sought to determine if the Texas Risk Reduction Program (TRRP, 30 TAC
350) will be applied. The concentrations below will be utilized by the city to determine if additional sampling or reporting to the
state is needed:
Metal
Median Background
Concentration
(mg/kg)
Antimony 1
Arsenic 5.9
Barium 300
Beryllium 1.5
Boron 30
Total chromium 30
Cobalt 7
Lead 15
Manganese 300
Mercury 0.04
Nickel 10
Selenium 0.3
Strontium 100
Tin 0.9
Titanium 2,000
Thorium 9.3
Vanadium 50
Zinc 30
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/438
Compound RRC Limits (mg/kg)
TPH 10,000
Benzene 0.026
Toluene 8.2
Ethylbenzene 7.6
Xylenes 120
(B) The soil sampling shall be completed with all data, results, documentation, and/or reports provided to the oil and gas
inspector within 30 days of sample collection. The reporting shall include, at a minimum, a description of the points [of] samples
(GPS coordinates included), description of the planned/ existing/removed equipment above the sampled area, methodology of
sample collection, description of field conditions, summary of laboratory data results compared to the criteria noted above,
copies of all laboratory data sheets, drawings (prepared to scale) of sampling points, past equipment and areas where spills are
anticipated to have occurred (if applicable).
(C) The third party shall perform soil sampling through the collection and analysis of a sufficient number of samples from
environmental media to reliably characterize the nature and degree of potential release(s) at the drill site, as well as the
horizontal and vertical extent of the impact, if identified above the criteria listed above. Surface samples collected from surface
to one foot below grade are sufficient for initial screening or confirmatory sampling.
(D) At a minimum, a soil contamination assessment shall consist of no less than five sample locations across a pad site. A
minimum of two samples shall be taken from beneath the planned tank containment area or immediately adjacent if tank
containment is present. A minimum of two samples shall be taken down-gradient and, if applicable, in the direction of the
nearest surface water source from the tank containment. All surface water sources located within 300 feet of the pit shall have a
minimum of one sediment sample taken and analyzed pursuant to compounds noted above.
(33) Signs.
(A) A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed at the gate on the temporary and permanent drilling site and
operation site fencing erected pursuant to section 5.09.015. Such sign shall be of durable material, maintained in good condition
and, unless otherwise required by the commission, shall have a surface area of not less than two square feet or more than four
square feet and shall be lettered with the following:
(i) Well name and number;
(ii) Name of operator;
(iii) Address of property;
(iv) The emergency 911 number; and
(v) Telephone numbers of two persons responsible for the well who may be contacted 24 hours a day in case of an
emergency.
(B) Permanent weatherproof signs reading “DANGER NO SMOKING ALLOWED” shall be posted immediately upon
completion of the drill site or operation site fencing at the entrance of each such site and tank battery or in any other location
approved or designated by the city fire chief. Sign lettering shall be four inches in height and shall be red on a white background
or white on a red background. Each sign shall include the emergency notification numbers of the fire services department and
the operator and well and lease designations required by the commission.
(C) For notification of fracture stimulation activities, required signage shall have white lettering on a red background.
(34) Storage of equipment. On-site storage is prohibited on the drill site or operation site. No equipment shall be stored on the
drilling or production operation site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well. Lumber, pipes, tubing and casing
shall not be left on the drill site or operation site except when drilling or well servicing operations are being conducted on the site. No
vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street or right-of-way or in any driveway or alley or upon any drill site or
operation site which constitutes a fire hazard or an obstruction to or interference with fighting or controlling fires except that equipment
which is necessary for drilling or production operations on the site. Fire and emergency services shall be the entity that determines
whether any and all equipment on the drill site or operation site shall constitute a fire hazard. No refinery, processing, treating,
dehydrating or absorption plant of any kind shall be constructed, established or maintained on the premises. This prohibition shall not
be deemed to exclude a conventional gas separator or dehydrator.
(35) Surface casing. Surface casing shall be run and set in full compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the
commission.
(36) Shut-off valve. Each well must have a shut-off valve to terminate the well's production. The fire services department shall have
access to the well site to enable it to close the shut-off valve in an emergency.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/438
(37) Waste disposal. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all tanks used for storage shall conform to the following:
(A) The operator must use portable closed steel storage tanks for storing liquid hydrocarbons. Tanks must meet all API
standards. All tanks must have a vent line, flame arrester and pressure relief valve. All tanks must be enclosed by a fence
applicable to the issued permit.
(B) Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting from or connected with the drilling,
re-drilling, re-working or deepening of any well shall be discharged into an above-ground self-contained tank. All disposals must
be in accordance with the rules of the commission and any other applicable local, state or federal agency.
(C) Unless otherwise directed by the commission, waste materials shall be removed from the drill site or operation site and
transported to an off-site disposal facility not less often than one time every 30 days. Water stored in on-site tanks shall be
removed as necessary.
(D) All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the air and water pollution control regulations of the
state, this article, and any other applicable ordinance of the city.
(38) Watchperson. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel on-site during the drilling, re-drilling or re-working of
a well when other workmen are not on the premises.
(b) Variances. Pursuant to section 5.09.019, the oil and gas board of appeals may issue variances to the technical requirements of
subsections (a)(16), (18), (22), (24), (25), and (32) of this section.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.14; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.015 Screening, fences and gates
(a) Screening. Screening shall be installed completely around the entire perimeter of the pad site and shall be sufficient to screen from view
the structures sought to be screened within 45 days following the completion of drilling of the first permitted well. Screening options shall adhere
to a combination of the following:
(1) Vegetation. A landscape plan is required and shall include a combination of large canopy trees and small to medium canopy
trees which are native or adaptive drought-tolerant species, shrubs, vines, ground cover, ornamental grasses, and/or wildflowers, or
other adapted drought-tolerant species, complementary to the surrounding landscape.
(A) Trees shall be a minimum three-inch caliper at the time of planting. A minimum of six trees per 100 feet is required.
Vegetation must have an installed and operable irrigation system that provides total water coverage to all plant materials. All
vegetation shall be planted and spaced to provide maximum screening, growth, and overall health.
(B) At least 50% of the landscape vegetation shall be evergreen.
(C) The vegetation shall be kept in an attractive state and in good condition at all times by the applicant or operator.
(D) Landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect, and vegetation used to satisfy screening standards shall
include the following species, as may be approved by the oil and gas inspector:
(i) Monterey Oak;
(ii) Live Oak;
(iii) Shumard Oak;
(iv) Water Oak;
(v) Yaupon Holly;
(vi) Ilex species;
(vii) Oleander;
(viii) Senesia (purple sage);
(ix) Vitex;
(x) Dwarf Bottle Brush.
(E) Protected trees and specimen trees removed from the area of the drill site or operation site shall be mitigated for per plan
approved by the city oil and gas inspector.
(2) Natural and man-made screens. When possible, sites should be located to utilize natural, structural, and topographical screens.
Vegetated berms may be constructed if they are compatible with the surrounding area.
(3) Fence screening. Fencing shall be equipped with interlocking opaque slats, mesh, or other screening material approved by the
oil and gas inspector. Color of materials shall be uniform, nonreflective tones, similar to the Bureau of Land Management standard
environmental colors chart. Approved colors shall include but not be limited to green, brown, tan, and black and be complementary to
the color of the fence and painted equipment.
(b) Fencing required. Fences shall be required around all operation sites and drill sites during initial drilling, completion, re-drilling or reworking
operations. A secured entrance gate to the drill site or operation site shall be required. All gates are to be kept locked when the operator
or his and her employees are not within the enclosure. Within 45 days following the completion of drilling the first permitted well or the derrick
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/438
being removed following the completion of drilling for wells drilled in succession, all remaining drilling equipment shall be completely enclosed by
a permanent chain-link fence or other approved fencing material according to the requirements of the requested permit, as follows:
(1) The fence fabric shall be at least eight feet in height, but no more than ten feet in height;
(2) Support posts shall be set in concrete and shall be imbedded into the ground to a depth sufficient to maintain the stability of the
fence; provided, however, so long as stability of the fence is maintained, temporary fence posts shall not be required to be set in
concrete;
(3) The chain-link fabric shall be coated with vinyl or plastic material and approved colors, including but not limited to, green, brown,
tan, and black, and be complementary to the color of the fence screening and painted equipment;
(4) The chain-link fence fabric shall have a minimum thickness of 11 gauge;
(5) The chain-link fabric shall be two-inch mesh; provided, however, three and one-half inch mesh may be used on any fence where
the fabric is interwoven with artificial screening material approved by the fire chief;
(6) Posts and rails shall be standard galvanized, welded pipe, Schedule 40 or thicker; provided, however, that non-galvanized drill
pipe may be used if it exceeds Schedule 40 in thickness;
(7) All pipe and other ferrous parts, except chain-link fabric and drill pipe, shall be galvanized inside and outside with a plating
which contains a minimum of one and two-tenths ounces of zinc per square foot of surface area;
(8) Tension rods shall be three-eighths inch round steel bolt stock. Adjustable tighteners shall be turnbuckle or equivalent having a
six-inch minimum take-up. Tension bars shall have a minimum thickness of one-fourth inch by three-fourths inch; and
(9) All fences shall have security extension arms at the top of such fences and such security extension arms shall be strung with at
least two strands of galvanized barbed wire.
(c) Gate specifications. All chain-link fences shall be equipped with at least one gate. The gate shall meet the following specifications:
(1) Each gate shall be not less than 12 feet wide and be composed of two gates, each of which is not less than six feet wide, or one
sliding gate not less than 12 feet wide. If two gates are used, gates shall latch and lock in the center of the span;
(2) The gates shall be of chain-link construction that meets the applicable specifications, or of other approved material that, for
safety reasons, shall be at least as secure as chain-link fence;
(3) The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a padlock, and shall be kept locked
except when being used for immediate access to the drill site or operation site; and
(4) The operator must purchase from the city fire chief a combination lock to access the well site, to be used only in case of an
emergency.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.15; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.016 Emergency control; cleanup and maintenance
(a) Cleanup after well servicing. After the well has been completed, or plugged and abandoned, the operator shall clean the drill site or
operation site, complete restoration activities and repair all damage to public property caused by such operations within 30 days.
(b) Cleanup after spills, leaks and malfunctions. After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove or cause to be removed to the
satisfaction of the city's fire chief and the oil and gas inspector all waste materials from any public or private property affected by such spill, leak
or malfunction. Cleanup operations must begin immediately. If the owner fails to begin site cleanup within 24 hours, the city shall have the right to
contact the commission in order to facilitate the removal of all waste materials from the property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction.
(c) Property to be kept free from weeds, waste material, etc. The property on which a drill site or operation site is located shall at all times be
kept free of debris, pools of water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash or other waste material within a radius of 100 feet
around any separators, tanks and producing wells.
(d) Painting of equipment and structures. All drilling equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads, pumping
units, tanks, and on-site buildings or structures. When requiring painting of such, the oil and gas inspector shall consider the deterioration of the
quality of the material of which such equipment, facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its appearance. Paint shall be of a
neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, gray and unobtrusive shades of green, blue and brown, or
other neutral colors approved by the oil and gas inspector.
(e) Blowouts. In the event of the loss of control of any well, the operator shall immediately take all steps to regain control regardless of any
other provision of this article and shall notify the oil and gas inspector immediately. The oil and gas inspector shall certify in writing, briefly
describing the same, to the city manager and reporting regarding any and all reported blowouts and the steps taken to regain control of such
well(s). In the event of such loss of well control, the oil and gas inspector may employ any well control expert or experts or other contractors or
suppliers of special services, including but not limited to companies offering hazardous materials cleanup services, or may incur any other
expenses for labor and material which the oil and gas inspector deems necessary to regain control of such well. The city shall then have a valid
lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners, excluding working interest owners designated as such by the commission as a
result of a forced pooling order, to secure payment of any expenditure made by the city pursuant to such action of the oil and gas inspector in
gaining control of said well.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.16; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.017 Plugged and abandoned wells
(a) Restoration of site. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements of the commission, the operator so abandoning shall be
responsible for the restoration of the site to its original condition as nearly as practicable in conformity with the regulations of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/438
(b) Approval of abandonment; requirements. Abandonment shall be approved by the oil and gas inspector after restoration of the drill site and
operation site has been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements at the discretion of the oil and gas inspector:
(1) The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from the drill site or operation site;
(2) All tanks, towers, and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site or operation site;
(3) All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials, regardless of depth, except surface casing,
shall be removed from the drill site or operation site, unless otherwise directed by the commission;
(4) All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil;
(5) All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site or operation site; and
(6) During abandonment, the operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this article.
(c) Notices and submission of information. The operator shall furnish the following at the discretion of the oil and gas inspector:
(1) A copy of the W-3A Notice of Intention to Plug & Abandon and W-3 Plugging Record forms on the same date these forms are
submitted to the commission; and
(2) A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such work will be commenced.
Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the date so stated and shall take no longer than 45 days once
commenced.
(d) Requirements prior to new construction. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites shall meet the most current abandonment
requirements of the commission and this article prior to the issuance of any building permit for development of the property. No structure shall be
built over an abandoned well.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.17; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.018 Technical advisor
The city may from time to time employ a technical advisor or advisors who are experienced and educated in the oil and gas industry or the law as
it pertains to oil and gas matters. The function of such advisor(s) shall be to advise, counsel or represent the city on such matters relating to oil
and gas operations within the city as the city may want or require and the effect thereof, both present and future, on the health, welfare, comfort
and safety of the citizens of the city. In the event such technical advisor(s) is employed for the purpose of advising, counseling or representing
the city relative to an operator's unique and particular set of circumstances, case or request relating to this article, then the cost for fees or
charges assessed pursuant to this article shall be borne entirely by operator. Prior to the employment of a technical advisor, the city shall inform
the operator of the intended scope of work and the estimated costs and expenses. The employment of a technical advisor shall be approved by
the city council. (1994 Code, sec. 153.18; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.019 Appeals
(a) In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations made by the oil and gas inspector relative to the application
and interpretation of this article, there shall be and is hereby created an oil and gas board of appeals consisting of members who shall pass on
matters pertaining to all oil and/or gas well applications and permits.
(b) The members of the zoning board of adjustment are hereby appointed as the oil and gas board of appeals as provided by subsection (a)
above and shall have and exercise the authority to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion regarding
the issuance of an oil, gas, or combined well permit or the revocation or suspension of any permit issued hereunder, and as provided by this
article. Any person or entity whose application is denied by the oil and gas inspector or whose permit is suspended or revoked or whose well or
equipment is deemed by the oil and gas inspector to be abandoned may file an appeal to the oil and gas board of appeals pursuant to section
158.051 (board of adjustment) in this Code of Ordinances [section 158.051 of the 1994 Code].
Editor's note–Chapter 158 of the 1994 Code was repealed by Ord. 2015-30, which adopts the Unified Development Code (chapter 9, exhibit A). The reader is
directed to section 13.103 of the development code (Zoning Board of Adjustment).
(c) The oil and gas board of appeals shall review the appeal and any other related information. The oil and gas board of appeals shall consider
the following in deciding an appeal:
(1) Whether there are special circumstances existing on the property on which the application is made related to size, shape, area,
topography, surrounding conditions and location that do not apply generally to other property in the vicinity;
(2) Whether a variance is necessary to permit the applicant the same rights in the use of his property that are presently enjoyed by
other similarly situated properties, but which rights are denied to the property on which the application is made;
(3) Whether the granting of the variance on the specific property will adversely affect any other feature of the comprehensive
master plan of the city;
(4) Whether the variance, if granted, will be of no material detriment to the public welfare or injury to the use, enjoyment, or value of
property in the vicinity;
(5) Whether the operations proposed are reasonable under the circumstances and conditions prevailing in the vicinity considering
the particular location and the character of the improvements located there;
(6) Whether the drilling of the maximum number of potential wells for the proposed drill site would conflict with the orderly growth
and development of the city;
(7) Whether there are other alternative well site locations;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/438
(8) Whether the operations proposed are consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the public when and if conducted in
accordance with the oil, gas, or combined well permit conditions to be imposed;
(9) Whether the operations proposed are consistent with protecting the ecological integrity and environmental quality, including
protection of surface and ground water sources, of potentially impacted environmentally sensitive areas;
(10) Whether there is reasonable access for city fire personnel and firefighting equipment, including the ability to safely evacuate
potentially affected residents; and
(11) Whether the impact upon the adjacent property(ies) and the general public by operations conducted in compliance with the oil,
gas, or combined well permit conditions are reasonable and justified, balancing the following factors:
(A) The reasonable use of the mineral estate by the mineral estate owner(s) to explore, develop, and produce the minerals;
and
(B) The availability of alternative drilling sites.
(d) Any person or entity aggrieved by any decision of the oil and gas board of appeals may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified,
stating that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the alleged illegality. Such petition shall be presented within
ten days after the date on which the decision of the oil and gas board of appeals was rendered and not thereafter, and judicial review of the
petition shall be pursuant to Tex. Local Gov't Code section 211.011, as amended.
(e) The oil and gas board of appeals may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the oil and gas inspector's order, requirement,
decision or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination from which an
appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination [sic]. Any action under this subsection, including the issuance
of any variance authorized by this article, shall require a three-fourths majority vote of the entire oil and gas board of appeals.
(f) Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal, which fees shall be assessed per well and in accordance with the provisions of section
5.09.022.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.19; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.020 Offenses; penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the following:
(1) Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of an oil, gas, or combined well permit issued under this article;
(2) Fail to comply with any condition set forth in an oil, gas, or combined well permit issued under this article; or
(3) Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article.
(b) Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 per violation per day, subject to applicable state law. Each
day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(c) Any violation of this article that governs fire safety, public health, and/or sanitation, including dumping, refuse, or discharge, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00 per violation per day, subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute
a separate offense.
(d) The penalty provided herein shall be cumulative of all other remedies provided by state law, including but not limited to the recovery of civil
penalties under Tex. Local Gov't Code chapter 54, subchapter B. The city may institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of
competent jurisdiction to enjoin the violation of this article. The power of injunction may be exercised in enforcing this article whether or not there
has been a criminal complaint filed.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.20; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.021 Applicability to existing wells
The provisions of this article shall not apply to existing well(s) drilled prior to the effective date of this article, except for the following:
(1) Annual site inspections;
(2) All fees per section 5.09.006(c) and section 5.09.022; and
(3) Annual meetings with the city to review emergency response plans per section 5.09.014(a)(2).
(1994 Code, sec. 153.21; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. 5.09.022 Fees
(a) Oil, gas, or combined well permit application and filing fees. Every application shall be accompanied by a permit fee as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) Annual inspection fee. An inspection fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code per well shall be required annually,
starting one year after the initial date the oil, gas, or combined well permit is issued and each year thereafter.
(c) Road maintenance fee. A one-time road maintenance fee shall be collected by the city engineer prior to the issuance of any and all oil,
natural gas, or combined well drilling and operations permit(s).
(d) Amended well permit fee. Every application for an amended oil, gas, or combined well permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee as set
forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/438
(e) Transfer of oil and gas well permit. The transfer fee for oil and/or gas well permits shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code.
(f) Appeal fees. Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal in the amount set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(g) Oil and gas pipeline permit fees.
(1) Oil and gas flowline permit application fee. Every application for an oil and gas pipeline permit shall be accompanied by a permit
fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(2) Oil and gas pipeline right-of-way review and inspection fee. Every applicant for an oil and gas pipeline permit where a portion of
the project is located within the public rights-of-way shall pay a fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. Each
permit application for use of a public right-of-way is subject to review and determination by the city's director of environmental
services or his/her designee.
(A) In the event the permit application for use of public right-of-way is approved, the review and inspection fee shall be paid
within 30 days of approval. Permittees using the public right-of-way shall enter into a city-approved right-of-way use agreement
with the city prior to receiving a permit authorizing the use of the city right-of-way.
(B) In the event a permit application for use of public right-of-way is denied, an applicant may appeal such denial within five
days of receipt of written notice of such denial to the city manager. The decision of the city manager shall be final.
(3) Oil and gas pipeline right-of-way annual use fee. Annual fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. Payment
for the first year is due within 30 days of approval and payment for subsequent years is due prior to each anniversary of the effective
date of the agreement. This fee may, in the sole discretion of the city, be adjusted for inflation.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.22; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
ARTICLE 5.10 FILMING AND FILM VENTURES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 5.10.001 Purpose
(a) The following guidelines are intended to protect the personal and property rights of the city and its residents and businesses. The city
manager reserves the right to impose additional regulations in the interest of public safely if deemed necessary.
(b) These guidelines cover requests for commercial use of city-owned property (streets, rights-of-way, parks, public buildings), commercial use
of private property which may affect adjacent public or private property and the use of city equipment and personnel in the filming of movies, TV
shows, commercials and related activities.
(1994 Code, sec. 115.01; Ordinance 2009-01 adopted 1/8/09)
Sec. 5.10.002 Control by city; authority of city manager
(a) The city manager may authorize the use of any street, right-of-way or public building, equipment or personnel for commercial uses in the
filming or taping of movies, television programs, commercials or training films and related activities. In conjunction with these uses, the city
manager may require that any or all of the conditions and/or remuneration as specified on the application be met as a prerequisite to that use.
(b) The applicant agrees that the city shall have full control over the use of public streets and buildings of the city while being used, as well as
control over the hours of production and the general location of the production. The city reserves the full and absolute right to prohibit all filming
or to order cessation of filming if determined to be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.
(c) The applicant shall agree to allow the respective city departments (i.e., police, fire, building) to inspect all structures and/or devices and
equipment to be used in connection with the filming and taping if required by the city manager.
(1994 Code, sec. 115.02; Ordinance 2009-01 adopted 1/8/09)
Sec. 5.10.003 Use of city equipment and personnel
(a) The applicant will agree to pay for the costs of any police, fire, public works or other city personnel assigned to the project (whether
specifically requested by the production or not). Remuneration rates for the use of any city equipment, including police cars and fire equipment,
will be established on a case-by-case basis as determined by the city manager. The applicant will agree to pay in full, promptly upon receipt of an
invoice, the charges incurred. The city manager may, at his or her discretion, require an advance deposit for the use of the equipment.
(b) The city manager in consultation with the chief of police and/or fire chief shall have the authority to stipulate additional fire or police
requirements and level of staffing for same, at any time during a film project, if it is determined to be in the best interest of public safety, health
and welfare, which cost shall be borne by the applicant. Off-duty police officers and firefighters shall be paid by the production company at a rate
no less than one and one-half their hourly rate based on their rank.
(1994 Code, sec. 115.05; Ordinance 2009-01 adopted 1/8/09)
Sec. 5.10.004 Use of city property
(a) The city manager may authorize the use of any street, right-of-way or public building, use of the city name, trademark or logo and/or use of
city equipment and/or personnel for commercial uses in the production of movies, television programs, commercials or training films and related
activities. In conjunction with these uses, the city manager may require that any or all of the conditions and/or remunerations as specified on the
application be met as a prerequisite to that use. A security or damage deposit may be required based on production activity.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/438
(b) Depending upon the extent of the use of city property, the applicant agrees to reimburse the city for inconveniences when using public
property. The rates are as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(c) The applicant agrees that the city shall have full control over the use of its name, trademark, logo, public streets and buildings of the city
while any are being used, as well as control over the hours of production and the general location of the production. The city reserves the full and
absolute right to prohibit all filming or to order cessation of filming activity if it is determined to be hazardous to the public health, safety and
welfare.
(1994 Code, sec. 115.06; Ordinance 2009-01 adopted 1/8/09; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 5.10.005 Special equipment and vehicles
The applicant shall provide a report listing the number of vehicles and types of equipment to be used during the filming, including proposed hours
of use and proposed parking locations. Such locations will need to be specifically approved by the city so as to maintain traffic safety. On-street
parking or use of public parking lots is subject to city approval. The use of exterior lighting, power generators or any other noise- or lightproducing
equipment requires on-site approval of the city manager. (1994 Code, sec. 115.07; Ordinance 2009-01 adopted 1/8/09)
Sec. 5.10.006 Hours of filming
Unless permission has been obtained from the city manager in advance and affected property owners, tenants and residents have been notified,
filming will be limited to the following hours: Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., and Saturday, Sunday and holidays, 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. (1994 Code, sec. 115.08; Ordinance 2009-01 adopted 1/8/09)
Sec. 5.10.007 Notification of residents
The applicant shall provide a short written description, approved by the city manager, of the schedule for the proposed production to the owners,
tenants and residents of each property in the affected neighborhood (as defined by boundaries set by the city manager). The applicant, or his or
her designee, shall make a good faith effort to notify each owner, tenant and resident of all such property, and shall submit, as part of this
application, a report noting each owner's, tenant's or resident's comments, along with their signatures, addresses and phone numbers. Based
upon this community feedback, the city manager may grant or deny the filming application. (1994 Code, sec. 115.09; Ordinance 2009-01
adopted 1/8/09)
Sec. 5.10.008 Certificate of insurance
The applicant/producer shall attach a certificate of insurance naming the city, and its agents, officers, elected officials, employees and assigns,
as an additional insured, in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 general liability, including bodily injury and property damage with a
$5,000,000.00 umbrella, and automobile liability (if applicable) in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 including bodily injury and property
damage. The insurer must have a rating of at least A (excellent) from A.M. Best Company. All insurance will provide that it shall not be cancelled
without at least 30 days' written notice to the city. (1994 Code, sec. 115.10; Ordinance 2009-01 adopted 1/8/09)
Sec. 5.10.009 Damage to public or private property
The applicant agrees to pay in full, promptly upon receipt of an invoice, the costs of repair for any and all damage to public or private property
resulting from or in connection with the production and restore the property to its original condition prior to the production, or to better than
original condition. (1994 Code, sec. 115.11; Ordinance 2009-01 adopted 1/8/09)
Sec. 5.10.010 Hold harmless agreement
Prior to any permit being issued, the applicant and the producer shall sign a hold harmless agreement that, to the fullest extent permitted by law,
provides that applicant, the producer and any other associated person, firm or entity shall defend, indemnify, protect and hold harmless the city
and its elected officials, officers, servants, employees, successors, agents, departments and assigns from any and all claims, lawsuits, liens,
losses, property damage, personal injury (including death), damages, expenses, claims, judgments, actions, liabilities, reasonable attorney's fees
and/or defense costs of every nature, kind and character arising out of or in connection with, directly or indirectly, from the filming or taping or film
venture taking place within the city. This will include, but is not limited to, the use of designated public property, right-of-way or equipment in
conjunction with the permitted use. The form of the hold harmless agreement shall be in a form approved by the city manager. (1994 Code, sec.
115.12; Ordinance 2009-01 adopted 1/8/09)
Secs. 5.10.011–5.10.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 5.10.041 Required; application
(a) Before filing an application for filming in the city, the office of the city manager must be contacted to discuss the production's specific filming
requirements and the feasibility of filming in the city.
(b) Any commercial producer who desires to undertake a commercial production in the city is required to complete and return the application
for filming to the office of the city manager, within the timeframes below.
(1) Commercials or episodic television. A minimum of two business days prior to the commencement of filming or any substantial
activity related to the project.
(2) Feature films. A minimum of five business days prior to the commencement of filming or any substantial activity related to the
project.
(1994 Code, sec. 115.03; Ordinance 2009-01 adopted 1/8/09)
Sec. 5.10.042 Application processing fee
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/438
(a) An application processing fee in the amount set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code should accompany each application for
filming in the city.
(b) The city manager may waive this fee upon proof of an organization's nonprofit status, or for any other reason deemed necessary.
(1994 Code, sec. 115.04; Ordinance 2009-01 adopted 1/8/09; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
ARTICLE 5.11 CABLE TELEVISION*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 5.11.001–5.11.030 Reserved
Division 2. Rate Regulation
Sec. 5.11.031 Authority
The authority for the regulation of basic service by the city (local franchise authority) is the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992 (Cable Act of 1992). (Ordinance 93-30 adopted 11/9/93; 1994 Code, sec. 102.01)
Sec. 5.11.032 Purpose
The purpose of this division is to implement the rate regulation provisions of the Cable Act of 1992 and to administer Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) requirements. Should the FCC modify the provisions of their rules and regulations, the city shall comply with and administer
the modified rules and regulations. (Ordinance 93-30 adopted 11/9/93; 1994 Code, sec. 102.02)
Sec. 5.11.033 Rate regulation process
(a) The cable operator has 30 days from the date of notification to submit schedules and supporting information. Justification will be provided
on FCC Form 393 (benchmark calculation). The cable operator may invoke a cost of service review on the grounds that its costs require higher
rates than the benchmark allows.
(b) The city shall, within 30 days of receipt of the filing of the request, issue a written order that:
(1) Allows the proposed rates to take effect;
(2) Disallows the proposed rates; or
(3) Extends the time to make a decision.
(A) If the cable operator is using benchmark rates, the extended time shall be 90 days.
(B) If the cable operator is using cost of service, the extended time shall be 120 days.
(Ordinance 93-30 adopted 11/9/93; 1994 Code, sec. 102.03)
ARTICLE 5.12 TAXICABS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 5.12.001 Applicability
The provisions of this article shall apply to all applications or permits to operate taxicabs pending at the time of the enactment of this article as
well as to all applications made hereafter. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 1-K; 1994 Code, sec. 113.01)
Sec. 5.12.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Person. Includes both singular and plural and shall mean and include any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, or society.
Street. Any street, alley, avenue, lane, public place or highway within the corporate limits of the city.
Taxicab. A motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than seven persons and not
operated over any fixed route.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 1-O; 1994 Code, sec. 113.02)
Sec. 5.12.003 Provisions cumulative
This article is cumulative of the ordinances of the city regulating the operation of taxicabs and shall not be construed to repeal any existing
ordinance of the city except insofar as its provisions may be directly in conflict with provisions of existing ordinances. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II,
sec. 2-J; 1994 Code, sec. 113.25)
Sec. 5.12.004 Inspection of taxicabs
Every vehicle operated as a taxicab in the city shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be examined from time to time by the
police department, which shall have authority to require the holder of the certificate of convenience and necessity under which the vehicles
operate to deliver the same for inspection at an authorized state safety inspection station. If it is determined that the vehicle is not in as good
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/438
condition as required by the state safety inspection laws, then the vehicle shall not be operated as a taxicab in the city until the deficiency has
been corrected. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 2-D; 1994 Code, sec. 113.14)
Sec. 5.12.005 Prohibited use of taxicab
No person, firm, or corporation operating any taxicab upon or over the streets of the city shall:
(1) Operate any taxicab for any personal business or pleasure of the driver or holder of the certificate.
(2) Make any pickup or delivery of merchandise other than the pickup or delivery of medicines, medical supplies, or medical
equipment made at the request of a licensed pharmacist, dentist, physician, hospital, or veterinarian.
(3) Operate a taxicab for the purpose of providing transportation for a person engaged in any unlawful undertaking.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 1-L; 1994 Code, sec. 113.15)
Sec. 5.12.006 Identification on vehicles
(a) Every taxicab operated upon or over the streets of the city shall be distinctly marked with permanent lettering showing the vehicle to be a
taxi, showing the name of the owner and the number of the license issued by the city manager under which the taxicab is operated, and the
words, “Cuero, Texas.” The lettering shall be not less than 2-1/2 inches high.
(b) Every taxicab operated for hire within the city shall be identified by a device located on top of the cab, bearing the words “Taxi” or “Taxicab,”
which shall be legible both from the front and from the rear and which shall be equipped with lights so as to be clearly visible and legible at night.
(Ordinance adopted 7/1/63; 1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 1-M, N; 1994 Code, sec. 113.16)
Sec. 5.12.007 Driver's license
(a) Required. No person holding a certificate of convenience and necessity for the operation of taxicabs within the city shall permit any taxicab
to be operated for hire over the streets of the city by any person who has not first obtained and who does not then have in full force and effect a
taxicab driver's license issued under the provisions of this article.
(b) Application. All applications for a taxicab driver's license shall be filed with the city manager on a form to be furnished by him, shall be
verified by the applicant's oath, and shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, address, and age of the applicant.
(2) The names and addresses of four reputable persons who have known the applicant for five years and who will vouch for his
sobriety, honesty, and good character.
(3) The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire.
(4) The educational background of the applicant.
(5) A concise history of the applicant's employment, with the names and addresses of his past employers and immediate
supervisors.
(6) A complete statement of the applicant's convictions for traffic violations within the past three years and of all his arrests and
convictions for felonies and for misdemeanors other than traffic violations.
(7) The date and number of the applicant's state chauffeur's license.
(8) Any other information as the city council or city manager may from time to time require.
(c) Physician's certificate. Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a reputable physician in the city certifying that the
applicant has no contagious or infectious disease and that in his opinion he is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity which would render him
an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver.
(d) Application fee. Each application shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(e) Investigation; approval of application; appeal of denial. The city manager shall cause the police department to make a complete
investigation of each applicant and a report of the investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant shall be attached to the
application for the consideration of the city manager. The city manager shall contact the references furnished by the applicant and of his former
employers and supervisors as he may deem necessary. Upon consideration of the application, reports, and certificates, if the city manager finds
that the applicant is in good health, the holder of a valid state chauffeur's license, of good moral character, without a record of convictions for
crime involving moral turpitude, with a good traffic record, of sufficient age, stability, and experience to be entrusted with the operation of a
taxicab, with sufficient education and intelligence to understand the provisions of the regulations relating to the operation of taxicabs and to keep
the records required of him, with a good reputation for and history of sobriety and honesty, then the city manager shall approve the application.
Otherwise he shall reject it. If the application is rejected, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the city council, which shall hear the
appeal and the evidence as the applicant may offer in support of his application. The action of the city council on the application shall be final.
(f) Issuance; renewal. If the application is approved, the city manager shall issue a license to the applicant, which shall bear his name, age,
race, signature and photograph. The license shall remain in effect for the remainder of the calendar year in which issued and may be renewed
for each calendar year thereafter upon payment of the annual fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code and presentation of
the physician's certificate as above provided.
(g) Display. Every taxicab driver licensed under this article must post his license in a conspicuous place in full view of all passengers while the
driver is operating any taxicab in the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/438
(h) Suspension or revocation. Failure to comply with any applicable provisions of this code and other ordinances of the city or the applicable
laws of the state or of the United States shall constitute grounds for suspending or revoking any license issued under this article. The city
manager shall have the right to suspend any license for cause for a period not longer than 30 days and he may recommend to the city council
that any license be revoked. In the event of revocation, the holder of the license shall be given notice and a hearing conducted before the city
council. After hearing the evidence the city council may enter its order revoking the license. The decision of the city council shall be final.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 2-A; Ordinance adopted 5/9/63; 1994 Code, sec. 113.17; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 5.12.008 Free service prohibited
No person holding a certificate of convenience and necessity for the operation of taxicabs within the city shall issue any free pass or give any
free taxicab service at any time to any person, nor shall he rent or hire out or make any contract with any person whomsoever for the purpose of
transporting voters to or from the polls, and every holder of a certificate must charge and collect cash trip fares for every taxicab trip. (1966 Code,
ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 2-C; 1994 Code, sec. 113.18)
Sec. 5.12.009 Manifest
Every driver of a taxicab operated in the city under a certificate of convenience and necessity granted by the city shall maintain a daily manifest
upon which he shall record all trips made each day, the time and place of origin and destination of each trip and the amount of each fare. All
manifests shall be returned to the holder of the certificate of convenience and necessity at the end of each day. The holder of the certificate shall
retain records in a safe place for at least the calendar year next preceding the current calendar year. The records shall be made available to the
police department on demand. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 2-E; 1994 Code, sec. 113.19)
Sec. 5.12.010 Drivers to pick up orderly fares; illegal activities prohibited
No driver shall refuse to carry any orderly person or persons, upon request, unless the taxicab is previously engaged or unless it is forbidden
under other provisions of this article. No driver shall engage in selling intoxicating liquors or solicit business for any house of ill repute or use his
vehicle for any purpose whatsoever other than the lawful transportation of passengers. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 2-F; 1994 Code, sec.
113.20)
Sec. 5.12.011 Authority to make additional rules and regulations
The city manager and the city council shall have authority to make reasonable rules and regulations respecting the quality and standards of
taxicab service rendered by holders of certificates of convenience and necessity, and it shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce the same.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 2-G; 1994 Code, sec. 113.21)
Sec. 5.12.012 Posting of schedule of fares
No person holding a certificate of convenience and necessity for the operation of taxicabs shall permit any taxicab to be operated for hire on the
streets of the city unless there is posted in each taxicab, in a conspicuous place in full view of all passengers, a full schedule of the fares which
he is authorized to charge. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 2-B; 1994 Code, sec. 113.23)
Sec. 5.12.013 Records and reports of receipts and expenses
Every holder of a certificate of convenience and necessity for the operation of taxicabs within the city shall keep accurate records of his receipts,
his capital expenditures, his operating and other expenses, and other operating information as may be required by the city manager or the city
council. A full report of the receipts, expenses, and the like shall be submitted by the certificate holder to the city manager on or before April 15
each year, the report to cover the preceding calendar year. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 2-H; 1994 Code, sec. 113.24)
Secs. 5.12.014–5.12.040 Reserved
Division 2. Certificate of Convenience and Necessity and Operator's License
Sec. 5.12.041 Unlawful operation
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to operate any taxicab within the corporate limits of the city unless there is in force a valid
certificate of convenience and necessity and permit as prescribed in this article for the operation of the vehicle. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec.
1-P; 1994 Code, sec. 113.03)
Sec. 5.12.042 Certificate and license required
No person, firm, or corporation shall hereafter operate any taxicab on or over the streets of the city without first having obtained from the city
council, under the provisions of this article, a certificate declaring that the public convenience and necessity requiring the operation exists, and
without having a license as herein provided. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 1-A; 1994 Code, sec. 113.04)
Sec. 5.12.043 Application for certificate
Any person, firm, or corporation desiring to operate any taxicab upon or over the streets of the city shall make sworn application to the city
council for the certificate of convenience and necessity. The application shall be made on a form to be furnished by the city manager and shall
contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The address of the office or offices from which the taxicab business will be conducted and of the depots or terminals from which
the taxicabs will be operated.
(3) The make, type and number of vehicles to be operated in the taxi service.
(4) The hours during which the taxicabs will be operated.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/438
(5) The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the
transaction or acts giving rise to the judgments.
(6) The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers.
(7) Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate.
(8) Each application shall have attached thereto written proof from some insurance company authorized to do business in the state
that it will issue, for each vehicle mentioned in the application, a valid liability policy in the amounts of $100,000.00 for bodily injury to
any one person, and $300,000.00 for bodily injury to more than one person in the same accident, and in the amount of $15,000.00 for
property damage.
(9) Any further information as the city council may require.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 1-B; 1994 Code, sec. 113.05; Ordinance 00-17 adopted 6/1/00)
Sec. 5.12.044 Liability insurance
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation to operate any taxicab within the corporate limits of the city unless and until the owner shall
have procured and deposited with the city manager a good and sufficient liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to
do business in the state, for each vehicle authorized, in the amount of $100,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, in the amount of
$300,000.00 for injuries to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident, and in the amount of $15,000.00 for property
damage resulting from one accident. The insurance policy shall have the city named as additional insured with all subrogation rights waived
against the city. The applicant shall deliver to the city a certificate of insurance. The certificate should state that the insurance shall not be
canceled without at least thirty days' written notice to the city. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 1-Q; 1994 Code, sec. 113.06; Ordinance 00-17
adopted 6/1/00)
Sec. 5.12.045 Public hearing on issuance of certificate
Upon the filing of an application, the city council shall fix a time and place for a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the
applicant and to all persons to whom certificates of public convenience and necessity have been issued. Due notice shall also be given to the
general public by posting a notice of the hearing at the city hall. Any interested person may file with the city council a memorandum in support of
or in opposition to the issuance of a certificate. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 1-C; 1994 Code, sec. 113.07)
Sec. 5.12.046 Issuance or denial of certificate; burden of proof
If the city council shall find that further taxicab service in the city is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit,
willing, and able to perform the public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this article, then the city council shall issue a certificate
stating the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under the certificate, and the date of issuance of the certificate;
otherwise the application shall be denied. In making the findings, the city council shall take into consideration the number of taxicabs already in
operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the probable permanence and quality of the services proposed to
be offered by the applicant, the financial ability and responsibility of the applicant, the character of vehicles and the character and location of
depots and terminals to be used, the experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers for hire in automobiles, and the character of
the applicant. The burden shall be upon the applicant to establish the existence of a public convenience and necessity for the operation of the
taxicabs designated in his application. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 1-D; 1994 Code, sec. 113.08)
Sec. 5.12.047 Transfer of certificate
The certificate, if same be issued, shall be nontransferable without the consent and approval of the city council. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec.
1-E; 1994 Code, sec. 113.09)
Sec. 5.12.048 Application for license; fee; duration; renewal
Upon the granting of the certificate by the city council, the applicant shall apply to the city manager for a license to operate, conformable to the
certificate of convenience and necessity. The license shall be issued by the city manager within five days after application has been made,
provided that the city council has granted the certificate of convenience and necessity and upon the payment by the applicant of an annual
license fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for each vehicle to be operated under the certificate of public convenience
and necessity. The license, when issued, shall be good for the remainder of the calendar year and shall be renewed by the holder of the
certificate, if he desires to operate under the same, on the first day of January of each succeeding year. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 1-F;
1994 Code, sec. 113.10; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 5.12.049 Payment of taxes on vehicles
No license or renewal of license shall be issued until the holder of the certificate shall show that all taxes levied and assessed by the city against
the vehicle, if due, have been paid, and that the vehicle has been rendered to the city assessor and collector for taxation for the current year.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 1-G; 1994 Code, sec. 113.11)
Sec. 5.12.050 Certificate effective until canceled
Any certificate issued pursuant to the provisions hereof shall be effective until canceled, and no additional certificate of public convenience and
necessity shall be required for obtaining a license or the renewal of a license so long as the original certificate is in effect. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3,
art. II, sec. 1-H; 1994 Code, sec. 113.12)
Sec. 5.12.051 Suspension or revocation
A certificate and license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or suspended by the city council if it shall be made to appear
that the holder has or any of his servants, agents, or employees acting in the course of his or their employment have violated any of the
provisions of this article, discontinued operations for more than ten days, or been convicted of three or more violations of the traffic ordinances of
the city or laws of the state within any period of 90 days. Prior to suspension or revocation of any certificate, the holder shall be given notice of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/438
the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to appear before the city council and be heard. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec.
1-I; 1994 Code, sec. 113.13)
Sec. 5.12.052 Exception for existing businesses
No certificate of public convenience and necessity, as provided for in this article, shall be necessary for the licensing of the same number of
vehicles licensed for operation and operated by the same applicant on December 1, 1952, or for the renewal of licenses for the applicant for the
same number of vehicles annually thereafter. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, sec. 1-J; 1994 Code, sec. 113.22)
ARTICLE 5.13 TRANSPORTATION OF SCHOOL CHILDREN
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 5.13.001 Scope
The transportation of school children to or from school for compensation or hire shall not be deemed to be the operation of a taxicab within the
meaning of article 5.12 of this chapter. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. I, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 113.40)
Sec. 5.13.002 Transporting persons other than school children prohibited
No person having a license issued under the provisions of this article shall transport for hire or compensation over the public streets of the city
any person other than a school child en route to or from school. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. I, sec. 7; 1994 Code, sec. 113.46)
Sec. 5.13.003 Exemption
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to affect the transportation of school children by duly licensed taxicab operators operating
pursuant to article 5.12 of this chapter. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. I, sec. 8; 1994 Code, sec. 113.47)
Secs. 5.13.004–5.13.030 Reserved
Division 2. License
Sec. 5.13.031 Required
No person shall transport school children to or from school over the public streets of the city for compensation or hire without first having
obtained a license under the provisions of this article from the city manager. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. I, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 113.41)
Sec. 5.13.032 Application
Any person desiring to obtain a license shall make sworn application to the city manager upon a form to be furnished by the city manager. The
application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The make and model of the automobile to be operated in the transportation.
(3) The number of the state chauffeur's license of the driver of the vehicle.
(4) Each application shall have attached thereto written proof from some insurance company authorized to do business in the state
that it has issued for the automobile a valid liability policy in the amounts of not less than $5,000.00 for bodily injury to any one
person, $10,000.00 for bodily injury to more than one person in a single accident, and $5,000.00 property damage.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. I, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 113.42)
Sec. 5.13.033 Issuance
If the application complies with the provisions of this article and the driver of the vehicle holds a valid state chauffeur's license and there is a valid
liability policy covering the vehicle as above provided, then the city manager shall issue to the applicant a license authorizing him to transport
school children to or from school over the public streets of the city for compensation or hire. (1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. I, sec. 4; 1994 Code, sec.
113.43)
Sec. 5.13.034 Duration
The license shall be valid, unless revoked, for a period of one year from its date and may be renewed by the applicant from year to year. (1966
Code, ch. 20.3, art. I, sec. 5; 1994 Code, sec. 113.44)
Sec. 5.13.035 Revocation
Any license issued shall be revoked by the city manager for any of the following causes: The violation of any provision of this article by the holder
of the license or any of his servants, agents, or employees acting in the course of his or their employment; the transportation by the license
holder for hire of any person other than school children to or from school; or the conviction of the license holder or any servant, agent, or
employee in the course of his employment for two or more violations of the traffic regulations of the city or the state within any six-month period.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. I, sec. 6; 1994 Code, sec. 113.45)
ARTICLE 5.14 STRUCTURAL PEST CONTROL OPERATORS*
Sec. 5.14.001 Registration required; current license to be on file
It shall be unlawful for anyone to engage in business as, or to perform or offer to perform any services of, a structural pest control operator as
defined in the Structural Pest Control Act, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1951, within the corporate limits of the city, without having first
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/438
registered at the office of the city manager and having on file at the office a copy of the operator's current and valid structural pest control
business license and certified applicator's license issued under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1951. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0,
art. VI, sec. 1; Ordinance 77-1 adopted 1/6/77; 1994 Code, sec. 112.50)
Sec. 5.14.002 Registration
Each structural pest control operator doing business in the city shall register annually with the city manager and file with him a copy of the
operator's current structural pest control business license and certified applicator's license issued pursuant to V.T.C.A., Occupations Code,
chapter 1951. Each registrant shall be charged and shall pay an annual registration fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code
to offset the cost of administering this article. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. VI, sec. 2; Ordinance 77-1 adopted 1/6/77; 1994 Code, sec. 112.51;
Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 5.14.003 Exemption from itinerant vendor regulations
After registration, the operator shall be permitted to solicit business in the city without complying with the provisions of article 5.04, division 1 of
this chapter regulating peddlers, solicitors and itinerant vendors. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. VI, sec. 2; Ordinance 77-1 adopted 1/6/77; 1994 Code,
sec. 112.52)
CHAPTER 6
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 6.01.001 Driving over fire hose; interfering with firefighters
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to step upon or to drive any vehicle upon or across any fire hose of the fire department of the city while
the hose is being used in fighting fire, while lying in the street, sidewalk or private property, whether it is under water pressure or not, or while
drained, or while being used for practice purposes.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to interfere in any manner with the firefighters of the city while the firefighters are en route to
a fire or while the firefighters are engaged in fighting the fire.
(1966 Code, ch. 6.0, art. II, secs. 1, 2; 1994 Code, sec. 130.04)
State law reference–Crossing fire hose, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.408.
ARTICLE 6.02 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 6.02.001 Office created; appointment and removal
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. The fire marshal shall be appointed and may be removed by the city manager. (1966 Code, ch. 6.0,
art. III, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 93.85)
Sec. 6.02.002 Duty to investigate fires
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which property has been
destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether the fire was the result of carelessness or design. The investigation
shall begin within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of the fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires,
together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the
investigation required by this article. (1966 Code, ch. 6.0, art. III, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 93.65)
Sec. 6.02.003 Taking of testimony; duty when evidence indicates crime
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons
supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to
be reduced to writing, and if he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the
attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct, in connection with the fire, he shall cause the person to be
lawfully arrested and charged with the offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all the evidence, together
with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case.
(1966 Code, ch. 6.0, art. III, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 93.66)
Sec. 6.02.004 Authority to summon witnesses and require production of evidence; misconduct of witnesses
(a) The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the sections of this
article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire
marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him.
(b) Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails
or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during
any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of the investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any
matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all the
offenders to be prosecuted.
(1966 Code, ch. 6.0, art. III, secs. 4, 5; 1994 Code, sec. 93.67)
Sec. 6.02.005 Right of entry on premises where fire has occurred
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/438
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the
provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises
adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (1966 Code, ch. 6.0, art. III, sec. 7; 1994
Code, sec. 93.68)
Sec. 6.02.006 Inspections for fire hazards
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and without any complaint, shall have a
right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his
duty, quarterly or more often, to enter upon and make, or cause to be entered upon and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile,
manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure which,
for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to
endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an
improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces, or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues,
and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful
storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, or combustible,
inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions
dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and the order shall be forthwith complied with by
the owner or occupant of the building or premises. Provided, however, that if the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by the order, he
may, within five days, appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint, and, unless by his authority the order is revoked, the
order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant. (1966 Code, ch. 6.0, art. III, sec. 8; 1994 Code, sec. 93.69)
Sec. 6.02.007 Maintaining fire hazard
(a) No owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of
age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others,
or is especially liable to fire and which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein.
(b) No owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a
stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be
connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or health, or safety of persons or property of others, nor shall any owner or occupant keep
or maintain any building, other structure or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of
explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemical vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, or refuse, or with any
other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health or property of others, or which shall be dangerous in the matter of
promoting, augmenting or causing fires, or which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen, or occupants of the building, structure or
premises other than the maintainor thereof.
(c) No prosecution shall be brought under subsections (a) and (b) above until the order provided for in section 6.02.006 be given and the party
notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same.
(1966 Code, ch. 6.0, art. III, secs. 9–11; 1994 Code, sec. 93.70)
Sec. 6.02.008 Continuing violations
Every day's maintenance of any of the conditions prohibited in any of the foregoing sections shall be a distinct and separate offense. (1966
Code, ch. 6.0, art. III, sec. 13; 1994 Code, sec. 93.71)
Sec. 6.02.009 Prosecution; recovery of fines
(a) All misdemeanors herein provided for shall be prosecuted, and all fines and forfeitures herein provided for shall be recovered and enforced,
in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of fines, forfeitures, penalties and punishments for offenses generally against the
city.
(b) The penalties provided for in section 1.01.009 shall be recovered by the city in the same manner as provided by law for the enforcement of
fines, forfeitures, and punishments for offenses against the city.
(1966 Code, ch. 6.0, art. III, secs. 12, 14; 1994 Code, sec. 93.72)
ARTICLE 6.03 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 6.03.001 Sale prohibited
No person shall, within the corporate limits of the city, sell, offer for sale, or possess with the intent to sell any fireworks. (1966 Code, ch. 16.0,
art. III, sec. 1; Ordinance 75-12 adopted 12/4/75; 1994 Code, sec. 93.50)
Sec. 6.03.002 Firing or discharge prohibited
No person shall, within the corporate limits of the city, except as hereinafter provided, fire or discharge any fireworks. (1966 Code, ch. 16.0, art.
III, sec. 2; Ordinance 75-12 adopted 12/4/75; 1994 Code, sec. 93.51)
Sec. 6.03.003 Exceptions
(a) Toy pistols, canes, guns, or similar toy devices in which paper caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive compounds are used and
toy paper caps containing 25/100 grains or less of explosive compounds shall not be considered to be fireworks within the meaning of sections
6.03.001 and 6.03.002 of this article.
(b) Sections 6.03.001 and 6.03.002 of this article shall not be deemed to prohibit the public display of fireworks handled or supervised by a
competent adult person approved by the chief of the fire department and holding a permit to display fireworks issued under the applicable
provisions of V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 2154.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/438
(c) Section 6.03.001 of this article shall not be deemed to prohibit the sale or possession for sale within the city of any fireworks by a
wholesaler selling or possessing the fireworks for sale to another wholesaler or to a retailer conducting his business entirely outside the city, or to
a person holding a permit to display fireworks under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 2154.
(1966 Code, ch. 16.0, art. III, sec. 3; Ordinance 75-12 adopted 12/4/75; 1994 Code, sec. 93.52; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
ARTICLE 6.04 PETROLEUM GAS PRODUCTS†
Sec. 6.04.001 General standards; storage restricted
All persons, firms or corporations who may, from and after the effective date of this article, install or equip any residence, business house,
apartment house or any other building located and situated within the corporate limits of the city with any installation or equipment designed to
use as a fuel any form of manufactured and liquefied petroleum gases, shall use in any installation (whether for domestic or industrial use) only a
standard grade of pipe and piping, and all appliances used in connection with any installation shall be a standard grade and type of equipment or
of any type required by regulations adopted pursuant to Texas Natural Resources Code, section 113.051. Any system which uses any form of
manufactured and liquefied petroleum gases must bear the label of approval and listing of the Underwriters' Laboratories or of any other agency
required pursuant to Texas Natural Resources Code, section 113.051. The storage of any liquefied petroleum gases in any container, either
above ground and underground, is prohibited inside of and underneath any building in the corporate limits of the city unless authorized by state
regulations. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. III, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 93.30)
Sec. 6.04.002 Standards for installation and repair of equipment; use in fire limits prohibited
Any equipment as provided for shall be installed and repaired in a workmanlike manner, which shall comply with all laws and regulations of the
city and the regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and the National Fire Protection Association or any other national code
adopted by the state railroad commission pursuant to Texas Natural Resources Code, section 113.052, and no equipment using liquefied
petroleum gases shall be permitted within the fire limits as defined by ordinance of the city. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. III, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec.
93.31)
Sec. 6.04.003 Inspection of installation of equipment
(a) When any equipment is installed as herein provided, same shall not be placed in operation or used by any persons unless and until the
installation has been approved as complying with this article by the city fire marshal.
(b) Any person, firm or corporation installing any equipment as herein provided shall secure approval of same as complying with the
requirements of this article by the city fire marshal, as herein provided for, and shall, upon requesting the inspection for approval, pay an
inspection fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code to cover the cost of inspection.
(1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. III, secs. 4, 5; 1994 Code, sec. 93.32; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 6.04.004 Tank trucks and trailers
All tank trucks and tank trailers used for the transportation of liquefied petroleum gases within the city shall be so constructed and operated as to
comply with the regulations for the design, construction and operation of automobile tank trucks and tank trailers for the transportation of
liquefied petroleum gases as approved by the National Board of Fire Underwriters and the National Fire Protection Association or any other
national code adopted by the state railroad commission pursuant to Texas Natural Resources Code, section 113.052. Any person, firm, or
corporation who shall operate or cause to be operated any tank truck and tank trailer used for the purpose of transporting liquefied petroleum gas
within the corporate limits of the city shall keep any equipment in good condition at all times, and upon the development of any defect that would
create a hazard to persons or property, the tank truck or tank trailer shall be removed from the streets of the city until the defects have been
repaired, or faulty equipment replaced, and any tank trucks and tank trailers shall be subject to inspection by the proper authorities at any time.
No tank truck and tank trailer shall be parked, stored and operated upon any street within the fire limits, nor shall they be stored and repaired
inside and outside of any building within the fire limits defined by ordinance of the city. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. III, sec. 6; 1994 Code, sec.
93.33)
Sec. 6.04.005 Treatment with malodorant
All liquefied petroleum gas sold within the city shall be treated with a malodorant in quantities as required by state law to create an odor easily
detected in case of leaks in piping and equipment. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. III, sec. 7; 1994 Code, sec. 93.34)
ARTICLE 6.05 GASOLINE AND OTHER VOLATILE LIQUIDS*
Sec. 6.05.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Filling station. Any place where gasoline or other volatile liquid is sold, supplied, dispensed or offered for sale to the retail motor vehicle trade,
and shall include marine filling stations serving boats or other craft.
Flammable liquids. Liquids with a flash point below 200° F (93.3° C), closed cup tester.
Portable tank. A metal receptacle of not more than 60 gallons' capacity, mounted on wheels, and provided with means for filling and withdrawing
liquid, and bearing the label of the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
Private plant. Any gasoline pump or other gasoline-dispensing equipment used by an owner or operator exclusively for motor vehicles or marine
craft owned or operated by the owner or operator and from which no gasoline is sold.
Standard grade. The grade of article which is accepted by dealers in the equipment and recognized as complying with all fire law regulations.
Tank truck. A metal receptacle of more than 60 gallons' capacity, mounted on wheels and ordinarily used for the purpose of transporting gasoline.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/438
Wholesale or bulk storage plant. Any place where gasoline or other volatile liquid is stored for the purpose of sale to the wholesale trade, or any
place where the liquid is sold to the wholesale trade.
(1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I (sec. 1-A), art. II (sec. 3), art. III (sec. 2); 1994 Code, sec. 93.01)
Sec. 6.05.002 Scope
It shall be unlawful for any person, or the agent or representative of any person, to keep, store, handle or offer for sale gasoline or any other
volatile or explosive fuel or liquid or to sell any to any boat or other craft using a volatile or explosive fuel or liquid, except upon compliance by the
person with the provisions of this article. The regulations set forth in this article shall govern all filling stations, wholesale or bulk storage plants,
private plants, tank trucks, buildings, boats, docks and beaches within the corporate limits of the city in the sale and delivery of gasoline or any
other volatile or explosive fuel or liquid. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 1-B; 1994 Code, sec. 93.02)
Sec. 6.05.003 Permit for construction or alteration of filling station or storage plant
(a) Any person desiring to erect a filling station, wholesale or bulk storage plant, or private plant, or to erect or alter any building to be used as
a filling station or as such plant, shall first obtain a permit therefor from the city council. The application for the permit shall be in writing, and shall
be signed by the owner or authorized agent of the property upon which the filling station is to be located, and shall be accompanied by four like
plans showing:
(1) The proposed layout of the filling station or plant, including the proposed location of buildings, tank pumps and other service
units;
(2) Whether each proposed tank or pump bears the label of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.;
(3) Any proposed use of the sidewalk area for driveways; and
(4) The proposed method of collection of waste oil and water and the final concentration of same for disposal;
all in relation to contiguous street and property lines and in relation to any abutting waterfront.
(b) In granting or refusing the permit to erect or maintain a filling station, wholesale or bulk storage plant, or private plant, or to erect or alter
any building to be used for the purposes of storing or handling gasoline or other volatile or explosive liquid, the city council shall take into
consideration the place where the filling station, wholesale or bulk storage plant or private plant is proposed to be established, its contiguity to
other buildings or residences, the location of public buildings, schools and places of public resort in relation to the location of the filling station or
plant, the character and condition of public traffic on streets immediately contiguous to or within 300 feet of the proposed filling station or plant,
the classification under the zoning regulations of the property on which any business or operation is to be conducted, the hazards presented by
the use of the sidewalks as a means of ingress and egress to and from the filling station or plant, and the question of whether the operation of
the filling station or plant might create odors, noises, nocturnal illumination or increased traffic, as might be unreasonably offensive to the
inhabitants or occupants of buildings or residences adjacent thereto or within 300 feet thereof as measured by the most direct line.
(c) If the city council, after a consideration of the facts, is of the opinion that an application for the permit should be refused, the council before
taking final action thereon shall first give the applicant an opportunity to be fully and fairly heard on the application. Written notice of the hearing
shall be given to the applicant at least five days before the date of the hearing.
(d) Any person desiring to locate, relocate or replace any tank or pump on premises then being used as a filling station, wholesale or bulk
storage plant or private plant shall first obtain a permit therefor from the building official. The application for the permit shall show the location or
proposed location of the equipment on the premises and the character of the equipment, and shall show that each tank or pump to be used
bears the label of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., showing that such is an Underwriters' Laboratories approved pump or tank.
(e) After the installation of pipe work connected with any tank or pump to be used for handling or storing gasoline at a filling station, wholesale
or bulk storage plant, or private plant, but before the installation has been covered or concealed from view, the person who was physically in
charge of the installation shall notify the plumbing inspector of the facts. It shall be unlawful for any person to cover or conceal from view the
installation or cause same to be so covered or concealed until the inspector has inspected and approved the installation.
(f) After the completion of the filling station, wholesale or bulk storage plant or private plant, or the installation or the location, relocation, or
replacement of any equipment on premises then being used as a filling station, wholesale or bulk storage plant or private plant, and the
inspection and approval thereof, as provided in this article, and the full compliance by the applicant for the permit with all the pertinent provisions
of this article and of all laws and ordinances pertaining to the matters, the building official shall issue a certificate of operation for the filling
station, wholesale or bulk storage plant or private plant, or the equipment.
(g) The permit to operate a filling station, wholesale or bulk storage plant or private plant, or to operate any of the equipment regulated in this
article, may be revoked by the city council if it is found by the city council that the permittee or transferee of the permit has failed and refused to
comply with the provisions of this article and all other laws applicable to the operation, but the city council, before taking final action thereon, shall
first give the permittee or the transferee an opportunity to be fully and fairly heard and written notice of the hearing must be given to the permittee
or transferee at least five days before the hearing.
(h) For a permit for a new filling station, which shall include all inspection work by the engineering department of the proposed plan, revised
plan, final inspection after completion but before operation, inspection by fire marshal and plumbing inspector of equipment and installation,
inspection of pump equipment by the sealer of weights and measures, inspection for operation permit and issuance of permits, the fees set forth
in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code shall be charged by the city and collected by the building official before the issuance of a permit,
for and on account of the permits provided for in this article.
(1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 93.03; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 6.05.004 Certain buildings prohibited
No building of Type V, as described and defined in the building code of the city, shall be permitted in connection with any filling station. (1966
Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 3-A; 1994 Code, sec. 93.04)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/438
Sec. 6.05.005 Sleeping quarters
It shall be unlawful to use, or allow to be used, any room, or part of any building, hereafter to be constructed, altered, fitted, equipped or
furnished as living or sleeping quarters, if any portion of the building is used at the same time as a filling station, or for the purpose of storing or
handling gasoline or other volatile liquids, unless the walls, floors and ceilings separating that portion of the building used as a filling station and
that portion used as sleeping or living quarters shall constitute an absolute fire separation, which fire separation shall be composed of walls,
floors and ceilings unbroken by openings of any description, and of the thickness and materials required in the matters by the terms of the
building code of the city. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 3-B; 1994 Code, sec. 93.05)
Sec. 6.05.006 Equipment generally
All pumps, tanks and other equipment used in filling stations in connection with the storage or handling of gasoline or other volatile liquid shall
bear the label of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and all equipment shall be installed in compliance with the rules and regulations governing
the installations as prescribed by the National Board of Fire Underwriters, and all equipment shall be inspected by and approved by the plumbing
inspector and the fire marshal of the city before being placed in service. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 3-C; 1994 Code, sec. 93.06)
Sec. 6.05.007 Storage tanks and pumps
(a) Only underground tanks shall be used for the storage of gasoline at filling stations. The tanks and appurtenances shall be placed entirely
within the property lines of the premises, and the distance from any part of an underground storage tank to the nearest wall of any basement or
pit shall be not less than one foot, and to any property line that may be built upon not less than three feet. All tanks shall bear labels showing
Underwriters' Laboratories approval. Gasoline shall be drawn from any tank only through an opening in the top thereof and only by means of
pumps bearing the approval of the National Board of Fire Underwriters. The pumps and appurtenances shall be so located on the premises as to
make it impracticable to serve any motor vehicle therefrom which is standing on a sidewalk, street, or alley. All pumps shall be tested, examined,
approved and sealed by the inspector of weights and measures before being placed in service.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to serve or to receive service of gasoline from any filling station pump to any motor vehicle while the
motor vehicle, or any part thereof, is standing upon or projecting into or over any sidewalk, street or alley.
(1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, secs. 3-D, 3-E; 1994 Code, sec. 93.07)
Sec. 6.05.008 Lights and wiring
Only electric lights shall be used in buildings, rooms or on premises where gasoline or other volatile liquid is stored or handled, and all electric
wiring for lights or meters shall be installed in compliance with the provisions of this code and any other ordinances and regulations of the city
governing the wiring of any building or premises, and all wiring and electrical equipment shall be inspected and approved by the electrical
inspector. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 3-F; 1994 Code, sec. 93.08)
Sec. 6.05.009 Smoking and open flames prohibited; signs
Signs marked “No Smoking” shall be displayed prominently in all filling stations at all times by the operator thereof. It shall be unlawful for any
filling station operator or employee to smoke or have, cause or permit any open flame or fire on premises where gasoline or other volatile liquid is
handled or stored, but stoves for heating purposes may be allowed in the premises if the flame in the stoves is not less than 12 inches above the
floor of the premises. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 3-G; 1994 Code, sec. 93.09)
Sec. 6.05.010 Running motor during service prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any filling station employee, or any other person, to fill the tank of any motor vehicle, boat or other craft with gasoline while
the motor of any motor vehicle, boat or other craft is running, and it shall be unlawful for any person in control of any motor vehicle, boat or other
craft to permit the motor of same to be running while the tank of the motor vehicle, boat or other craft is being filled with gasoline. (1966 Code,
ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 3-H; 1994 Code, sec. 93.10)
Sec. 6.05.011 Above-ground storage tanks
Above-ground tanks for storing gasoline or other volatile liquids may be used at wholesale or bulk storage plants, but it shall be unlawful for any
person to locate, place or cause to be located or placed any tank installed above ground which is less than 100 feet from any dwelling, school,
church, theater, hospital, asylum, hotel, apartment building, charitable or public institution or place of public assembly. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I,
sec. 3-I; 1994 Code, sec. 93.11)
Sec. 6.05.012 Standards for tanks and pumps; inspection and approval
All tanks and pumps hereafter installed and all equipment used in connection with the storage and handling of gasoline and other volatile or
explosive liquids shall bear the label of the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., for use, and shall be constructed and installed in compliance with the
regulations of the National Board of Fire Underwriters governing the construction and installation, and all tanks, pumps, piping and equipment
shall be inspected and approved by the plumbing inspector and the fire marshal before being put into service. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 3-
J; 1994 Code, sec. 93.12)
Sec. 6.05.013 Deliveries by tank trucks; portable tank sales
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, deliver or purchase gasoline from a tank truck or portable tank within the limits of the city, except
as provided in subsections (b), (c), (e) and (f) of this section.
(b) Gasoline may be delivered from a tank truck to heavy construction equipment, including tractors, concrete mixers, trench diggers, air
compressors and fire pumping engines, when in service, but not while the motor of the equipment is running.
(c) Gasoline may be delivered from any tank truck directly to underground storage tanks and to portable tanks by means of a hose, or from the
tank truck to underground storage tanks or portable tanks by means of standard tank truck buckets; provided, however, that the use of the
buckets for these purposes shall be unlawful if:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/438
(1) Any filler pipe of an underground storage tank is not located at a reasonably safe distance away from any public driveway or
walkway and unless the location has been approved by the building official;
(2) The gasoline is delivered from a tank truck to any other container when any part of the tank truck is standing on or over any
public driveway or public walkway.
(d) Whenever any gasoline is being delivered from a tank truck to an underground storage tank or portable tank as permitted by this section,
the person delivering the gasoline shall at all times during the delivery remain immediately present and attentive at the point of delivery. It shall
be unlawful for the person making the delivery to suffer or permit the storage tank to overflow.
(e) Every portable tank shall have painted on each side the word “Gasoline” in letters at least six inches high, and under the word “Gasoline”
there shall be painted the following: “No Smoking. Keep Open Flame Or Lights Away.”
(f) It shall be unlawful for any tank truck driver or attendant thereof, or portable tank attendant, to smoke or intentionally cause or permit any
open flame or fire while on or about the tank truck or portable tank or while drawing gasoline or other volatile liquid therefrom.
(1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 3-K–3-O; Ordinance 76-4 adopted 3/4/76; 1994 Code, sec. 93.13)
Sec. 6.05.014 Repair of equipment
All tanks, pumps and any other equipment used in connection with the storage or handling of gasoline or other volatile liquid shall be kept in
reasonably safe working order at all times, or the use of same shall be discontinued until the equipment is put in safe condition for use. This all
also apply to storage fuel tanks of boats or other craft. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 3-P; 1994 Code, sec. 93.14)
Sec. 6.05.015 Filling storage tanks
Underground storage tanks and portable tanks at docks or boathouses shall be filled only during the day, unless adequate electric light
illumination is provided for nighttime servicing. It shall be unlawful to fill any storage tank at a dock or boathouse at any time when any person,
other than an attendant or employee participating in the filling, is within 25 feet of the filler pipe of the tank. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 3-Q;
1994 Code, sec. 93.15)
Sec. 6.05.016 Fueling boats
(a) Where a fuel pump is located on a dock on or along a lake or other body of water, tanks of boats or other craft brought alongside the dock
may be filled by use of a hose attached to the pump. Fuel from a pump not located on a dock may be carried only in a container having a
capacity of not more than five gallons and being equipped with a flexible hose for transferring gasoline from the container, and being designed for
the purpose of transporting gasoline or other volatile explosive fuel.
(b) Extra fuel may be carried on any boat or other craft only when contained in a tightly closed metal container and only when placed in the
craft where it will not be reasonably liable to leak or spill.
(1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 3-R, 3-S; 1994 Code, sec. 93.16)
Sec. 6.05.017 Employees selling fuel at docks
No person, agent or representative of any person engaged in the business of selling gasoline or other volatile or explosive fuel on any dock or at
any boathouse on or along the shores of any body of water shall employ any person other than a responsible person of mature age to handle
any gasoline or other volatile or explosive fuels. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 3-T; 1994 Code, sec. 93.17)
Sec. 6.05.018 Storage at residence; permit for storage
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall store in any dwelling, apartment house or tenement within the city, nor in any garage or outbuilding
used in connection with any dwelling, apartment house or tenement, nor on the grounds of any dwelling, apartment house or tenement, a total
quantity of gasoline or other flammable liquids in excess of five gallons.
(b) A total quantity of gasoline or other flammable liquids in excess of five gallons shall not be stored in, on or under premises in the city other
than dwellings, apartment houses or tenements unless a permit for the storage shall first have been obtained from the fire marshal. All permits
shall state the nature of the business of the applicant, the maximum quantity of each kind of liquid to be kept and the location of the storage. No
fee shall be charged for any permit.
(1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. II, secs. 1, 2; 1994 Code, sec. 93.18)
Sec. 6.05.019 Maximum storage at retail establishments
No person, firm, association or corporation shall keep or store within the corporate limits of the city gasoline or other volatile inflammable oil in or
under premises used as retail establishments in a total amount greater than 15,000 gallons, or in storage tanks having a capacity of more than
5,000 gallons each. (Ordinance 65-9 adopted 5/12/65; 1994 Code, sec. 93.19)
CHAPTER 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/438
ARTICLE 7.02 TOBACCO PRODUCTS†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 7.02.001–7.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Use on City Property
Sec. 7.02.031 Definitions
City building. Any building or portion thereof located in the city owned, leased or under the management, operation or control of the city and/or
occupied by city officials and employees.
City vehicle. Any motor vehicle owned, leased or under the operation or control of the city and used by city officials and employees.
Smoke or smoking. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, igniting or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or
form.
Use of tobacco products. Dipping snuff, sniffing snuff, chewing tobacco, smoking, and any other use of tobacco products.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.08(A); Ordinance 96-02 adopted 1/4/96; Ordinance 2006-20 adopted 11/2/06)
Sec. 7.02.032 Penalty
A person who violates the provisions of this division commits a class C misdemeanor, punishable under section 1.01.009 by a fine not to exceed
$2,000.00. A culpable mental state is not required for a violation of this division, and need not be proved. Each day an offense occurs is a
separate violation. (1994 Code, sec. 130.99(C); Ordinance 96-02 adopted 1/4/96; Ordinance 2006-20 adopted 5/4/06)
Sec. 7.02.033 Smoking prohibited in city buildings and vehicles
(a) A person commits an offense if that person smokes in any city building located within the city.
(b) A person commits an offense if that person smokes within 12 feet from an entrance or openable window of a city building in which smoking
is prohibited.
(c) A person commits an offense if that person smokes in a city vehicle.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.08(B)(1)–(3); Ordinance 96-02 adopted 1/4/96; Ordinance 2006-20 adopted 11/2/06)
Sec. 7.02.034 Use of tobacco products prohibited at school-sponsored functions in city park
Use of tobacco products is prohibited in the baseball field, bleachers, and dugouts and in the municipal park clubhouse and in the parking areas
adjacent to such sites and other areas of the Cuero Municipal Park during the times when such facilities are in use by the Cuero Independent
School District for any school-sponsored function. (1994 Code, sec. 130.08(B)(4); Ordinance 96-02 adopted 1/4/96; Ordinance 2006-20 adopted
11/2/06)
Sec. 7.02.035 No smoking signs
(a) The city shall conspicuously post a “No Smoking” sign, the international “No Smoking” symbol (depiction of a burning cigarette enclosed in
a red circle with a red bar across it), or other sign containing words or pictures that reasonably prohibit smoking:
(1) In each city building where smoking is prohibited by this division;
(2) At each entrance to a city building; and
(3) In each city vehicle.
(b) It is not a defense to prosecution under this section that the city failed to post a sign required under this section.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.08(C); Ordinance 96-02 adopted 1/4/96; Ordinance 2006-20 adopted 11/2/06)
Sec. 7.02.036 Enforcement
(a) This division is cumulative of other laws providing enforcement authority.
(b) A person may report a violation of this division to the director of the health and human services department.
(c) The city manager may authorize a city employee conducting an inspection under any provision of the code to also inspect for compliance
with this division and issue a citation for a violation of this division.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.08(D); Ordinance 96-02 adopted 1/4/96; Ordinance 2006-20 adopted 11/2/06)
ARTICLE 7.03 FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 7.03.001 Meat inspections
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/438
For provisions concerning meat inspections, the Meat and Poultry Inspection Act, section 433.001 et seq., Texas Health and Safety Code, is
hereby adopted by reference. (1994 Code, sec. 94.02)
State law reference–Texas Meat and Poultry Inspection Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 433.
Sec. 7.03.002 Milk regulations
For provisions concerning milk regulations, section 435.001 et seq., Texas Health and Safety Code, is hereby adopted by reference. (1994 Code,
sec. 94.03)
State law reference–Dairy products, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 435.
Secs. 7.03.003–7.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Food Establishments and Mobile Food Units
Part I. In General
Sec. 7.03.031 Purpose
The purpose of this division is the protection of the public health of the citizens and visitors of the city by establishing minimum standards of
sanitation for food establishments and mobile food units. (1994 Code, sec. 114.01; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03)
Sec. 7.03.032 Adoption of Texas Food Establishment Rules
The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules as amended by the state board of health found in 25 Texas Administrative Code,
chapter 228, regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction. (1994 Code, sec. 114.02; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03;
Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 7.03.033 Adoption of additional state regulations
(a) The following statutes, in their current form and as they may hereafter be amended, are adopted and incorporated into this division as if
they were set forth at length herein:
(1) The Texas Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 431; and
(2) The Minimum Standards of Sanitation and Health Protection Measure, Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 341.
(b) The following regulations adopted by the state board of health, in their current form and as they may hereafter be amended, are adopted
and incorporated into this division as if they were set forth at length herein. If there is a conflict between a rule and any section of this division,
the more restrictive provision shall apply.
(1) The Sanitary Rules for Food and Drug Establishments, 25 Texas Administrative Code, section 229.41 et seq.; and
(2) The Texas Food Establishment Rules, 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 228.
(1994 Code, sec. 114.03; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 7.03.034 Definitions
For the purposes of this division, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Authorized agent or employee. The employees of the regulatory authority.
Change of ownership. A change of owner or operator of a food establishment business. Change of ownership does not refer to a change of
owner of the building where a business is located.
Director. The director of the authorized agent and the director's authorized representatives.
Extensive remodeling. Any type of construction of facilities and/or replacement of equipment of an establishment permitted by the authorized
agent which:
(1) Results in a final job cost of $10,000.00 or more.
(2) Results in a significant modification of the operation or facilities of the establishment (20% or greater of the area of the food
establishment is to be remodeled).
(3) Requires a building permit from the department of development of the city.
Food establishment. A food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit, and/or a roadside food
vendor. “Food establishment” includes day care centers licensed for more than 13 individuals and residential facilities.
Health official. The director or employee of the regulatory authority.
Mobile food unit. A vehicle-mounted food service operation designed to be readily movable.
Municipality. The incorporated City of Cuero, Texas.
Nonprofit facility.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/438
(1) All government entities and political subdivisions and public school districts.
(2) Organizations chartered under the Texas Non-Profit Corporation Act.
(3) Operations exempted by IRC section 501(c).
Potentially hazardous food. A food that is natural or synthetic and that requires temperature control because it is in a form capable of supporting
the rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms; the growth and toxin production of Clostridium botulinum; or in raw
shell eggs, the growth of Salmonella enteritidis.
Regulatory authority. The Crossroads Public Health District.
Risk analysis. An analysis using commonly known public health risks to determine the degree of hazard a food establishment poses to the
public.
State rules. The state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 229, sections 161 through 171 and sections 173 through 175. These
rules are also known as the Texas Food Establishment Rules.
(1994 Code, sec. 114.04; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03)
Sec. 7.03.035 Administration
The director of the authorized agent and the director's authorized representatives are authorized to administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this division and the provisions of the Texas Health and Safety Code and the rules of the state board of health relating to food, and
to issue orders requiring compliance with the same. (1994 Code, sec. 114.05; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03)
Secs. 7.03.036–7.03.060 Reserved
Part II. Permits*
Sec. 7.03.061 Required; exemptions
(a) Permit required; transfer; posting. A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority.
Permits are not transferable from one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this division.
A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this division.
(b) Exemptions.
(1) The following types of establishments are exempt from the requirements of this division, but are not exempt from compliance
with state rules:
(A) Group homes;
(B) Establishments selling only commercially packaged, nonpotentially hazardous foods;
(C) Vending machines;
(D) Private schools that do not have a kitchen; and
(E) Facilities operated by nonprofit organizations for their members, families, and invited guests. Facilities are not exempt
when food service is provided in conjunction with a day care facility, retirement center, hospital, school, indigent feeding program
or public fundraising events.
(2) The regulatory authority may require any information necessary to determine whether an organization or establishment meets
the above criteria.
(1994 Code, sec. 114.10; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03)
Sec. 7.03.062 Application; fees
(a) Application requirements. Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms
provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed
food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying
information required, may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same
information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit.
(b) Inspection of establishment. Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall
inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply with
state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit.
(c) Employee training. Prior to the approval of an initial permit, the authorized agent will provide a food safety in-service for all employees of
the food establishment at no cost.
(d) Classification of permits. Food establishment permits shall be classified according to the duration of operation and location of such
operation.
(1) Duration of permit. The duration of a permit shall fall within one of three categories, either annual, temporary, or seasonal, as
follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/438
(A) Annual. An establishment that operates throughout the year.
(B) Temporary. An establishment that operates 14 consecutive days or fewer, in conjunction with a special event.
(C) Seasonal. An establishment that operates more than 14 consecutive days but less than 180 days each year, and not
associated with a special event.
(2) Location of establishment. The location classification of a permit shall fall within one of two categories, either fixed or mobile, as
follows:
(A) Fixed food establishments:
(i) Food service establishment-restaurants, cafeterias, snack bars, bakeries, snow cone stands, caterer's commissaries,
private school cafeterias, halfway house food services, hospital kitchens/cafeterias, institutional food services, and the like,
where food is prepared and served.
(ii) Retail food stores handling prepackaged, potentially hazardous foods.
(iii) Retail food stores handling, processing or selling open foods.
(iv) Food warehouses/produce stands.
(v) Farmers' markets/produce stands.
(vi) Bars/lounges.
(vii) Bed and breakfast establishments.
(B) Mobile food units:
(i) Retail food unit handling prepackaged food.
(ii) Retail food unit (including trailers, mobile barbeques, snow cone units, and the like) handling, processing or selling
open food. A separate permit is required for each different type of mobile unit owned or operated by an individual or
company.
(iii) Mobile produce unit.
(iv) Mobile units selling meat, poultry, fish, seafoods, or shellfish for retail. Roadside vending of meat, poultry, fish,
seafoods, or shellfish shall not be permitted within the city limits.
(iv) Pushcarts.
(vi) Catering units.
(e) Charity bake sales. Notwithstanding any provision of this division to the contrary, food prepared in the kitchen of a private home that is not
licensed hereunder may be offered for sale for human consumption without any food permit, subject to full compliance with the following
requirements:
(1) The items offered for sale shall be limited to baked food products that are not potentially hazardous;
(2) The items are offered for sale at a function conducted by or under the auspices of a sponsoring organization, which may be a
school or religious or nonprofit organization;
(3) The sale shall not be conducted in a food establishment, except that if the sponsoring organization is a food establishment, then
the sale may be conducted on its premises, provided that the sale is conducted separately and apart from the sponsoring
organization's food sales or service; and
(4) The consumer is informed by a clearly visible placard at the sales or service location that the food was prepared in a kitchen
that is not subject to regulation and inspection by the city or any other health inspection agency. The person conducting the bake sale
shall provide the placard, which shall be in a form approved by the health officer.
(f) Fees. The city council shall adopt a schedule of fees for:
(1) Annual fixed food establishment permits;
(2) Annual mobile unit permits;
(3) Temporary food service establishments;
(4) Seasonal food service establishments/mobile units; and
(5) Reissuance of a permit after its expiration.
(g) Fee schedule. The fees for permits for food service establishments set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code shall be charged
by the regulatory authority and shall be paid to and collected at city hall.
(1994 Code, sec. 114.11; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 7.03.063 Review of plans
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/438
(a) Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food
establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory
authority for review before work is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical
plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and
specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this division. The approved plans
and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion.
(b) Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation.
(1994 Code, sec. 114.12; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03)
Secs. 7.03.064–7.03.070 Reserved
Part III. Inspections and Violations
Sec. 7.03.071 Inspections generally; responsibilities of permittee
(a) A permit holder shall ensure that the food establishment or mobile food unit is in full compliance with this division at all times. The person in
charge shall ensure that the food establishment is operated in full compliance with this division, that all food is stored, prepared, displayed and
served in accordance with the provisions of this division and that food employees are trained in basic food safety principles.
(b) The authorized agent may through risk analysis determine the risk of every food establishment. Based on the results of the risk analysis,
the authorized agent may:
(1) Determine the minimum inspection frequency of an establishment; and
(2) Require high-risk establishments to provide the health department with a hazard analysis critical control point (HACCP) plan.
(c) Whenever an inspection is made of a food establishment, the findings shall be recorded on an inspection report form provided for this
purpose, and a copy of the inspection report shall be posted upon an inside wall of the establishment. The inspection report so posted shall not
be defaced or removed by any person except the health officer. Another copy of the inspection report shall be filed with the records of the
department.
(1994 Code, sec. 114.20; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03)
Sec. 7.03.072 Analysis of samples
In connection with any inspection program authorized to be conducted pursuant to this division, the authorized agent may require the samples of
any food item or ingredient be provided by any person in possession or custody thereof for laboratory inspection or analysis to determine
whether applicable standards imposed or adopted pursuant to law have been complied with in the manufacture, packaging, labeling and
preparation thereof. All samples shall be used for inspection and analysis only, and the authorized agent shall only require the surrender of those
quantities as may reasonably be required to obtain a valid sample for the inspection or analysis that is to be performed. Upon request, the
authorized agent shall provide compensation for the sample at the fair market value thereof. (1994 Code, sec. 114.21; Ordinance 03-07 adopted
9/4/03)
Sec. 7.03.073 Condemnation of products or equipment
The authorized agent is authorized and directed to take action as may be reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare
by condemning or initiating the condemnation of any food or drug product or item of food equipment that may be used or held with intent to sell,
offer or expose for sale within the city that is suspected to be adulterated or misbranded or expired pursuant to applicable ordinances or state or
federal laws, rules and regulations. Expiration of ready-to-eat potentially hazardous food items that are required to be time and date marked shall
be determined from the date markings. Pending disposition, the authorized agent may direct that the product or item not be used or sold by
causing the same to be appropriately tagged if he finds upon diligent inquiry and inspection that the product or item poses an immediate threat or
danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public and if the owner or person in possession thereof is afforded the right of a public hearing
thereon within 24 hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays observed by the closure of city offices, before the director of public health
or his or her designee. The health officer may utilize the resources of all state, county or federal offices and agencies as necessary or desirable
in the prosecution of condemnation actions hereunder. (1994 Code, sec. 114.22; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03)
Sec. 7.03.074 Emergency closures
(a) In the event of an occurrence, such as a fire, flood, power outage, sewage water backflow, extended interruption of water service, foodborne
disease outbreak, gross unsanitary occurrence or condition or similar event, that might result in the contamination of food, or that might
prevent potentially hazardous food from being held at required temperatures, the person in charge shall immediately discontinue operation and
contact the health officer. Upon receiving notice of this occurrence, the health officer shall, consistent with the nature of the emergency and the
risks posed, take appropriate action as he or she deems necessary to protect the public health.
(b) When the authorized agent finds any food establishment in a condition that poses an imminent risk to the health or safety of the public or
the employees of the establishment, the authorized agent shall be authorized to:
(1) Post and maintain at the entrance of the food establishment notice of the conditions therein, or require the owner, operator, or
person in charge of the establishment to post and maintain at the entrance of the establishment notice that the establishment is
closed;
(2) Close summarily such food establishment and prevent its use as a food establishment until such unsanitary conditions have
been removed or abated, and until it no longer endangers public health; and
(3) Suspend summarily its food establishment permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/438
(1994 Code, sec. 114.23; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03)
Sec. 7.03.075 Suspension of permit
(a) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of
the food establishment constitutes an imminent health hazard to public health. Imminent health hazard means a significant threat or danger to
health that is considered to exist when there is evidence sufficient to show that a product, practice, circumstance, or event creates a situation
that requires immediate correction or cessation of operation to prevent injury based on the number of potential injuries and the nature, severity,
and duration of the anticipated injury.
(b) Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (c) of this section. When a permit is suspended, food operations
shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within 20 days
of a receipt of a request for a hearing.
(c) Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service
of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the
regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is
sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
(1994 Code, sec. 114.24; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03)
Sec. 7.03.076 Revocation of permit
(a) The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the
requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory
authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and
that the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the
regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten-day period.
(b) If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final.
(1994 Code, sec. 114.25; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03)
Sec. 7.03.077 Service of notices; hearings
(a) Service of notices. A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in
charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of
the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority.
(b) Hearings. The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it.
Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any
notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory
authority.
(1994 Code, sec. 114.26; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03)
Sec. 7.03.078 Enforcement; penalty
(a) All provisions of this division shall be applicable to all food establishments unless specifically limited to food processing establishments or
to food service establishments.
(b) No food service establishment or food processing establishment shall be operated within the city unless it conforms with the requirements
of this division.
(c) (1) Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $2,000.00. Each day a violation of this division continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
(2) If, however, a person is convicted of an offense under this division that also constitutes a violation of any other criminal provision
of the laws of the state, the person shall be subject to the criminal penalties set out in the laws of the state for the offense.
(d) Nothing in this division shall be construed as requiring the health officer to report minor violations of this division for prosecution whenever
the health officer believes the public interest will be adequately served in the circumstances by a warning.
(e) The permit holder shall be the person in charge or shall designate a person in charge and shall ensure that a person in charge is present at
the food establishment during all hours of operation.
(f) The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of these rules.
(1994 Code, sec. 114.99; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03)
ARTICLE 7.04 WEEDS, RUBBISH AND OTHER UNSANITARY CONDITIONS*
Sec. 7.04.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Lot. The premises, plot, or parcel of land, plus the front or side parkway between the property line or sidewalk and the curb or traveled way, and
the rear or side parkway between the property line and the centerline of an adjacent alley.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. VIII, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 98.01(A); Ordinance 95-09 adopted 7/6/95)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/438
Sec. 7.04.002 Prohibited conditions
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who shall own or occupy any lot or lots in the city to:
(1) Permit or allow holes or places on the lots where water may accumulate and become stagnant, or to permit the same to remain.
(2) Permit or allow the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or to permit the same to remain.
(3) Permit or allow any carrion, filth or other impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain in or on any house, building,
establishment, lot, yard or ground owned or occupied by the person.
(4) Allow weeds, rubbish, brush or any other unsightly, objectionable or insanitary matter to accumulate or grow to a height greater
than 12 inches on the lot or lots.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. VIII, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 98.01(B); Ordinance 95-09 adopted 7/6/95)
Sec. 7.04.003 Notice of violation; abatement procedures
(a) If the owner of property in the city does not comply with the provisions as applicable under section 7.04.002(1) through (4) within ten days
of notice of a violation, the city may:
(1) Perform the work, mow the weeds/grass or make the improvements required; or
(2) Pay for the work to be done, grass mown or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property and
assess the expenses on the real estate or lots upon which the expenses are incurred.
(b) The notice of violation must be given:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in
which the property is located; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained;
(A) By publication at least once;
(B) By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or
(C) By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates.
(c) If a municipality mails a notice of violation to a property owner in accordance with subsection (b) and the United States Postal Service
returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered.
(d) In a notice provided under this section, a municipality may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the property, or by personally
delivering the notice, that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety
on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the municipality without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense
and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the
municipality has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the municipality without notice may take any action
permitted by subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section and assess a lien for its expenses as provided by section 7.04.004(a) through (f).
(e) In the event the city gives the notice of violation as provided in subsection (b) above, and if the city thereafter sends any subsequent notice
of violation within the following 36 months from the original notice of violation, then the city shall charge the owner an administration fee as set
forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for each subsequent written notice of violation sent in the manner as provided in subsection
(b), until the property and/or lot(s) are brought into compliance. This administrative fee is in addition to any other expenses and may be enforced
as provided in this article.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. VIII, sec. 3; Ordinance 92-02 adopted 4/–/92; 1994 Code, sec. 98.02; Ordinance 2004-16 adopted 11/4/04; Ordinance
2007-16 adopted 11/1/07)
Sec. 7.04.004 Statement of city's expenses; lien
(a) Expenses incurred under sections 7.04.002 and 7.04.003 shall be and are hereby assessed against the real estate on which the work is
done or improvements made.
(b) To obtain a lien against the property, the mayor, health officer or other city official designated by the mayor shall file a statement of
expenses with the county clerk.
(c) The lien obtained is security for the expenditures made and interest accruing at the rate of 10% on the amount due from the date of
payment by the city.
(d) The lien is inferior only to tax liens and liens for street improvements.
(e) The city council may bring a suit for foreclosure in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest due.
(f) The statement of expenses or a certified copy thereof is prima facie proof of the expenses incurred by the city in doing the work or making
the improvements.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. VIII, sec. 4; Ordinance 92-02 adopted 4/–/92; 1994 Code, sec. 98.03)
Sec. 7.04.005 Enforcement; penalties
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/438
(a) Criminal remedies. Unless otherwise provided, an offense under section 7.04.002 is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500.00. Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(1) Any person convicted of one previous offense under section 7.04.002 within three years of the date of an alleged offense shall
be fined not less than $250.00.
(2) Any person convicted of two or more previous offenses under section 7.04.002 within three years of the date of an alleged
offense shall be fined not less than $500.00.
(b) Civil remedies.
(1) The city may invoke sections 54.012–54.019 of the Texas Local Government Code and petition the state district court or any
applicable county court at law, through the city attorney, for either injunctive relief, civil penalties, or both injunctive relief and civil
penalties, whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of section 7.04.002 that relates to:
(A) Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation, or other matter that creates breeding and living places for
insects and rodents.
(2) Pursuant to section 54.016 of the Texas Local Government Code, the city may obtain against the owner or the operator of a
facility a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that:
(A) Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of section 7.04.002 that relates to any matter specified in subsection (b)
(2) [(b)(1)] above; or
(B) Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with any provision of this article that
relates to any matter specified in subsection (b)(2) [(b)(1)] above.
(3) (A) Pursuant to section 54.017 of the Texas Local Government Code, the city may recover a civil penalty of not more
than $1,000.00 per day for each violation of any provision of section 7.04.002 that relates to any matter specified in subsection
(b)(2) [(b)(1)], if the city proves that:
(i) The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of this article;
(ii) After the defendant received notice of the provisions of this article, the defendant committed acts in violation of this
article or failed to take action necessary for compliance with this article.
(B) The city may also institute suit to recover the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city, and any costs of response,
remediation, abatement and restoration incurred by the city as allowed under state or federal laws, or at common law.
(C) In determining the amount of civil liability, the court should take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not
limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained
through the violation, corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, and any other factors as justice
requires.
(1994 Code, sec. 98.04; Ordinance 2004-16 adopted 11/4/04)
ARTICLE 7.05 LITTER CONTROL*
Sec. 7.05.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Containers. City-approved metal or heavy plastic receptacles or city-owned dumpsters used for the storage or disposal of solid wastes, and
pedestrian litter containers provided on public sidewalks and elsewhere for the disposal of litter by pedestrians.
Litter. Any solid waste, trash, debris, rubbish, refuse, garbage or junk not placed in a container.
Private property. Includes but is not limited to yards, grounds, driveways, entranceways, passageways, parking areas, working areas, storage
areas, vacant lots and recreation facilities owned by private individuals, firms, corporations, institutions and organizations.
Public property. Includes but is not limited to streets, street medians, roads, road medians, catchbasins, sidewalks, strips between streets and
sidewalks, alleys, lanes, public rights-of-way, public parking lots, school grounds, parks, publicly owned recreation facilities and municipal bodies
of water and waterways.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III-A, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 98.15)
Sec. 7.05.002 Depositing litter on public or private property
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place or deposit litter in any manner or amounts on any public or private property within the
corporate limits of the city except in containers. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III-A, sec. 2A; 1994 Code, sec. 98.16)
Sec. 7.05.003 Throwing litter from motor vehicle
If a violation of section 7.05.002 occurs from a motor vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle was the origin of the litter together with proof that
the defendant was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the vehicle shall constitute prima facie proof that the registered owner is the
person who committed the violation. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III-A, sec. 2B; 1994 Code, sec. 98.17)
Sec. 7.05.004 Posting handbills on public property; placing on unoccupied motor vehicles
Posting of handbills on public property is prohibited. A person commits an offense if he places or posts on public property or an unoccupied
motor vehicle a handbill. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III-A, sec. 2C; 1994 Code, sec. 98.18)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/438
Sec. 7.05.005 Removal of placards
Placards must be removed within five days of the date of the event. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III-A, sec. 2C; 1994 Code, sec. 98.19)
Sec. 7.05.006 Vehicles transporting loose materials
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any truck or other motor vehicle to transport any loose cargo within the corporate limits of the city
by truck or other motor vehicle unless the cargo is covered and secured so as to prevent depositing litter on public or private property. (1966
Code, ch. 8.0, art. III-A, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 98.20)
State law reference–Transportation of loose materials, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 725.
Sec. 7.05.007 Control of litter from containers
All persons placing the containers for collection and removing them after collection shall take the necessary precautions to prevent the contents
thereof from becoming litter. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III-A, sec. 4; 1994 Code, sec. 98.21(A))
Sec. 7.05.008 Unlawful use of receptacle intended for use by pedestrians
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit household solid waste or solid wastes from a commercial establishment in a litter receptacle on a
sidewalk or other location for the disposal of litter by pedestrians. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III-A, sec. 4; 1994 Code, sec. 98.21(B))
Sec. 7.05.009 Property to be kept clean; failure to remove litter; removal by city
(a) It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, or lessee of any private property to keep the exterior private property free of litter. This
requirement applies not only to the removal of loose litter but also of materials that are or become trapped at the locations of fences, walls,
grassy and planted areas, borders, embankments and other lodging points.
(b) Owners, occupants or lessees of private property which abuts city sidewalks, streets, and strips between streets and sidewalks shall be
bound to keep those sidewalks, strips, curbs and gutters free of litter.
(c) It shall be unlawful to sweep or push litter from sidewalks and strips between streets and sidewalks in the street or alley. Sweepings from
sidewalks and strips shall be picked up and placed in household or commercial solid waste containers.
(d) If any owner, occupant, or lessee fails to remove litter from private property after having been warned to do so by the city, the city may give
the person written notice that, if the condition is not corrected within ten days, the property will be cleaned by the city and the owner billed for the
cost thereof. If the bill is not paid within 30 days, execution shall be issued by the city against the property for the amount of the cleaning charge
and the execution shall constitute a lien on the property until the claim has been satisfied.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III-A, sec. 5; 1994 Code, sec. 98.22)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 8.01.001 Penalty
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter for which no other specific penalty has been enacted shall be punished as set forth in section
1.01.009. (1994 Code, sec. 130.99(A))
Sec. 8.01.002 Placing advertisements, posters, etc., on light poles or electrical poles
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to place or allow to be placed any advertising cards, posters, or other like material on any
of the electric light poles within the city or belonging to or used by the city electric department, and any person, firm, or corporation allowing the
same to be done shall be deemed guilty of an offense. (1994 Code, sec. 156.12; Ordinance 96-07 adopted 7/2/96)
Sec. 8.01.003 Public intoxication
Any person who shall get drunk or be found in a state of intoxication in any public place shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1966 Code,
ch. 9.0, art. I, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 130.01)
Sec. 8.01.004 Voyeurism
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to go to or near any building not his own within the corporate limits of the city, and to look, peer, or peep
into or through any door, window, or other opening in the building.
(b) It shall be unlawful for person to loiter within the corporate limits of the city around or within view of any window, door, or other opening in
any building not his own, for the purpose or with the intent of looking, peering, or peeping into or through the door, window or other opening.
(1966 Code, ch. 13.0, art. II, secs. 1, 2; 1994 Code, sec. 130.02)
Sec. 8.01.005 False alarms
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/438
No person shall knowingly give or make a false alarm of fire within the corporate limits of the city. (1966 Code, ch. 6.0, art. II, sec. 6; 1994 Code,
sec. 130.05)
Sec. 8.01.006 Drug solicitation
(a) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
Abusable volatile chemical. Any of the chemicals or an isomer of any of the chemicals listed in Tex. Health & Safety Code, section 485.001, or
any amendments thereto.
Controlled substance. Has the meaning ascribed by Tex. Health & Safety Code, section 481.002(5), or any amendments thereto.
Controlled substance analogue. Has the meaning ascribed by Tex. Health & Safety Code, section 481.002(3) [481.002(6)], or any amendments
thereto.
Prohibited substance. A controlled substance, controlled substance analogue, dangerous drug, abusive volatile chemical, or any combination
thereof. Such prohibited substances are included by whatever official, common, usual, chemical, trade, street language, or slang name they may
be designated.
(b) Offenses. A person commits an offense if, with intent to acquire a prohibited substance, he or she requests, commands, or attempts to
induce another to sell, donate, or otherwise transfer or deliver a prohibited substance to the person.
(c) Defenses.
(1) It is no defense to prosecution under this section that:
(A) No monetary or other consideration was tendered to the person solicited; or
(B) The person solicited was unable or unwilling to transfer or deliver a prohibited substance.
(2) It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution under this section that:
(A) The solicitation is made in furtherance of a transaction which would not constitute a violation of any applicable laws; or
(B) The solicitation is made by a peace officer or federal law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his or her duties or
by a law enforcement agent acting in the lawful discharge of an official duty.
(d) Conviction of violation. A person may not be convicted under this section on the uncorroborated testimony of the person allegedly solicited,
and unless the solicitation is made under circumstances strongly corroborative of both the solicitation itself and the actor's intent that the other
person act on the solicitation.
(e) Enforcement of other laws. The city police department is authorized and required to enforce all laws, statutes, and ordinances as
prescribed by federal, state, or local requirements within the city.
(f) Exceptions. Any prohibition enumerated above may be superseded by written authority of the city, or superseded in the exercise of official
duty by any employee, agent, contractor, or authorized personnel of the city.
(g) Penalty. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $500.00. However, any
conduct proscribed by this section which also constitutes an offense under state law shall not be prosecuted under this section but shall be
prosecuted pursuant to and punishable as provided by the applicable state law. An offense under this section is not a lesser included offense
under Tex. Health & Safety Code, chs. 481, 483, and 485.
(1994 Code, secs. 130.07, 130.99(B); Ordinance 97-02 adopted 1/2/97; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 8.01.007 Synthetic cannabinoids and similar substances
(a) Prohibited substances. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, sell, publicly display for sale or attempt to sell, give or
barter any one or more of the following substances within the city limits:
(1) Saliva divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as Salvia divinorum, whether growing or
not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts;
(2) Synthetic cannabinoids, synthetic cannabinoid mimicking compounds, substances containing the HU-210 compound, or
substances having cannabinoid mimicking effects used to adulterate plant or other materials;
(3) Products containing any of the above substances and marketed as “K-2,” “K-2 Summit,” “K-2 Sex,” “Genie,” “Dascents,” “Zohai,”
“Sage,” “Spice,” “KO Knock-Out 2,” “Spice Gold,” “Spice Diamond,” “Spice Silver,” “Yucatan Fire,” “Solar Flare,” “Pep Spice,” “Fire ‘n
Ice,” “Diablo,” “Spicy Green,” “Skunk,” “Sence” and “Salvia Divinorum,” or products by any other name containing a synthetic
cannabinoid, synthetic cannabinoid mimicking compound or substance containing the HU-210 compound; or
(4) Any substance similar to those described, which when inhaled or otherwise ingested produces intoxication, stupefaction,
giddiness, paralysis, or irrational behavior, or in any manner changes, distorts or disturbs the auditory, visual or mental process and
the product or substance has no other apparent legitimate purpose for consumption.
(b) Ingestion prohibited. It is unlawful for any person, knowingly, to breathe, inhale, drink, or otherwise ingest any compound, liquid or chemical
listed within this section or a similar substance, for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication, stupefaction, giddiness, paralysis, or
irrational behavior, or in any manner, changing, distorting or disturbing the auditory, visual or mental process.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/438
(c) Use or possession of paraphernalia. It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess within the city any paraphernalia, equipment or
utensils in ingesting or inhaling any compound, liquid or chemical listed in this section, or similar substance.
(d) Exception for law enforcement activities. It is not a violation of this section if a person was acting under the supervision of an authorized
law enforcement officer to enforce or to ensure compliance with this section.
(e) Exception for medical uses. It is not a violation of this section if a person who inhales anesthesia, or who commits any act described in this
section, is under the direction or prescription of a physician or dentist licensed by the state to direct or prescribe the act.
(f) Exception for religious activities. It shall be a defense to prosecution under the terms of this section if an individual charged with violation
can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials was undertaken solely for religious purposes or as the
activity of an organized religious denomination in which the individual has been identified to have a long-standing historic membership by a
member of the clergy or spiritual leader recognized by the state.
(g) Penalty. Any person who violates any [provision of] this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine upon conviction in
municipal court, and shall be punished for a violation of an ordinance governing public health.
(1994 Code, secs. 130.09, 130.99(I); Ordinance 2010-26 adopted 12/28/10)
ARTICLE 8.02 MINORS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.02.001–8.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Curfew*
Sec. 8.02.031 Findings; intent
(a) More and more minor children are frequenting public places and establishments within the city at all hours of the night when they should be
at home or in an environment that is more conducive to their own safety and the safety of others. Crimes are more likely to be committed during
the late night and early morning hours when minor children have been seen roaming public places and establishments. It is the intent of the
council to see that these children are kept safe and out of trouble as well as having their parents or guardians responsible for their children.
(b) More and more minor children are frequenting public places and establishments within the city during the weekday and at times they
should be in school. It is the intent of this division that minor children attend school during the weekday school time rather than remain at public
places or establishments and not attend school.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.55; Ordinance 2006-08 adopted 5/4/06; Ordinance 2014-54, sec. 1, adopted 12/15/14; Ordinance 2017-34 adopted
12/14/17)
Sec. 8.02.032 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Curfew hours.
(1) 10:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day;
(2) 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday; and
(3) 8:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of
life.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
Guardian.
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor. Any person under 17 years of age.
Officer. A police officer of the city.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
Parent. A person who is:
(1) A natural parent, foster parent, or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/438
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways,
and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
Remain. To:
(1) Linger or stay; or
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by an officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
Serious bodily injury. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.56; Ordinance 2006-08 adopted 5/4/06; Ordinance 2014-54, sec. 2, adopted 12/15/14; Ordinance 2017-34 adopted
12/14/17)
Sec. 8.02.033 Offenses
(a) A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew
hours.
(b) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in
any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.57; Ordinance 2006-08 adopted 5/4/06; Ordinance 2014-54, sec. 3, adopted 12/15/14; Ordinance 2017-34 adopted
12/14/17)
Sec. 8.02.034 Defenses
It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.02.033 of this division that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning from home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the police department about the minor's presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home without any detour or stop,
an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, organization, or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the U.S. Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech,
and the right of assembly; or
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Tex. Family Code chapter 31.
(10) That the offense occurred at a time when the school in which the minor was enrolled was not in session; or that the minor has
graduated from high school or received a high school equivalency certificate; or that the minor has permission to be absent from
school or to be in a public place from an authorized school official. The minor is going to or returning from lunch during the times
established by Cuero Independent School District.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.58; Ordinance 2006-08 adopted 5/4/06; Ordinance 2014-54, sec. 4, adopted 12/15/14; Ordinance 2017-34 adopted
12/14/17)
Sec. 8.02.035 Enforcement
(a) Before taking any enforcement action under this division, an officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public
place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this division unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has
occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in section 8.02.034(1)–(10) of this division is present.
(b) A police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of this division shall:
(1) Ascertain the name and address of the minor's parent(s);
(2) Order the minor to go promptly home by a direct route.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.59; Ordinance 2006-08 adopted 5/4/06; Ordinance 2014-54, sec. 5, adopted 12/15/14; Ordinance 2017-34 adopted
12/14/17)
Sec. 8.02.036 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this division for which no other penalty has been enacted shall be punished as set forth in section
1.01.009 of this code. (1994 Code, sec. 130.99(H); Ordinance 2006-08 adopted 5/4/06; Ordinance 2014-54, sec. 6, adopted 12/15/14; Ordinance
2017-34 adopted 12/14/17)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/438
Sec. 8.02.037 Review of regulations
(a) Before the third anniversary date of the adoption of this division, and every third year thereafter, the city council shall review the ordinance
or order's effects on the community and on problems the ordinance was intended to remedy; conduct public hearings on the need to continue the
ordinance and abolish, continue or modify the ordinance.
(b) Failure to comply with this section shall cause this division to automatically expire.
(Ordinance 2014-54, sec. 7, adopted 12/15/14; Ordinance 2017-34 adopted 12/14/17)
ARTICLE 8.03 SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLERBLADES AND SIMILAR DEVICES
Sec. 8.03.001 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this article for which another [no other] penalty has been enacted shall be punished as set forth in
section 1.01.009 of this code. (1994 Code, sec. 130.99(G); Ordinance 2006-07 adopted 5/4/06)
Sec. 8.03.002 Operation in unsafe manner
(a) No person shall operate, propel and/or ride any type of skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades or similar devices on any highway, street,
alley, sidewalk, walkway, railway, waterway, elevator, aisle, hallway, entrance, or exit to which the public or a substantial group of the public has
access, or any other place used for the passage of persons or vehicles, in an unsafe manner.
(b) For purposes of this article, the following definition shall apply, unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning:
Unsafe manner. To operate a skateboard, roller skate, rollerblade or similar device in such a manner that may endanger the health and safety of
the rider and/or any member of the public.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.40; Ordinance 2006-07 adopted 5/4/06)
Sec. 8.03.003 Ramps, jumps and similar devices
No person will construct any ramp, jump or similar device intended for use by a person with a skateboard, roller skates, rollerblades or similar
device on any highway, street, alley, sidewalk, walkway, railway, waterway, elevator, aisle, hallway, entrance, or exit to which the public or a
substantial group of the public has access, or any other place used for the passage of persons, vehicles, or conveyances. (1994 Code, sec.
130.41; Ordinance 2006-07 adopted 5/4/06)
Sec. 8.03.004 Placement of wax or similar substance
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any wax or other similar substance commonly used to provide a lubricated surface for the purpose of
easing the movement of skateboards, roller skates, rollerblades or similar devices, on any of the following locations in the city:
(1) Streets;
(2) Sidewalks;
(3) Alleys;
(4) City-owned structures; or
(5) Property upon which skateboarding, rollerblading, roller skating or similar device has been prohibited or which contains any sign
prohibiting the placement of wax or other lubricating substance thereon.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.42; Ordinance 2006-07 adopted 5/4/06)
Sec. 8.03.005 Designation of prohibited areas; posting of signs
The city manager or his or her authorized representative is authorized to designate any part of any city-owned building, park, grounds or
sidewalk adjacent thereto as an area where skateboarding, rollerblading, roller skating or the placement of lubricating substances is prohibited.
The city manager is further authorized to require the placement of signs at appropriate locations to indicate this prohibition. (1994 Code, sec.
130.43; Ordinance 2006-07 adopted 5/4/06)
ARTICLE 8.04 NOISE*
Sec. 8.04.001 Penalty
Any person who violates a provision of this article for which no other specific penalty has been enacted shall be punished as set forth in section
1.01.009 of this code. (1994 Code, sec. 98.65; Ordinance 2004-08 adopted 6/3/04)
Sec. 8.04.002 Loud, unnecessary or unusual noise prohibited
A person shall be in violation of this article and considered to create a nuisance if that person makes or continues to make or causes to be made
or continues where the same is capable of being controlled within reasonable limits any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which
would either annoy or disturb a person of normal nervous sensibilities. (1994 Code, sec. 98.60; Ordinance 2004-08 adopted 6/3/04)
Sec. 8.04.003 Factors to be considered in determination of violation
Factors to be considered in determining whether a violation of section 8.04.002 exists include but are not limited to the following:
(1) Volume of noise;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/438
(2) Intensity of noise;
(3) Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
(4) Whether the origin of the noise is natural or artificial;
(5) Volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;
(6) Proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
(7) Nature of the area within which the noise emanates;
(8) Density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;
(9) Time of the day or night the noise occurs;
(10) Duration of the noise;
(11) Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and
(12) Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity.
(1994 Code, sec. 98.61; Ordinance 2004-08 adopted 6/3/04)
Sec. 8.04.004 Sound produced by amplifying device or musical or entertainment group
(a) It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to conduct, permit or allow an electronic sound amplifying device or a musical or
entertainment group to produce a sound that is discernable beyond the property lines of the property on which the sound is being produced that,
when measured with a sound level meter using the standardized frequency weighting as specified by the American National Standard
Specification for sound meters, exceeds the applicable dB(A) level listed below for the property on which the sound is received:
(1) Residential property.
(A) Sixty dB(A) between the hours of 8:01 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday or
between the hours of 7:01 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. on a Saturday or Sunday.
(B) Fifty dB(A) between the hours of 10:01 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday or
between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on Saturday or Sunday.
(2) Nonresidential property. Sixty dB(A) between the hours of 10:01 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on a Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday or Thursday or between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Friday or Saturday.
(b) The dB(A) levels set forth in this section apply to the property where the sound is being received. Any sound that when measured at the
property where the sound is being received exceeds the dB(A) level set forth in this section is a violation of this article.
(c) This section shall not apply to the creation of sound by government authorities.
(1994 Code, sec. 98.62; Ordinance 2004-08 adopted 6/3/04)
Sec. 8.04.005 Amplifying devices in motor vehicles
(a) It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street, highway, alley, parking lot, or
driveway, whether on public or private property, to operate or permit the operation of any sound amplifying device from within the vehicle so that
the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 50 or more feet from the vehicle, when measured by the auditory senses, based on direct line of
sight.
(b) This section shall not apply to any person acting on behalf of a government authority.
(1994 Code, sec. 98.63; Ordinance 2004-08 adopted 6/3/04)
Sec. 8.04.006 Engine braking devices; defective or modified muffler systems
(a) It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to operate or occupy a motor vehicle on any public street or highway within the city while
the vehicle or operator is utilizing an engine braking device or engine retarder that creates loud, excessive, unnecessary or unusual noise or any
noise which would either annoy or disturb a person of normal nervous sensibilities by the motor vehicle caused by improperly maintained,
defective or modified muffler systems. Factors to consider in determining whether there is a violation of this provision shall include, but are not
limited to, volume of noise, intensity of noise, proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities and time of day or night the noise occurs.
(b) This provision shall not apply in the following situations:
(1) Emergency driving situations requiring the utilization of an engine brake to protect the safety and property of any person or
property;
(2) Fire or emergency vehicles requiring the utilization of an engine brake to protect the safety and property of any person from fire
or other emergency; and
(3) Farming vehicles used for agricultural purposes.
(c) The chief of police is hereby authorized to post, at reasonable locations within the city, signs indicating the prohibition of engine braking in
non-emergency situations as described by this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/438
(1994 Code, sec. 98.64; Ordinance 09-23 adopted 10/6/09)
ARTICLE 8.05 WEAPONS*
Sec. 8.05.001 Open carry of handguns prohibited at public meetings
(a) Findings.
(1) Texas Penal Code section 46.035(c) provides that a handgun license holder commits an offense if the license holder
intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly carries a handgun under the authority of subchapter H, chapter 411, Government Code,
regardless of whether the handgun is concealed or carried in a shoulder or belt holster, in the room or rooms where a meeting of a
governmental entity is held and if the meeting is an open meeting subject to chapter 551, Government Code, and the entity provided
notice as required by that chapter.
(2) State law provides that notice of the prohibition of the open carry of handguns into the meetings of the governmental entity that
are being held pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act be provided by a sign containing certain language that is printed in a certain
size or from the owner of the property or someone with apparent authority to act for the owner by oral or written communication.
(3) The city council desires to prohibit the open carry of handguns by license holders, regardless of whether in a shoulder or belt
holster, in the meeting room or rooms of all meetings of the city council and/or its boards, commissions, or committees that are being
conducted pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(4) To effectuate that prohibition, the city council authorizes and directs the city manager, or his designee, to post the required
signage and/or to provide oral or written communications in accordance with state law to provide license holders with notice that the
open carrying of handguns is prohibited in the room or rooms where meetings of the city council and/or its boards, commissions and
committees are being conducted pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(b) Notice. The city council authorizes and directs the city manager, or his designee, to post the required signage and/or to provide oral or
written communications in accordance with state law to provide license holders with notice that openly carrying handgun(s) is prohibited in the
room or rooms where meetings of the city council and/or its boards, commissions and committees are being conducted pursuant to the Texas
Open Meetings Act.
(Ordinance 2016-02 adopted 2/1/16)
State law reference–Unlawful carrying of handgun by license holder, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 46.035.
Sec. 8.05.002 Discharging firearm or airgun
(a) Prohibition. No person shall, within the corporate limits of the city, fire or discharge any gun, pistol, or firearm of any description or any air
rifle, air pistol, or pellet gun that is capable by any means of discharging shots, pellets, or any solid object at a velocity in excess of 300 feet per
second.
(b) Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the lawful discharge of firearms by a peace officer engaged in the discharge
of his official duties or by any person lawfully defending his person or property or the person or property of another against an unlawful attack
under the circumstances that the discharge of the firearm would be justified under the criminal laws of the state.
(c) Firing ranges. The city manager is authorized to issue to any group organized and functioning under the rules of the National Rifle
Association, or similar organization, or to any National Guard Company or any organization of the United States Army, Marines, Navy, or Air
Force, at his discretion, a permit to maintain and operate a firing range. The city manager, before issuing the permit, shall first inspect the site to
be used for the purposes and shall satisfy himself that the premises are so located and the firearms to be discharged are so regulated and
controlled as to protect the safety and comfort of the residents of the city. The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the
discharge of firearms at any authorized firing range.
(1966 Code, ch. 16.3, art. III, secs. 4–6; Ordinance 75-12 adopted 12/4/75; 1994 Code, sec. 130.03)
Sec. 8.05.003 Carrying knives on school premises
(a) Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
Knife. Any hand instrument with a blade of whatever length capable of nicking, piercing or cutting the skin of a human being.
(b) Prohibition. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, no student shall carry a knife on or about his person while on the premises
or grounds of any public or parochial school within the corporate limits of the city.
(c) Exception. This section shall not apply to any employee of such public or parochial school who carries a knife for use in the repair or
maintenance of school facilities or grounds.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.06; Ordinance 94-01 adopted 1/6/94)
ARTICLE 8.06 SEX OFFENDERS*
Sec. 8.06.001 Findings and intent
(a) Repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders that use physical violence and sexual offenders who prey on children are sexual predators who
present an extreme threat to the public safety. Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offenses, and
most sexual offenders commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their
crimes.
(b) This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/438
(c) It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual
offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residences.
(d) It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the city by requiring a person registered as a sex offender under the Texas sex offenders laws to place a sign at their residence that
generally informs the public of the offender's residence.
(e) It is the intent to enact a nonpunitive civil regulatory measure that protects health and safety.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.20; Ordinance 2005-23 adopted 12/1/05; Ordinance 2006-05 adopted 3/2/06)
Sec. 8.06.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Permanent residence. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
Sign. A square-shaped display made of wood, plastic, metal or other material being no smaller than two feet in width by two feet in length with a
white backing and black lettering visible at all times from the nearest public roadway that states as follows: “A REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER
LIVES HERE.”
Temporary residence. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar
year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, resides or lodges for a period of four or
more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.21; Ordinance 2005-23 adopted 12/1/05; Ordinance 2006-05 adopted 3/2/06)
Sec. 8.06.003 Penalties
(a) Any person, firm or corporation who violates section 8.06.004 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(b) Any person, firm or entity who violates section 8.06.005 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(c) Any person who violates sections 8.06.007 and 8.06.008 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.99(D)–(F); Ordinance 2005-23 adopted 12/1/05; Ordinance 2006-05 adopted 3/2/06)
Sec. 8.06.004 Residency restrictions
(a) Restrictions. It is unlawful for any person who has been convicted of a violation of Tex. Penal Code, sections 21.08, 21.11, 22.011, 22.021,
25.02, 43.25, and 43.26, regardless of whether the adjudication was deferred, in which the victim of the offense was less than 16 years of age, to
establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather, including but not
limited to a school, day care facility, playground, public or private youth center, public swimming pool, or video arcade facility, as those terms are
defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code, section 481.134.
(b) Measurement of distance. For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by
following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where
children commonly gather, as described herein.
(c) Exceptions. A person residing within 1,000 feet of those places where children commonly gather, as specified herein, does not commit a
violation of this article if any of the following apply:
(1) The person established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of
the state, prior to the date of the adoption of this article.
(2) The person was a minor when he or she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult.
(3) The person is a minor.
(4) The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 1,000 feet of the person's permanent or temporary
residence was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender
registration laws of the state.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.22; Ordinance 2005-23 adopted 12/1/05)
Sec. 8.06.005 Renting real property to sex offender
It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance with the knowledge that it will be
used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or temporary
residence pursuant to the terms of this article, if such place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance is located
within 1,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather, including but not limited to a school, day care facility, playground, public or
private youth center, public swimming pool, or video arcade facility, as those terms are defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code, section 481.134.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.23; Ordinance 2005-23 adopted 12/1/05)
Sec. 8.06.006 Length of time applicable
The length of time within which this article is applicable to an offender shall be as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/438
(1) A person assigned a risk level of one pursuant to Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, article 62.007 or has no risk assessment
level assignment shall be exempt from this article upon the completion of that person's probationary period for the offense described
in section 8.06.004 and this section, as applicable.
(2) A person assigned a risk level of two or three pursuant to Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, article 62.007 shall have no
exemption as to the length of time this article is applicable.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.24; Ordinance 2005-23 adopted 12/1/05)
Sec. 8.06.007 Placement of sign at residence
(a) Required. Any person who has been convicted of a violation of Tex. Penal Code, sections 21.08, 21.11, 22.011, 22.021, 25.02, and 43.25,
regardless of whether the adjudication was deferred, in which the victim of the offense was less than 16 years of age, and is required to register
with the state under the state registration provisions of Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, article 62.051 shall place and permanently maintain a
sign within 20 feet of the front entrance to their permanent or temporary residence that indicates that a registered sex offender resides in the
residence. The sign's legibility must be maintained at all times.
(b) Exceptions. A person is exempt from this provision, and does not commit a violation of this article, if any of the following apply:
(1) The person committed the offense described above prior to the date of adoption of this article and has complied with all sex
offender registration laws of the state;
(2) The person established the permanent or temporary residence prior to the date of the adoption of this article and has complied
with all the sex offender registration laws of the state;
(3) The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult; or
(4) The person is a minor.
(1994 Code, sec. 130.25; Ordinance 2006-05 adopted 3/2/06)
Sec. 8.06.008 Risk level application
Section 8.06.007 shall only be applicable to a sex offender described in section 8.06.007(a) that is assigned a risk level of two or three pursuant
to Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, section 62.007. (1994 Code, sec. 130.26; Ordinance 2006-05 adopted 3/2/06)
ARTICLE 8.07 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.07.001 Title
This article may be cited as the junked vehicle ordinance. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. IX, sec. 11; 1994 Code, sec. 98.35)
Sec. 8.07.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Operable. The vehicle license plate sticker and inspection sticker must be current whereas the vehicle is legally able to be driven on a street and
capable of performing the transportation function for which it was manufactured and not just having the function to be driven forward or in
reverse.
Junked vehicle. A vehicle that:
(1) Is self-propelled; and
(2) Is:
(A) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(B) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(i) 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(ii) 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
For purposes of this article, “junked vehicle” includes a motor vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft. This article applies only to:
(1) A motor vehicle that displays an expired license plate or does not display a license plate;
(2) An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft an unexpired federal aircraft identification number registered under
Federal Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 C.F.R. part 47; or
(3) A watercraft that:
(A) Does not have lawfully on board an unexpired certificate of number; and
(B) Is not a watercraft described by section 31.055, Parks and Wildlife Code.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. IX, sec. 11; 1994 Code, sec. 98.36; Ordinance 2011-09 adopted 3/10/11; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 8.07.003 Applicability
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/438
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to “abandoned motor vehicles” as that term is defined by the Texas Abandoned Motor
Vehicle Act. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. IX, sec. 9; 1994 Code, sec. 98.37)
Sec. 8.07.004 Declaration of nuisance
Junked vehicles which are located in any place where they are visible from a public place or public right-of-way are detrimental to the safety and
welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, and to constitute an
attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the state by producing
urban blight, which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the municipalities in the state, and the vehicles are therefore
declared to be a public nuisance. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. IX, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 98.38)
Sec. 8.07.005 Maintaining nuisance
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to suffer or permit any junked vehicle in its possession or under its control to be or
become a public nuisance as herein defined. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. IX, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 98.39)
Sec. 8.07.006 Notice of nuisance on private property
For a nuisance on private property, not less than ten days' notice stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property shall be given. The
notice shall state that it must be removed and abated within ten days and that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the tenday
period. The notice must be mailed by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor
vehicle, to any lienholder of record, and to the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public nuisance exists. If the post office
address of the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the
motor vehicle, or, if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered
by the U.S. Postal Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days after the date of the return.
(1994 Code, sec. 98.40)
Sec. 8.07.007 Notice of nuisance on public property
For a nuisance on public property, not less than ten days' notice stating the nature of the public nuisance on public property or on a public rightof-
way shall be given. The notice shall state that the nuisance must be removed and abated within ten days and that a request for a hearing must
be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice must be mailed by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the last known
registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, to any lienholder of record, and to the owner or occupant of the public premises, or to the owner or
occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known
registered owner of the motor vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle, or, if the last
known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal
Service, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days after the date of the return. (1994 Code, sec.
98.41)
Sec. 8.07.008 Reconstruction of vehicle after removal prohibited
It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to be reconstructed or made operable after it has been removed from property pursuant this article. (1994 Code,
sec. 98.42)
Sec. 8.07.009 Public hearing
If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is served, the hearing shall be held not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the
service of notice through an application being submitted to the building official, to include a nonrefundable application fee in the amount set forth
in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. The building official shall submit the application to the zoning board of adjustments and appeals
upon receipt of requests for such public hearing, and notify such applicant of the date, time, and place of such public hearing. Upon the
completion of such hearing, the zoning board of adjustments and appeals shall determine whether or not such alleged junked vehicle is, in fact, a
junked vehicle under the terms of this article and subject to removal and abatement under the terms of this article. An order requiring the removal
of a vehicle or vehicle part must include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if the
information is available at the site. (1994 Code, sec. 98.43; Ordinance 2011-09 adopted 3/10/11; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 8.07.010 Notice to state department of transportation
Notice of removal shall be given to the state department of transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. The notice must
identify the vehicle or vehicle part. The department shall immediately cancel the certificate of title to the vehicle pursuant to the Certificate of Title
Act, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, chapter 501. (1994 Code, sec. 98.44)
Sec. 8.07.011 Exemptions
This article does not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from
the street or other public or private property, a vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection
with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or an unlicensed operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by a
collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a health
hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means. (1994
Code, sec. 98.45)
Sec. 8.07.012 Removal by city; disposal
If the owner or occupant of the premises on which a junked vehicle is located fails to remove the same within the time and in the manner
provided in section 8.07.006, then it shall be the duty of the chief of police, members of the city police department, or the building official or
designee to remove or cause to be removed the junked vehicle. Any such junked vehicle may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or by
sale to a demolisher for the highest bid or offer received therefor or by removal to any suitable site operated by the city for processing as scrap or
salvage. If no bid or offer is received for the junked vehicle, the city may dispose of the same by causing it to be demolished or removed to a
place provided by the city council or by permitting it to be removed by a demolisher who is willing to do so for the sake of the junk or parts the
demolisher can salvage. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. IX, sec. 6; 1994 Code, sec. 98.46; Ordinance 2011-09 adopted 3/10/11)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/438
Sec. 8.07.013 Enforcement official
This article shall be enforced by a regularly salaried, full-time employee of the city, to be designated from time to time by the city council, except
that the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part from property may be by any duly authorized person. (1994 Code, sec. 98.47)
ARTICLE 8.08 GRAFFITI
Sec. 8.08.001 Definitions
Aerosol paint. An aerosolized paint product.
Etching or engraving device. A device that makes a delineation or impression on tangible property, regardless of the manufacturer's intended use
for the device.
Indelible marker. A device that makes a mark with a paint or ink product that is specifically formulated to be more difficult to erase, wash out, or
remove than ordinary paint or ink products.
(Ordinance 2017-07 adopted 4/11/17)
Sec. 8.08.002 Offense
A person commits an offense if, without the effective consent of the owner, the person intentionally or knowingly makes markings, including
inscriptions, slogans, drawings, or paintings, on the tangible property of the owner with:
(1) Paint, including aerosol paint;
(2) An indelible marker; or
(3) An etching or engraving device.
(Ordinance 2017-07 adopted 4/11/17)
Sec. 8.08.003 Penalty
Any person who violates a provision of this article for which no other specific penalty has been enacted shall be punished as set forth in section
1.01.009 of this code. (Ordinance 2017-07 adopted 4/11/17)
CHAPTER 9
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 9.02 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE*
Sec. 9.02.001 Adopted
The Unified Development Code, Ordinance 2015-30, adopted by the city on October 30, 2015, as amended, is included at the end of this chapter
as exhibit A. Due to the nature of the development code and the technicalities involved in adopting or amending it, such ordinance is printed
herein as enacted, with only nonsubstantive formatting and style changes. Capitalization, punctuation and numbering of articles, sections and
subsections have been retained as enacted. Subsequent amendments will be inserted in their proper place and denoted by a history note
following the amended section. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Any other material added for purposes of
clarification is enclosed in brackets. (Ordinance adopting Code)
EXHIBIT A
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
PART 1
ZONING DISTRICTS AND LAND USES†
ARTICLE 1 ZONING DISTRICTS
Division 1.100 Zoning Districts
Sec. 1.101 Zoning Districts Established
A. Generally. The City of Cuero is divided into the nine zoning districts that are established by Table 1.101A, Zoning Districts Established.
Table 1.101A
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/438
Zoning Districts Established
District
Classification
District Name Symbol District Purpose District
Character
Agriculture Agriculture AG The purpose of the agriculture
district is to provide for new and
existing agricultural uses,
agricultural support uses, and
single-family detached homes on
large lots.
Rural/Natural
Residential (For the
development of new
neighborhoods)
Residential
Estate
R-1 The purpose of the residential
estate district is to provide for the
development of residential
neighborhoods with suburban
character.
Suburban
Residential,
General
R-2 The purpose of the residential
general district is to provide for
residential neighborhoods with
auto-urban character.
Auto-Urban
Residential (For
protecting the
character of existing
neighborhoods or
facilitating
redevelopment)
Neighborhood
Conservation
NC The purpose of the neighborhood
conservation district is to preserve
the integrity of existing
neighborhoods while providing
reasonable opportunities for
improvement and expansion of
existing homes without variances.
See Table 1.101B, below, for more
specificity.
Varies based on
existing
conditions, but
generally Auto-
Urban
Neighborhood
Transition
NT The purpose of the neighborhood
transition district is to protect the
functional character of existing
neighborhoods while facilitating the
transition of the neighborhood
through the combination of lots and
construction of different types of
housing types than in the NC
district. See Table 1.101B, below,
for more specificity.
Nonresidential
(including mixeduse
and public
uses)
Commercial,
General
C-1 The purpose of the commercial
general district is to provide for
general commercial uses. It is the
primary retail and service district
and is generally auto-urban in
character. This district also allows
the development of new multifamily
development.
Auto-Urban
Central
Business District
C-2 The purpose of the central
business district is to provide for
commercial and mixed-use
development within the City's
central business district, i.e.,
“Downtown.” Development within
the central business district is
urban in character, i.e., “buildings
are built to the street and parking is
generally provided on-street or in
public or private parking lots or
parking structures.”
Urban
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/438
Industrial,
General
I-1 The purpose of the industrial
general district is to provide for a
range of industrial uses, regulated
by performance standards to
mitigate their impacts on the
community.
Auto-Urban
Public and
Recreation
PR The purpose of the public and
recreation district is to provide for
public-owned and operated uses
(e.g., governmental and school
buildings and facilities, utility
stations, libraries, cemeteries,
active and passive recreation
parks, public safety complexes,
post offices, etc.). These uses are
oftentimes unique in nature and
scale and thus, not appropriately
placed within any other district.
Some of these uses may be
appropriate in other zoning districts
subject to applicable performance
standards.
Varies
B. Neighborhood Conservation (NC) and Transition (NT) Subdistricts Established. The Neighborhood Conservation (NC) district is divided into
six subdistricts that are established by Table 1.101B, Neighborhood Conservation (NC) and Transition (NT) Subdistricts Established. Any
reference in this UDC to the “NC or NT district” also includes reference to each NC and NT subdistrict.
Table 1.101B
Neighborhood Conservation (NC) and Transition (NT) Subdistricts Established
Subdistrict
Name
General Characteristics Purpose
Neighborhood Conservation Subdistricts
NC-R1 The NC-R1 subdistrict primarily consists of single-family
detached houses on lots that were developed on a
gridded street pattern with 40-foot lot widths and alleys
using the R-1 zoning district that pre-dated the effective
date of this UDC.
The primary purpose of the
neighborhood conservation
subdistricts are to preserve the
existing character of the established
neighborhoods that were developed
under regulations that pre-dated the
effective date of this UDC, while
allowing for the infill of vacant lots,
expansion of existing buildings, or
redevelopment resulting in the same
general character of development.
NC-R2 The NC-R2 subdistrict primarily consists of two-family
single-family attached houses (i.e., duplexes) on lots that
were developed on a gridded street pattern with alleys
using the R-2 zoning district that pre-dated the effective
date of this UDC.
NC-R3 The NC-R3 subdistrict primarily consists of multi-family
houses (i.e., apartments) on lots that were developed on
a gridded street pattern with alleys using the R-3 zoning
district that pre-dated the effective date of this UDC.
NC-R4 The NC-R4 subdistrict primarily consists of single-family
detached houses on lots that were developed on a
gridded street pattern with alleys and with lot widths and
lot size that is larger than those found in the NC-R1
subdistricts using the R-1 zoning district that pre-dated
the effective date of this UDC.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/438
NC-MH The NC-R5 subdistrict primarily consists of
manufactured housing that was developed using the MH
district or manufactured home park provisions that predated
the effective date of this UDC.
Neighborhood Transition Subdistricts
NT-R5 The NT-R5 subdistrict primarily consists of single-family
detached houses on lots that were developed on a
gridded street pattern with 40-foot lot widths and alleys
using the R-1 zoning district that pre-dated the effective
date of this UDC. As these areas redeveloped over time,
the characteristics of this area should transition from an
area of predominantly single-family housing to that of
single-family attached housing.
The primary purpose of the
neighborhood conservation
subdistricts are to use lot
aggregation, replatting, and alternate
forms of housing types (e.g.,
cottages, duplexes, triplexes, and
townhouses) to incentivize new
development, redevelopment, and
substantial improvement of existing
neighborhoods that are in need of
reinvestment.
NT-R6 The NT-R6 subdistrict primarily consists of single-family
detached houses on lots that were developed on a
gridded street pattern with 30-foot lot widths and alleys
using the R-1 zoning district that pre-dated the effective
date of this UDC (although they were nonconforming
lots). As these areas redeveloped over time, the
characteristics of this area should transition from an area
of predominantly single-family housing to that of singlefamily
attached housing.
C. Zoning of Annexed Land. The City may process an application for an initial City zoning designation, or may designate a newly annexed
property's zoning district upon its own initiative, in conjunction with annexation proceedings and the procedures set out in Article 14, Permits and
Procedures. Land that is not zoned otherwise by the City Council during the annexation process is zoned Agriculture (AG) upon annexation until
affirmatively rezoned to another district. Simultaneous processing of the annexation and the zoning change is permitted.
D. Comprehensive Plan Consistency. The zoning districts created by this UDC are intended to implement the Cuero Comprehensive Plan,
which may be amended from time to time. When a lot or parcel is zoned in a manner that is consistent with the Cuero Comprehensive Plan, then
the City Council may find that approvals granted pursuant to the standards of this UDC are consistent with the intent of this adopted plan.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 1.102 Official Zoning Map
A. Generally. Zoning districts are shown on the map entitled “official zoning map” of the City of Cuero, which is attached hereto and made part
of this UDC. At least two copies of the official zoning map are on file and available for inspection during regular business hours at the
Department.
B. Force and Effect. The official zoning map, together with all legends, references, symbols, boundaries, and other information, shall be
adopted as a part of, and concurrent with this UDC.
C. Effective Date. The effective date of a rezoning ordinance shall be the date specified in the ordinance itself, and not the date of revision of
the official zoning map.
D. Status of the Zoning Map. The official zoning map that is on file at the Department shall control in the event of a conflict between the map
that is on file and any other reproduction of the official zoning map.
E. Changes. The City Council may from time to time adopt a new “official zoning map,” which shall supersede the prior zoning map, in the
event that the zoning map becomes damaged or destroyed, for purposes of clarity due to a number of boundary changes, or to correct drafting
errors or omissions. However, such adoption shall not have the effect of amending this UDC or any subsequent amendment thereof.
F. Interpreting the Zoning Map. Where the official zoning map appears to be unclear regarding the location of district boundaries, the Building
Official shall make a determination using the following criteria:
1. Rights-of-Way or Easements. Where boundary lines appear to follow existing streets, alleys, railroad tracks, utility lines, or
similar features, the zoning boundary shall be construed to follow the centerline of the rights-of-way or easement. Where the location
of these features on the ground differs from that shown on the official zoning map, the features on the ground control.
2. Corporate Limits. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following corporate limits, such corporate limits shall
be considered the district boundaries.
3. Section Lines. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following section lines, quarter section lines, or quarterquarter
section lines, such lines shall be considered the district boundaries.
4. Property Lines. Where the boundaries are indicated as approximately following property or other lot lines, such lines shall be
construed to be the boundaries.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/438
5. Waterbodies and Watercourses. Boundaries shown as following, or approximately following, the centerline of drainageways,
streams, waterbodies, or other watercourses, shall be construed as following the channel centerline. In the event of a natural change
in the location of such streams or other watercourses, the zoning district boundary shall be construed as moving with the channel
centerline.
6. Unsubdivided Land or No Identifiable Feature. On unsubdivided land, or where a district boundary follows no identifiable feature,
the location of the boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by applying, in order, the following
rules:
a. Legal Description. The boundary shall be according to the legal description in the ordinance establishing the district
boundaries.
b. Text Dimensions. The boundary shall be located by reference to dimensions shown in the text on the official zoning map, if
any.
c. Map Scale. The boundary shall be located using the map scale appearing on the official zoning map.
G. Conflicts Resolved. In the event of a conflict between the district boundaries on the official zoning map and the zoning of property provided
by a duly enacted rezoning ordinance adopted before the effective date of this UDC, the official zoning map shall control.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
ARTICLE 2 LAND USE
Division 2.100 Permitted, Limited, Conditional, Temporary and Prohibited Uses
Sec. 2.101 Interpretation of the Land Use Tables
A. Generally. Figure 2.101, Illustrative Interpretation of Land Use Tables, illustrates how the land use tables are interpreted.
1. Displayed in Section 2.102, Residential and Commercial Uses of the Home, through Section 2.106, Temporary Uses, are the
tables that set out which uses are permitted, limited, conditional, and prohibited in each zoning district.
2. The tables list uses in white and pink rows (the name of the use is listed in the first column), sometimes organized by category
(brownish-red rows).
Editor's note–As published herein, the tables are printed in black and white.
3. The second column, “Limited and Conditional Use Standards,” refers to the section which provides the use-specific standards
that apply to limited or conditional uses for districts in which the use is limited or conditional.
4. The remaining columns list the zoning districts by category.
5. In the table cells where rows and columns intersect, a letter or symbol indicates if the use is permitted, limited, conditional, or
prohibited in the district.
Figure 2.101
Illustrative Interpretation of Land Use Tables
Example: A person wants to know if Example Use A is allowed on a parcel of land that is located in the CG [C-1] district. The use is listed as “L”
(shown in bold blue type with yellow background [in bold type], below) which means that it is allowed, provided that it meets some additional
standards that are set out in Division 2.200, Limited and Conditional Use Standards (see subsection B for details about the symbols in the
illustration).
Illustrative Land Use Table
P = Permitted Use; L = Limited Use; C = Conditional Use; X = Prohibited Use
Land Use Limited and
Conditional Use
Standards
Zoning Districts
Agriculture Residential Nonresidential
AG R-1 R-2 NC NT C-1 C-2 I-1 PR
A Group of Related Uses Follows
Example Use A A cross reference
will be shown in
Division 2.200,
X X X X X L C C C
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/438
Limited and
Conditional Use
Standards.
Example Use B There is no L or C in
this row, therefore
there is no crossreference
(i.e., N/A).
P P X P P X X X X
TABLE NOTES:
This is where additional regulatory provisions, clarity, or interpretations may be found specific to a row, column, or cell. Table notes are enforceable by the
Building Official.
B. Table Symbology. All the tables use the following symbols:
1. “P” means that the use is Permitted in the specified zoning district. The uses are approved by the Building Official, subject to the
standards of this UDC that apply to all permitted uses.
2. “L” means that the use is allowed as a Limited Use in the specified zoning district. Limited uses are approved by the Building
Official, subject to:
a. The standards for permitted uses that are set out in this UDC; and
b. The applicable use-specific standards set out in Division 2.200, Limited and Conditional Use Standards.
3. “C” means that the use is a Conditional Use in the specified zoning district. Conditional uses are approved by the City Council
after a public hearing, subject to:
a. The standards for permitted uses that are set out in this UDC; and
b. The applicable use-specific standards set out in Division 2.200, Limited and Conditional Use Standards.
4. “X” means that the use is Prohibited in the specified zoning district.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 2.102 Residential and Commercial Uses of the Home
Set out in Table 2.102, Residential and Commercial Uses of the Home, are the residential and commercial uses of the home that are allowed in
each zoning district.
Table 2.102
Residential and Commercial Uses of the Home
P = Permitted Use; L = Limited Use; C = Conditional Use; X = Prohibited Use
Land Use Limited and
Conditional
Use
Standards
Zoning Districts
Agriculture
Residential Nonresidential
AG R-1 R-2 NC NT C-1 C-2 I-1 PR
Residential Uses
Single-Family Detached
- Cottage Sec. 2.202 X X X X L X X X X
- Industrialized Housing Sec. 2.202 L L L L L X X X X
- Single-Family Sec. 2.202 P P P P P L L X X
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/438
Detached
- Manufactured Home Sec. 2.202 L L L L L X X X X
- Manufactured Home
Overlay (MHO) District
Sec. 2.202 X X X C C X X X X
Single-Family Attached
- Duplex Sec. 2.202 X X L L L X X X X
- Triplex Sec. 2.202 X X L X L X X X X
- Townhouse Sec. 2.202 X X L X L X X X X
- Live-Work Unit Sec. 2.202 X X X X X X L X X
Multi-family
- Apartment Sec. 2.202 X X X X X L C X X
Residential Neighborhood Types
Standard Residential
Neighborhood
N/A P P P P P X X X X
Planned Cluster N/A P P P X X X X X X
Mixed-Use N/A X X X X X X L X X
Manufactured Home
Park or Subdivision
N/A C X C L L X X X X
Recreational Vehicle
(RV) Park
N/A C X C L L X X X X
Commercial Use of the Home
Bed and Breakfast Sec. 2.203 X X X C C C C X X
Child-Care, Family
Home
Sec. 2.203 P L L L L L L X X
Child-Care Facility,
Group Home
Sec. 2.203 X C C C C L L X X
Child-Care Facility,
Residential (foster
home/agency foster
home)
N/A P P P P P X P X X
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/438
Child-Care Facility,
Residential (other)
Sec. 2.203 X C C C C L L X X
Home Occupation Sec. 2.202 L L L L L X X X X
TABLE NOTES:
N/A - Not Applicable.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2016-13, sec. 2, adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. 2.103 Institutional, Recreation and Amusement Uses
Set out in Table 2.103, Institutional, Recreation and Amusement Uses, are the institutional or recreation and amusement uses that are allowed in
each zoning district.
Table 2.103
Institutional, Recreation and Amusement Uses
P = Permitted Use; L = Limited Use; C = Conditional Use; X = Prohibited Use
Land Use Limited and
Conditional
Use
Standards
Zoning Districts
Agriculture
Residential Nonresidential
AG R-1 R-2 NC NT C-1 C-2 I-1 PR
Institutional Uses
Assisted Living Facility Sec. 2.204 P L L L L P L X X
Child-Care Facility, Day-
Care
Sec. 2.204 P X X X X L L X X
Hospitals N/A X X X X X P P X X
Medical
Office/Clinic/Medical Lab
Sec. 2.204 X X X X X P P X L
Nursing/Convalescent
Home
Sec. 2.204 P L L L L P P X X
Place of Public Assembly
(event facilities; meeting
halls; fraternal
organizations; places of
worship)
Sec. 2.204 P C C L L P L X L
Schools, Private N/A X X C C C P X X X
Schools, Public Sec. 2.204 X X C C C P X X P
Recreation and Amusement Uses
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/438
Commercial Amusement,
Indoor
N/A X X X X X P P P P
Commercial Amusement,
Outdoor
N/A C X X X X C X X C
Golf Course/Club N/A C C C C X X X X X
Recreation and Fitness,
Indoor
N/A X C C C C P P P P
Recreation and Fitness,
Outdoor
N/A P P P P P P P P P
Sexually Oriented
Business1
N/A X X X X X X X C X
TABLE NOTES:
N/A - Not Applicable
1. See Chapter 111, Amusements, [Article 5.08, Sexually Oriented Businesses] of the Cuero Code of Ordinances
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 2.104 Commercial Uses
Set out in Table 2.104, Commercial Uses, is the commercial uses that are allowed in each zoning district.
Table 2.104
Commercial Uses
P = Permitted Use; L = Limited Use; C = Conditional Use; X = Prohibited Use
Land Use Limited and
Conditional
Use
Standards
Zoning Districts
Agriculture Residential Nonresidential
AG R-1 R-2 NC NT C-
1
C-2 I-1 PR
Commercial Uses
Alcohol Beverage Sales Sec. 2.205 C X X X X C C X C
Animal Grooming Facilities N/A P X X X X P P X X
Animal Boarding or
Veterinarian Services,
Large Animal
Sec. 2.205 P X X X X C X L X
Animal Boarding or
Veterinarian Services,
Small Animal
Sec. 2.205 P X X X X L L L X
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/438
Bar or Nightclub2 Sec. 2.205 X X X X X C C X X
Drive-In, Drive-Through
Facility
Sec. 2.205 X X X X X L L X L
Heavy Retail/Home Center Sec. 2.205 X X X X X L X L X
Mixed-Use Sec. 2.205 X X X X X L L X X
Nursery/Greenhouse,
Retail
Sec. 2.205 P X X X X C X C X
Office, General N/A X X X X X P P X P1
Overnight
Accommodations (hotels,
motels)
N/A X X X X X L L X X
Pawn Shop N/A X X X X X P X X X
Restaurant Sec. 2.205 C X X X X P P P X
Retail Sales and Services Sec. 2.205 X X X X X P P P X
Vehicle Gas or Fueling
Station
Sec. 2.205 C X X X X L X L L1
Vehicle Sales, Rental, and
Service
Sec. 2.205 X X X X X L X L X
Wholesale Sec. 2.205 X X X X X X X P X
TABLE NOTES:
N/A - Not Applicable
1. These allowances are to accommodate functions or actions related to the public provisions of services (e.g., bill payment window at a government office, fuel
pumps or vehicle repair for government vehicles, alcohol sales at government sponsored public events, etc.).
2. See Chapter 110, Alcohol Beverages, [Article 5.03] of the Cuero Code of Ordinances
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 2.105 Agriculture, Industrial, Transportation, Utility and Communication Uses
Set out in Table 2.105, Agriculture, Industrial, Transportation, Utility and Communication Uses, are the agriculture, industrial, transportation,
utility, and communication uses that are allowed in each zoning district.
Table 2.105
Agriculture, Industrial, Transportation, Utility and Communication Uses
P = Permitted Use; L = Limited Use; C = Conditional Use; X = Prohibited Use
Land Use Limited and
Conditional
Use
Standards
Zoning Districts
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/438
Agriculture
Residential Nonresidential
AG R-1 R-2 NC NT C-1 C-2 I-1 PR
Agricultural Uses
Agriculture, General N/A P X X X X X X X X
Nursery/Greenhouse,
Wholesale
N/A P X X X X X X X X
Industrial
Heavy Industry Sec. 2.206 X X X X X X X P X
Light Industry Sec. 2.206 X X X X X X X P X
Mining/Extraction Sec. 2.206 C X X X X X X C X
Oil/Gas Operations Sec. 2.206 C X X X X X X C X
Storage, Self Sec. 2.206 X X X X X L X L X
Storage Yard Sec. 2.206 X X X X X L X L L1
Vehicle Wrecking and
Salvage Yard; Junkyard
Sec. 2.206 X X X X X X X C X
Warehousing and
Logistics
Sec. 2.206 X X X X X X X L X
Waste Transfer Station/
Recycling Collection
Facility
Sec. 2.206 X X X X X X X L L
Transportation Uses
Airport N/A X X X X X X X X P
Helistop Sec. 2.207 C X X X X C C C C
Parking, Stand-Alone Sec. 2.207 X X X X X P L P P
Rail Yard Sec. 2.207 X X X X X X X C X
Utility Uses
Power Generation, Smallscale
(Renewable;
Sec. 2.208 P L L X X L L L P
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/438
Noncombustible)
Power Generation, Utilityscale
Sec. 2.208 X X X X X X X C X
Public Utilities N/A P P P P P P P P P
Wireless Telecommunication Facility (WTF) Uses
WTF, Attached Sec. 2.209 L L L L L L L L L
WTF, Freestanding Non-
Stealth
Sec. 2.209 C X X X X C C C C
WTF, Freestanding Stealth Sec. 2.209 L L L L L L L L L
TABLE NOTES:
N/A - Not Applicable
1. These allowances are to accommodate functions or actions related to the public provisions of services (e.g., conversion or composting of vegetative material
from public property into a usable product for citizen pickup and use, storage of government vehicles and equipment, and government recycling centers, etc.).
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 2.106 Temporary Uses
Set out in Table 2.106, Temporary Uses, are the temporary uses that are allowed in each zoning district.
Table 2.106
Temporary Uses
P = Permitted Use; L = Limited Use; T = Temporary Conditional Use Permit; X = Prohibited Use
Land Use Limited and
Conditional
Use
Standards
Zoning Districts
Agriculture
Residential Nonresidential
AG R-1 R-2 NC NT C-1 C-2 I-1 PR
Commercial Outdoor Sales Events and Public Special Events
Commercial Outdoor
Sales Event
Sec. 2.210 X X X X X L L X X
Public Special Event Sec. 2.210 L or T2 X X X X L or T2 L or T2 X P
Seasonal Sales Sec. 2.210 X X X X X L L X X
Sidewalk Sales Sec. 2.210 X X X X X L L X X
Truckload Sales Sec. 2.210 X X X X X L L X X
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/438
Neighborhood Events
Garage Sales Sec. 2.210 L L L L L L L L L
Neighborhood Special
Event
Sec. 2.210 L or T2 L or T2 L or T2 L or T2 L or T2 L or
T1,2
L or T1,2 X X
Construction, Storage, and Refuse Collection Uses
Asphalt or Concrete
Batching Plant
Sec. 2.210 T X X X X X X T X
Model Home/On-Site
Real Estate Office
Sec. 2.210 X L L X X X X X X
Portable Storage Unit Sec. 2.210 P L L L L L L L L
Temporary Construction
Building
Sec. 2.210 P X X X X L L L L
Temporary Construction
Dumpster
Sec. 2.210 P L L L L L L L L
Temporary Construction
Yard
Sec. 2.210 L X X X X X X L L
TABLE NOTES:
N/A - Not Applicable
1. These allowances are for multi-family or residential uses that may occur as part of a mixed-use development.
2. If the attendance at a public special event or neighborhood special event is expected to be greater than 150 persons, but less than 500 persons, it requires
limited use approval by the Building Official. If the attendance is expected to be greater than 500 persons, it requires a temporary conditional use permit.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 2.107 Prohibited Uses in All Districts
A. Generally. The following uses are prohibited in all areas of the City.
B. Prohibited Uses.
1. Hazardous waste management facility;
2. Internet cafe/sweepstakes;
3. Mobile homes;
4. Rendering plants;
5. Solid waste facility;
6. Disposal of radioactive wastes;
7. All uses that are prohibited by local ordinance, or require the use or sale of materials that are prohibited by local ordinance; and
8. All uses that are prohibited by state or federal law or require the use or sale of materials that are prohibited by state or federal
law.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 2.108 Unlisted or Functionally Similar Uses
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/438
A. Authorization of Proposed Use. If a proposed use is not specified in Section 2.102, Residential and Commercial Use of the Home; Section
2.103, Institutional, Recreation and Amusement Uses; Section 2.104, Commercial Uses; or Section 2.105, Agriculture, Industrial, Transportation,
Utility, and Communication Uses, and the Building Official has made a determination that the use is either a subcategory of a permitted, limited,
or conditional use, or a use that is functionally similar to a permitted, limited, or conditional use, the Building Official will authorize the proposed
use, and apply all standards that would have applied to the similar use.
B. If Not Authorized Then Prohibited. If the Building Official determines that a proposed use is not a subcategory of, or functionally similar to, a
permitted, limited, or conditional use, then the use is a prohibited use.
C. Decision Criteria. The following decision criteria shall be evaluated when the Building Official, or at the Building Official's discretion, the
Planning and Zoning Commission, decides whether a proposed use is a subcategory of, or is functionally comparable to, a permitted, limited, or
conditional use:
1. Parking demand;
2. Average daily and peak hour trip generation (cars and trucks);
3. Impervious surface;
4. Regulated air or water emissions;
5. Noise;
6. Lighting;
7. Dust;
8. Odors;
9. Solid waste generation;
10. Potentially hazardous conditions, such as projectiles leaving the site;
11. Use and storage of hazardous materials;
12. Character of buildings and structures;
13. Nature and impacts of operation; and
14. Hours of operation.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 2.200 Limited and Conditional Use Standards
Sec. 2.201 Limited and Conditional Uses, Generally
A. Timing of Compliance. The standards of this Division apply at the time a limited or conditional use is requested to be established in an
existing or new structure, and when an existing limited or conditional use is proposed to be expanded by more than 10 percent of the existing
square footage currently devoted to the use. This Division applies to an expansion of use whether it is to or within an existing building, in an
outdoor area devoted to the use, or a combination of thereof. This Division also applies to all Temporary Uses as set out in Section 2.210,
Temporary Permitted, Limited, and Temporary Conditional Use Permit Standards.
B. Other Applicable Standards. The standards of this Division are applied in addition to the other applicable standards of this UDC.
C. Procedures. For conditional uses, the procedures set out in Section 14.402, Conditional Use Permits, apply.
D. Uses Not Listed. If there are conditional uses specified in the tables of Division 2.100, Permitted, Limited, Conditional, Temporary and
Prohibited Uses, that are not included in this Division, all applicable standards of this UDC and all conditions of approval that may be determined
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall apply.
E. Limited and Conditional Use Tables. Section 2.202, Residential Limited and Conditional Use Standards, through Section 2.210, Temporary
Permitted, Limited, and Temporary Conditional Use Standards, contain standards that apply to each of the limited and conditional uses. The
tables are interpreted as follows:
1. Use. The first column, “Use,” lists the use to which the standards specified in the same row apply.
2. District. The second column, “District,” lists the district in which the standards specified in the same row apply. This may mean
that different standards apply to the use, depending upon the district in which it is located.
3. Location. The third column, “Location,” specifies where the use may be located (e.g., in the C-2 district, residential is only
allowed above a nonresidential use), or not located (e.g., a child-care family home cannot be located on an arterial street), or certain
minimum spacing (e.g., 600 feet between similar uses), etc.
4. Design. The fourth column, “Design,” specifies the design requirements that are specific to this use.
5. Other Standards. The fifth column, “other,” specifies additional standards that are specific to the use (e.g., operational limitations,
or licensing requirements, etc.).
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 2.202 Residential Limited and Conditional Use Standards
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/438
A. Generally. The standards of this Section apply to residential uses that are set out in Table 2.102, Residential and Commercial Uses of the
Home, as a limited (L) or conditional (C) use, and are subject to the provisions set out in Section 2.201, Limited and Conditional Uses, Generally.
B. Standards. Set out in Table 2.202, Residential Limited and Conditional Use Standards, are the standards that apply to each use.
Table 2.202
Residential Limited and Conditional Use Standards
Use District Location Design Other
Cottage NT N/A N/A See Section 3.201,
Established Neighborhoods
and Section 3.204, Alternate
Neighborhood Transition
Standards.
Industrialized
Housing
AG
R-1
R-2
NC
NT
N/A All single-family detached or
duplex industrial housing
units shall be required to
have similar exterior siding,
roofing, roofing pitch,
foundation fascia,
fenestration, and a value
equal to or greater than the
median taxable value for
each single-family detached
dwelling unit located within
500 feet of the lot on which
the industrialized housing is
proposed to be located, as
determined by the most
recent certified tax appraisal
roll for the county.
A. In addition to application
materials required for all new
housing, the Building Official
shall require the following:
1. A confirmation that the
proposed industrialized
housing unit complies with
the design standards set out
in this subsection.
2. A complete set of designs,
plans, and specifications
bearing a stamp of approval
Texas Industrialized Building
Code Council.
B. To ensure compliance with
designs, plans, and
specifications, the following
on-site inspections are
required by the Building
Official.
1. Confirmation that each
module or modular
component bears an
approved decal or insignia by
the Texas Department of
Licensing and Regulation
signifying that each module
or modular component has
received a post-construction
inspection ensuring
conformance with statemandated
building codes.
2. The construction of the
foundation system; and
3. The erection and
installation of the modules or
modular components on the
foundation.
Manufactured
Home
AG
R-1
R-2
They are located
within a
manufactured home
park or subdivision.
See Section 4.203,
Manufactured Home Park or
Subdivision and Section
10.103, Manufactured Home
Unit Standards.
See Section 4.203,
Manufactured Home Park or
Subdivision and Section
10.103, Manufactured Home
Unit Standards.
NC
NT
The use existed on
the effective date of
this UDC.
N/A See Section 12.107,
Nonconforming
Manufactured Homes.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/438
See also Section
4.205 Manufactured
Home Overlay (MHO)
District.
Multi-Family C-1 They are not located
closer than 200 feet
to NC subdistrict
boundaries, unless
separated from such
subdistrict by a
collector or arterial
street.
Apartments are allowed as
follows:
A. All units are accessed via
interior hallways and
designed and constructed
with a balcony.
B. The apartment building(s)
shall be separated from
nonresidential uses by a
Type B bufferyard or a local
street. See Division 7.300,
Bufferyard Landscaping.
C. The design of the
apartment buildings shall be
in conformance with Section
10.102, Multi-Family Design
Standards.
N/A
C-2 N/A Apartments are allowed as
follows:
A. They are integrated into
mixed-use buildings and
located above the ground
floor.
B. All units are accessed via
interior hallways and
designed and constructed
with a balcony.
C. The design of the
apartment buildings shall be
in conformance with Section
10.102, Multi-Family Design
Standards.
D. Vehicular access to the
units is provided via an alley,
parking structure, or parking
court.
E. Parking is in a parking lot
or parking structure behind
or underneath the building.
N/A
Single-Family
Attached
R-1
R-2
They are not located
closer than 150 feet
to NC subdistrict
boundaries, unless
separated from such
subdistrict by a
collector or arterial
street.
A. Within the allowable
neighborhood types, they are
separated from single-family
detached dwellings by a
Type A bufferyard or a local
street. See Division 7.300,
Bufferyard Landscaping.
B. Townhouses if provided,
are constructed in groups of
not less than four and not
more than six units.
N/A
NT N/A A. Duplexes, if provided, are
limited to side-by-side
duplexes.
B. Townhouses if provided,
are constructed in groups of
seven.
See Section 3.204,
Generalized Standards for
Neighborhood Transition.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/438
C-2 N/A In the C-2 district, live-work
units are the only singlefamily
attached housing type
allowed. The units shall
comply with the following:
A. Each unit must be
designed with an external
appearance as a residence
rather than a commercial
business.
B. Vehicular access to the
units must be provided via
an alley, parking structure, or
parking court.
C. A single unlighted placard
with a maximum size of two
square feet may be affixed
securely and flat against the
street-facing facade of the
dwelling.
D. The area devoted to work
does not exceed 25 percent
of the total habitable area of
the unit.
In the live-work unit,
employees are limited to the
person who owns the
property, or the immediate
family living and working
within the dwelling unit.
Single-Family
Detached
C-1
C-2
The use existed on
the effective date of
this UDC.
N/A N/A
TABLE NOTES:
N/A - Not Applicable.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2016-13, sec. 3, adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. 2.203 Commercial Use of the Home Limited and Conditional Use Standards
A. Generally. The standards of this Section apply to commercial uses of the home that are set out in Table 2.102, Residential and Commercial
Uses of the Home, as a limited (L) or conditional (C) use, and are subject to the provisions set out in Section 2.201, Limited and Conditional
Uses, Generally.
B. Standards. Set out in Table 2.203, Commercial Use of the Home Limited and Conditional Use Standards, are the standards that apply to
each use.
Table 2.203
Commercial Use of the Home Limited and Conditional Use Standards
Use District Location Design Other
Bed & Breakfast
Home or Inn
(overnight
accommodations)
NC
NT
C-1
C-2
On a property that has received
a Bed and Breakfast Home or
Inn Conditional Use Permit
from the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council,
See, Sec. 14.402 Conditional
Use Permits
See Sec. 4.206 Bed and
Breakfast Home or Inn
See Sec. 4.206 Bed and
Breakfast Home or Inn
Child-Care, Family
Home
R-1
R-2
NC
NT
A. Limited to single-family
detached buildings that meet all
of the standards of this UDC.
B. The family home is not
located on an arterial street.
C. There is no other family
home or group home located
A. There is at least 100
square feet of open space
per child, which is entirely
enclosed by a building,
fence, or wall with a height
of at least six feet.
B. Signage will be limited
to a single, non-illuminated
A. The operator for the use
meets all certification,
licensing, and/or monitoring
requirements of the state.
B. No more than one person
other than members of the
immediate family residing in
the dwelling unit will be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/438
on the same street segment
that terminates in a dead-end
or cul-de-sac.
D. The family home is a
minimum of 600 feet from any
other family home and 750 feet
from a group home, measured
along a straight line from the
closest lot lines.
placard or nameplate with
a maximum size of two
square feet that must be
affixed securely and flat
against the street-facing
facade of the dwelling.
C. There is adequate
space on-site for
temporary parking and
drop-off and pickup during
peak times.
employed on the site of the
home-based business.
C-1
C-2
In addition to the requirements
for R-1, R-2, NC, and NT
districts (above), family homes
in nonresidential districts are
limited to single-family
detached dwellings that existed
on the effective date of this
UDC.
Same as R-1, R-2, NC,
and NT provisions above.
Same as R-1, R-2, NC, and
NT provisions above.
Child-Care Facility,
Group Home or Child-
Care Facility,
Residential (other)
R-1
R-2
NC
NT
C-1
C-2
Same provisions as for childcare,
family home, except that
a child-care facility, group home
shall be located a minimum of
1,000 feet from any other group
home and 750 feet from a
family home, measured along a
straight line from the closest lot
lines.
Same provisions as for a
child-care, family home,
above.
Same provisions as for a childcare,
family home, above.
Home Occupation R-1
R-2
NC
NT
C-2
N/A A. There is no exterior
indication of the home
occupation, except that a
single unlighted placard
with a maximum size of
two square feet may be
affixed securely and flat
against the street-facing
facade of the dwelling.
B. No entrance is
specifically dedicated for
the home occupation,
unless otherwise required
by law.
C. No external alterations
or construction or
reconstruction of the
dwelling unit on the lot to
accommodate the home
occupation is permitted.
D. Not more than 25
percent of the gross floor
area of the dwelling unit, or
400 square feet, whichever
is less, shall be devoted to
a home occupation,
excluding the floor area of
an attached or detached
garage or an accessory
dwelling unit. The
maximum floor area shall
apply to any accessory
buildings or structures
used as part of the home
occupation.
A. The home occupation shall
be owned and operated by the
person, or the immediate
family, living and working
within the dwelling unit.
B. The home occupation shall
be carried on wholly within the
principal dwelling unit or in an
accessory building or
structure.
C. There shall be no outdoor
display or storage of goods,
materials, merchandise, or
equipment related to the home
occupation that is visible from
the exterior of the dwelling
unit.
D. The home occupation will
not create or cause any
perceptible noise, odor,
smoke, heat, dust, electrical
interference, or vibrations that
constitute a public or private
nuisance to neighboring
properties.
E. The home occupation shall
not create any increase in
vehicular flow or parking by
more than two additional
vehicles at a time and shall not
create greater pedestrian
traffic than normal for the
district.
F. Home occupations are not
allowed in multi-family dwelling
units.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/438
G. The following home
occupations are prohibited:
1. Child-care facilities with
greater than 10 children;
2. Vehicle sales, repair, or
service, including painting of
vehicles and boats; and
3. Private schools.
TABLE NOTE:
N/A - Not Applicable
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2016-25, sec. 3, adopted 1/11/17)
Sec. 2.204 Institutional Limited and Conditional Use Standards
A. Generally. The standards of this Section apply to institutional uses that are set out in Table 2.103, Institutional, Recreation and Amusement
Uses, as a limited (L) or conditional (C) use, and are subject to the provisions set out in Section 2.201, Limited and Conditional Uses, Generally.
B. Standards. Set out in Table 2.204, Institutional Limited and Conditional Use Standards, are the standards that apply to each use.
Table 2.204
Institutional Limited and Conditional Use Standards
Use District Location Design Other
Assisted Living
Facility
R-1
R-2
NC
NT
C-2
Assisted living facility
uses are allowed in
the R-1, R-2, NC, NT,
and C-2 districts only
as an accessory use
of a place of public
assembly that is in
conformance with all
the provisions of this
UDC.
N/A The operator for the use
meets all certification,
licensing, and/or
monitoring requirements of
the state.
Child-Care
Facility, Day-
Care
C-1
C-2
N/A A. The facility shall be located
on and have access to a
collector or arterial street.
B. The facility shall have at
least one building entrance
dedicated solely for its use.
C. Outdoor activities shall be:
1. Located a minimum of 100
feet from any residentially
used or zoned property
(measured along a straight
line from the closest lot lines)
or separated by a Type B
bufferyard or other one-story
buildings (if child-care center
is located on the interior of a
multi-tenant complex);
2. Screened by a secure
masonry wall, fence, or
evergreen hedge no less than
five feet in height and
maintained in good condition;
and
3. Used only between the
hours of 7:30 AM and 6:00
PM.
The operator for the use
meets all certification,
licensing, and/or
monitoring requirements of
the state.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/438
Medical
Office/Clinic/
Medical Lab
PR N/A N/A Medical offices, clinics,
and medical labs that are
operated by a
governmental entity (e.g.,
Cuero-DeWitt County
Health Department) are
allowed in the PR district.
Nursing/
Convalescent
Home
R-1
R-2
NC
NT
C-2
Nursing/convalescent
home facility uses are
allowed in the R-1, R-
2, NC, NT, and C-2
districts only as an
accessory use of a
place of public
assembly that is in
conformance with all
the provisions of this
UDC.
N/A The operator for the use
meets all certification,
licensing, and/or
monitoring requirements of
the state.
Place of Public
Assembly
R-1
R-2
N/A A. The use has a minimum
site area that is three times
the minimum lot size of the
respective district.
B. The parcel proposed for
development is located along
and arterial or collector street.
C. Parking shall be:
1. provided on-site without
requiring parking on
contiguous or noncontiguous
parcels.
2. conducted so that it does
not create parking or traffic
congestion or otherwise
unreasonably interfere with
the peace and enjoyment of
surrounding homes as places
of residence.
N/A
NC
NT
The use existed as a
place of public
assembly on the
effective date of this
UDC.
The parcel proposed for
development is located along
and [an] arterial or collector
street.
The existing use may be
expanded on-site or to
abutting lots if:
A. The expansion will allow
the use to take access
from an arterial or collector
street;
B. The owner of the
property also owned the
abutting lot onto which the
expansion is proposed on
the effective date of this
UDC.
C. The expansion will
involve the installation of a
Type B bufferyard between
the use and abutting
residential uses, unless an
equivalent buffer is already
provided. See Division
7.300, Bufferyard
Landscaping.
C-2 N/A Parking shall be:
A. Be accommodated through
on-lot, on-street, or private off-
N/A
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/438
street parking (via ownership
or private agreements) within
300 feet of the place of public
assembly; and
B. Not place material
demands upon the on-street
or public parking during peak
demand hours for retail,
restaurant, and other
commercial uses.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 2.205 Commercial Limited and Conditional Use Standards
A. Generally. The standards of this Section apply to commercial uses that are set out in Table 2.104, Commercial Uses, as a limited (L) or
conditional (C) use, and are subject to the provisions set out in Section 2.201, Limited and Conditional Uses, Generally.
B. Standards. Set out in Table 2.205, Commercial Limited and Conditional Use Standards, are the standards that apply to each use.
Table 2.205
Commercial Limited and Conditional Use Standards
Use District Location Design Other
Animal Boarding
and Veterinarian
Services, Large
Animal
C-1 No boarding facility
or dog runs shall
be located within
100 feet from any
lot line or within
300 feet of any
type of public or
private school,
child-care facility,
or public park
(except a dog
park).
A. The use is conducted within a
fully enclosed building, which is
designed with noise resistant
materials. Plans and
specifications for noise reduction
materials shall be approved by
the City through the site plan
approval process.
B. There will be no outdoor
livestock pens.
N/A
I-1
Outdoor livestock pens:
A. Will be screened by a Type C
bufferyard around the facilities or
at the property lines so as to
prevent distracting or exciting the
animals; and
B. Shall be set back at least 50
feet from all lot lines and are
allowed only to the rear of the
use, provided that the abutting
property is zoned AG, C-1, or I-1.
Animal Boarding
and Veterinarian
Services, Small
Animal
C-2 No boarding facility
or dog runs shall
be located within
100 feet from any
lot line or within
300 feet of any
type of public or
private school,
child-care facility,
or public park
(except a dog
park).
The use is conducted within a
fully enclosed building, which is
designed with noise resistant
materials. Plans and
specifications for noise reduction
materials shall be approved by
the City through the site plan
approval process.
No livestock or large
animals will be boarded,
treated, or kept on the
premises.
C-1
I-1
Outdoor dog runs and animal
exercise areas will be screened
by a Type C bufferyard around
the facilities or at the property
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/438
lines so as to prevent distracting
or exciting the animals. See
Division 7.300, Bufferyard
Landscaping.
Drive-In, Drive-
Through Facility
C-1
C-2
A. Drive-in, drivethrough
facilities
are permitted only
as an accessory
use to a principal
use (e.g.,
restaurant or
bank).
B. The facility shall
take access from
an arterial or
collector street.
A. The drive-in, drive-through
facility shall not be located within
the front yard.
B. Ordering stations facing
abutting residentially zoned or
used property shall be buffered
with a 5 to 6 foot high masonry
wall and landscaping.
N/A
PR N/A
Drive-in and drivethrough
uses are
allowed to
accommodate functions
or actions related to the
public provisions of
services (e.g., bill
payment window at a
government office, etc.).
Heavy Retail/ Home
Center
C-1 The facility shall
take access from
an arterial or
collector street.
Outdoor display areas:
A. Cannot be larger than 30
percent of the footprint of the
principal building.
B. Must be enclosed by a
structure that screens the
merchandise.
C. The display of goods,
materials, and merchandise will
not be in parking areas or reduce
the minimum required parking or
loading for the use.
N/A
I-1 N/A A. The use involves the sale of a
single category of merchandise
and is characterized by one or
more of the following:
1. Outdoor displays that are
larger in area than the footprint of
the principal building;
2. The sale of goods that are
manufactured on-site.
B. Permitted examples include:
1. Permanent retail operations
that are located outside of
enclosed buildings;
2. Lumber and other building
materials; or
3. Lawn, garden equipment, and
related supplies stores.
C. Prohibited examples include:
warehouse clubs, super stores,
and home centers.
N/A
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/438
Overnight
Accommodations
(hotels, motels)
C-1
C-2
The minimum area
of the parcel
proposed for
development is
three acres.
N/A N/A
Vehicle Gas or
Fueling Station
AG
C-1
I-1
N/A The use shall not be located
within:
A. the 100-year or 500-year
floodplain.
B. 200 feet of a wetland,
waterbody (except detention or
retention with treatment), or
permitted potable water well.
N/A
PR N/A
The use is allowed to
accommodate functions
or actions related to the
public provisions of
services (e.g., fuel
pumps or vehicle repair
for government
vehicles, etc.)
Vehicle Sales,
Rental, and Service
C-1
I-1
N/A A. All outdoor display areas for
rental or sales of vehicles shall:
1. Be located on an approved
hard surface;
2. Be located in areas that are
outside of the minimum required
parking spaces for the use;
3. Be located outside of the rightof-
way; and
4. Include no more than one
elevated display which raises the
vehicle no more than three feet
off the ground.
B. Accessory uses and
structures, such as vehicle wash
facilities and their incidental
functions (e.g., vacuums and air
compressors) are set back a
minimum distance of 50 feet from
all rear and side yards of
residentially zoned or used
property and public rights-of-way.
N/A
TABLE NOTE:
N/A - Not Applicable
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 2.206 Industrial Limited and Conditional Use Standards
A. Generally. The standards of this Section apply to industrial uses that are set out in Table 2.105, Agriculture, Industrial, Transportation, Utility
and Communication Uses, as a limited (L) or conditional (C) use, and are subject to the provisions set out in Section 2.201, Limited and
Conditional Uses, Generally.
B. Standards. Set out in Table 2.206, Industrial Limited and Conditional Use Standards, are the standards that apply to each use.
Table 2.206
Industrial Limited and Conditional Use Standards
Use District Location Design Other
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/438
Heavy
Industry
I-1 The use shall be spaced,
measured along a straight
line from the closest lot
lines from residentially
zoned or used property,
places of public assembly,
child-care facilities,
hospitals, private and
public schools, at least:
A. 300 feet, if the area of
the use is 7,500 sf or less,
unless the use involves a
material risk of explosion
or toxic air emissions;
B. 1,000 feet, if the area of
the use is larger than
7,500 sf or the use
involves a material risk of
explosion or toxic air
emissions.
Outdoor storage areas are
located at least 150 feet
from arterial streets or
buffered from such streets
by a Type C bufferyard.
N/A
Mining/
Extraction
AG
I-1
A. The use shall be
spaced, measured along a
straight line from the
closest lot lines, from
residentially zoned or
used property, places of
public assembly, childcare
facilities, hospitals,
private and public schools,
colleges, universities, and
vo-tech at least 1,000 feet.
B. Extraction uses are
prohibited in areas that
are within a cone of
influence around a
wellhead.
A. The use shall be
surrounded by a Type C
bufferyard, except at points
of ingress and egress. The
bufferyard shall include a
berm. Noise studies shall be
conducted to establish the
minimum required berm
height, based on the
equipment operated at the
site. The berm shall ensure
that noise is not generated
at a level greater than 55
dBA at the lot line.
B. Any processing which
results in waste materials
shall provide information
about the pollution potential
of the waste materials. The
City shall deny any plans
that have a substantial risk
of polluting ground or
surface waters due residual
or waste materials from
extraction.
Extraction uses shall restrict
hours of operation to 7:00
AM to 6:00 PM, weekdays.
Oil/Gas
Operations
AG
I-1
N/A The use (including drilling)
shall be surrounded by a
Type C bufferyard, which
shall be sufficient to screen
operations within 45 days of
production.
See Chapter 153, Oil and
Natural Gas Well Drilling
and Operations, [Article
5.09] of the Cuero Code of
Ordinances.
Storage, Self C-1
I-1
The minimum size of a
self-storage facility is one
acre.
A. No storage buildings may
open into required front
yards adjacent to public
street right-of-way or any
abutting district.
B. All driveways within the
facility shall provide an
improved hard surface with
a minimum width of 30 feet.
C. Fencing and gates will be
constructed of decorative
metal. Barbed wire and
chain-link fencing will not be
A. Activities within the
facility shall be limited to the
rental of storage cubicles or
garages and the
administration and
maintenance of the facility.
B. All storage must be within
enclosed buildings and shall
not include the storage of
hazardous materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/438
installed, unless not visible
from any property line.
D. The use shall be
surrounded by a Type C
bufferyard, except at points
of ingress and egress.
Storage Yard C-1
I-1
N/A The storage yard shall be
enclosed by a Type A
bufferyard that includes a
fence to provide security,
provided, however, that the
bufferyard requirements set
out in Division 7.300,
Bufferyard Landscaping,
may require a more
restrictive bufferyard.
A. Storage yards shall only
be used to store operable
equipment and construction
materials.
B. Liquids, gels, and pastes
(e.g., paints, sealers, etc.)
shall be stored only in
enclosed buildings.
C. Storage yards shall not
be used to dispose of
inoperable machines or
wastes. Temporary storage
of construction wastes
generated by the contractor
who operates the storage
yard is permitted.
D. C-1 District: Parking of
trucks shall be limited to
vehicles of not over one and
one-half ton capacity.
Vehicle
Wrecking and
Salvage Yard;
Junkyard
I-1 The use shall have access
to an arterial or collector
street.
The use shall be enclosed
on all sides by a Type C
bufferyard that includes a
structure.
Wrecked cars shall not be
stacked such that they are
visible from lot lines or
public rights-of-way.
Warehousing
and Logistics
I-1 The use is not allowed on
property that is located
within 300 feet of any
residentially zoned or
used property, measured
along a straight line from
the closest lot lines.
Loading bays shall be
located behind the principal
building unless it is
demonstrated that:
A. Front-facing bays would
have less impact on the
function of the surrounding
land uses; and
B. The front property line is
buffered with a Type A
bufferyard.
The use does not involve
hazardous materials or
wastes.
Waste
Transfer
Station/
Recycling
Collection
Facility
I-1 The use shall be located
so that its truck traffic can
access a paved arterial
street without need to use
a local road that traverses
a residential district.
The use shall be enclosed
by a Type A bufferyard that
includes a fence to provide
security, provided, however,
that the bufferyard
requirements set out in
Division 7.300, Bufferyard
Landscaping, may require a
more restrictive bufferyard.
The applicant shall
demonstrate compliance
with any state regulation
based on the type and scale
of facility proposed.
PR N/A
The use is allowed to
accommodate functions or
actions related to the public
provisions of services (e.g.,
recycling drop-off centers,
etc.).
TABLE NOTE:
N/A - Not Applicable
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/438
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 2.207 Transportation Limited and Conditional Use Standards
A. Generally. The standards of this Section apply to transportation uses that are set out in Table 2.105, Agriculture, Industrial, Transportation,
Utility and Communication Uses, as a limited (L) or conditional (C) use, and are subject to the provisions set out in Section 2.201, Limited and
Conditional Uses, Generally.
B. Standards. Set out in Table 2.207, Transportation Limited and Conditional Use Standards, are the standards that apply to each use.
Table 2.207
Transportation Limited and Conditional Use Standards
Use District Location Design Other
Helistop AG
C-1
C-2
I-1
PR
A. In general, helistops
that are located on
platforms or buildings,
but are closer than 48
feet to ground level shall
be spaced:
1. At least 500 feet
(horizontal distance) from
single-family detached
and single-family
attached residential uses
and all types of public
and private schools.
2. At least 300 feet
(horizontal distance) from
multi-family uses.
B. Helistops that are
anticipated to conduct
more than two flight
operations per day shall
add 100 feet to each of
the spacing requirements
set out in subsection 1.a.
[sic], above.
A. Helistops shall be
designed according to the
applicable design standards
set out in U.S. Department
of Transportation Advisory
Circular No. 150/5390-2C,
dated April 24, 2012, as
may be amended or
supplemented from time to
time; and shall meet all
Federal Aviation
Administration
requirements. Compliance
with these standards shall
be demonstrated to the City.
B. In general, helistops shall
be set back 250 feet from lot
lines. Setbacks shall be
increased if necessary to
accommodate all required
safety zones on the parcel
proposed for development.
A. Applications for
construction of a heliport or
helistop shall include a
determination by the Federal
Aviation Administration of
“no objection” or
“conditional,” pursuant to 14
CFR Section 157.7, FAA
Determinations. If the
determination is
“conditional,” then the
applicant shall demonstrate
how the conditions will be
met.
B. In the interest of public
safety, police stations, fire
stations, hospitals, and
trauma centers may be
developed with an
accessory helistop, subject
to the design standards of
this subsection (at left).
C. Nothing in this subsection
shall be construed to prohibit
or limit the ability of an
emergency services
helicopter from landing or
taking off as part of an
emergency response or for
special events normally
associated with the use of
helicopters.
Parking, Stand-
Alone
C-2 N/A Stand-alone parking lots in
the C-2 district shall be:
A. Structured; or
B. Not larger than 30
spaces, and are:
1. Accessed from alleys; or
2. Spaced from each other
so that there is not more
than one parking lot per
block.
C. This does not apply to
City-owned, maintained,
and managed parking lots.
They are an existing use on
the effective date of this
UDC.
TABLE NOTE:
N/A - Not Applicable
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/438
Sec. 2.208 Utility Limited and Conditional Use Standards
A. Generally. The standards of this Section apply to utility uses that are set out in Table 2.105, Agriculture, Industrial, Transportation, Utility
and Communication Uses, as a limited (L) or conditional (C) use, and are subject to the provisions set out in Section 2.201, Limited and
Conditional Uses, Generally.
B. Standards. Set out in Table 2.208, Utility Limited and Conditional Use Standards, are the standards that apply to each use.
Table 2.208
Utility Limited and Conditional Use Standards
Use District Location Design Other
Power Generation,
Small-scale
(Renewable;
Noncombustible)
R-1
R-2
A. Residential Developments.
1. The use must be located in an area
that is:
a. 10 acres or less in size (which may
include up to 10 percent of the area
of required open space);
b. Owned by the property owners'
association; and
2. The system must be provided for
the benefit of the property owners
who are members of the association.
B. Nonresidential and Mixed Uses.
Rooftops, covered walkways, and
covered parking spaces on parcels
used for nonresidential purposes may
be used for small scale power
generation with solar arrays.
N/A All small-scale power
generation facilities
must be gridconnected.
C-1
C-2
Small scale power generation using
solar arrays is allowed in the C-1 and
C-2 districts on rooftops, covered
walkways, and covered parking
spaces.
N/A
I-1 Small scale power generation using
solar arrays is allowed in the I-1
district:
A. On rooftops, covered walkways,
and covered parking spaces; and
B. On ground-mounts, provided that
the facility is set back 100 feet from
arterial rights-of-way or a Type B or
higher (more opaque) bufferyard
and/or buildings screens the facility
from arterial rights-of-way. See
Division 7.300, Bufferyard
Landscaping.
N/A
Power Generation,
Utility-scale
(Renewable;
Noncombustible)
C-1 The use is allowed if the power is
generated by solar arrays that are
mounted on nonresidential rooftops
and/or over parking spaces.
N/A N/A
TABLE NOTE:
N/A - Not Applicable
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 2.209 Communication Limited and Conditional Use Standards
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/438
A. Generally. The standards of this Section apply to communication uses that are set out in Table 2.105, Agriculture, Industrial, Transportation,
Utility and Communication Uses, as a limited (L) or conditional (C) use, and are subject to the provisions set out in Section 2.201, Limited and
Conditional Uses, Generally.
B. Locations.
1. Stealth Freestanding Communications Facilities. Stealth freestanding communications facilities are permitted in all districts if it is
demonstrated that the principal use of the property is a multi-family, institutional, or other nonresidential use.
2. Non-Stealth Freestanding Communications Facilities. Non-stealth freestanding communications facilities are permitted in the AG,
C-1, C-2, I-1, and PR districts if it is demonstrated that the carrier has reasonably explored the use of co-locating on existing
communications facilities within a one-mile radius of the proposed site and determined that said facilities are not feasible or
appropriate, and justification of the need for the proposed freestanding facility and the height of the facility is provided.
3. Attached Communications Facilities. Attached communication facilities shall only be permitted on commercial, industrial,
agricultural, multi-family, institutional, or publicly owned buildings, or public utility structures.
C. Design and Landscaping Standards. The following design and landscaping standards apply to all wireless telecommunications facilities.
1. Requirements for All Facilities.
a. Facilities shall be located and designed to be compatible and blend in with surrounding buildings and existing or planned
uses in the area. This may be accomplished through the use of compatible architectural elements such as materials, color,
texture, scale and character.
b. All ground based equipment must be screened by a solid fence or screen wall six feet in height and surrounded by a Type
B bufferyard around the perimeter of the lease area pursuant to Division 7.300, Bufferyard Landscaping. This requirement shall
be waived in areas where buildings or other structures provide the same or better screening effect. Existing landscaping
adjacent to the perimeter of the lease area may be applied towards the minimum planting requirements provided that the plant
material meets the requirements of Section 7.104, Selection of Plant Material.
c. All ground-based equipment shall meet the setbacks applicable to principal structures in the zoning district, unless an
alternative setback is established for a stealth freestanding facility per this Section.
d. The use of any portion of a wireless telecommunications facility for signs, with the exception of safety, identification, and
notification information as may be required by the FCC or other governmental authority, is prohibited.
e. Security lighting may be provided to the extent that it does not substantially affect abutting properties in an adverse
manner. Artificial lighting mounted on freestanding facilities shall be limited to mandatory safety lighting required by federal
aviation authorities or other authorities with jurisdiction over communication structures.
f. Facilities are permitted within the public right-of-way, subject to the execution of a lease agreement with the City (or other
applicable jurisdiction) and is co-located on a traffic light pole, streetlight standard, or other vertical infrastructure is encouraged.
g. All new wireless telecommunications facilities shall be designed structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to
accommodate both the applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least two additional users if the tower is more than
100 feet in height and for at least one additional user if the tower is more than 60 feet in height but less than 100 feet in height.
The tower owner shall allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and
conditions for shared use. The conditions and terms for shared use shall be submitted to the City. If the land for the tower is
leased, a copy of the relevant portions of a signed lease allowing the tower owner to add additional users and associated
facilities on the tower shall be submitted at the time of application to the City for tower erection.
2. Additional Requirements for Attached Facilities.
a. Where possible, attached facilities shall be disguised as an architectural feature or design element of a building, provided
that the feature is compatible in terms of architectural style, height, mass, scale, and color and reasonably screens the facility
from ground level view.
b. Roof-mounted facilities (the antenna, together with antenna support structures and screening) shall not project more than
10 feet higher than the roof line of a building and can exceed the maximum height limitations of the zoning district by the same.
c. Facade mounted facilities (antenna mounted on the side of a building) may not extend above the parapet wall, or, in the
case of a pitched roof, above the fascia.
3. Additional Requirements for Freestanding Facilities.
a. Setbacks.
i. Towers shall be sited within the rear yard unless located on a vacant lot or parcel.
ii. The height of the tower shall be measured from the floor of the base pad to the top of the tower.
iii. Setback requirements shall be measured from the base of the tower to the nearest boundary line of the tract of land
on which it is located.
iv. Monopole type towers shall provide a minimum setback in excess of 10 percent of the tower's designed fail area.
v. Guyed and lattice type towers shall provide a minimum setback in excess of 25 percent of the tower's designed fail
area.
b. Height. No tower shall exceed 200 feet in height.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/438
c. Separation. New towers shall meet the following minimum separation requirements from other towers:
i. Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other towers whether monopole, self-supporting lattice, or
guyed towers by a minimum of 750 feet.
ii. Self-supporting lattice or guyed towers shall be separated from all other self-supporting lattice or guyed towers by a
minimum of 1,500 feet.
d. Notice. New towers that exceed the maximum height of the zoning district require notification to the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) due to the proximity of the Cuero Municipal Airport.
D. Submittal Requirements. All of the following documentation shall be provided for all proposed wireless telecommunications facilities:
1. Site Plan. A site plan showing:
a. The location and legal description of the site;
b. On-site land uses and zoning;
c. Adjacent roadways;
d. Parking and access;
e. Areas of vegetation and landscaping to be added;
f. Setbacks from property lines; and
g. The location of the facility, including all related improvements and equipment.
2. Vicinity Map. A vicinity map showing abutting properties, land uses, zoning and roadways within one mile of a proposed wireless
telecommunication facility.
3. Elevation Drawings. Elevation drawings of the proposed facility showing all antennas, towers, tower heights, structures, existing
buildings, walls and/or roofs on which antennas are mounted, equipment buildings/cabinets, fencing, screening, lighting and other
improvements related to the facility showing specific materials, placement and colors.
4. Technical Report. A narrative report describing the facility and the technical, economic, and other reasons for its design and
location, the need for the facility and its role in the network, and describing the capacity of the structure, including the number and
type of antennas it can accommodate.
5. Coverage Map. A coverage map and a survey of existing towers including type and location and a statement to demonstrate the
need for the new tower and supporting documentation as to why co-location is not possible on an existing tower in the area.
6. Co-Location Statement. A letter of intent to allow co-location on the antenna support structure.
7. Removal Statement. A letter of intent to remove the facility at the expense of the facility operator and/or property owner if it is
abandoned.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 2.210 Temporary Permitted, Limited, and Temporary Conditional Use Standards
A. Generally. The standards of this Section apply to temporary uses as set out in this Section.
B. Standards for All Temporary Uses. All temporary uses, unless exempted in subsection B.1., below, shall be reviewed for compliance with
the following criteria:
1. Exemptions.
a. Special events in athletic stadiums and City parks;
b. City-sponsored Farmers' Market or other special events held within the public rights-of-way or on City-owned property;
c. Garage sales, although garage sales shall comply with subsection C., below;
d. Portable storage units, although portable storage uses shall comply with subsection C., below; or
e. Public special events where the expected attendance is less than 150 persons.
2. Temporary Use Permit. A temporary use permit, as set out in Section 14.304 [14.302E], Temporary Use Permit, is required for all
temporary uses, unless exempted.
3. Traffic Circulation.
a. The temporary use shall have adequate sight distances for safe vehicular ingress and egress in conformance with the
corner clearance standards set out in Section 5.302 [sic], Access Spacing and Corner Clearance.
b. If deemed necessary by the Building Official, property access shall be controlled by special traffic personnel paid for by the
applicant. Prior to receiving a permit, the applicant must provide written communication from the Police Department indicating
adequate provisions have been made.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/438
4. Public Convenience and Litter Control. Temporary uses that generate litter shall comply with the following:
a. Adequate on-site restroom facilities shall be required to serve the expected attendance at the event at a rate of one toilet
and one urinal per 50 expected attendees.
b. Trash containers and recycling bins shall be placed in convenient areas including:
i. Near principal places of assembly;
ii. Near food and beverage vendors;
iii. Near restrooms; and
iv. At entry and exit points.
c. All litter generated by the event shall be removed, at no expense to the City, within 12 hours after the closing on the last day
of the event. Litter cleanup shall extend into the adjoining public rights-of-way.
5. Signs.
a. A sign permit is not required; however, the Building Official shall review and approve all signage. The Building Official may
approve signs up to 50 percent larger than would be permitted in Article 9, Signs, and may also approve attention-getting
devices such as flags. The number, type, and size of signs and attention-getting devices shall be determined using the following
criteria:
i. The need for obvious way-finding information, based on the location of the event and its likelihood of attracting visitors
who are unfamiliar with the area, who may lose their way or become confused if signs are limited to the sign area
otherwise allowed by this UDC.
ii. The type, length, and scale of the proposed event or use.
iii. Sight distances, other signage in the area or on the property, sidewalks, traffic volumes, and travel speed of the street
upon which the signage is proposed to be posted.
iv. Other lighting in area, neighboring uses, ambient light intensity, and glare potential.
v. Logical travel routes to the site.
b. All signs shall be removed when the event ends.
6. Standards. All temporary uses shall comply with the applicable standards as set out in subsection C., Standards for Specific
Temporary Uses.
7. Additional Conditions. The Building Official, in coordination with other City staff or officials as may be necessary, may establish
additional conditions that are desirable to ensure land use compatibility or minimize potential adverse impacts on neighboring
properties, public streets, or the City as a whole. These may include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Modification or restrictions on hours of operation or duration of the event.
b. Posting of a performance bond to ensure cleanup and removal of signage.
c. Arrangements satisfactory to the City for the provision of special or extraordinary services or equipment, such as traffic
control or security personnel, or equipment that is needed to ensure safe operation of the use or event. This may also include
liability insurance.
d. The Building Official may refuse to issue a permit if the event is too large to be safe for the site, neighborhood, street, or
other infrastructure, or may place limits on attendance to ensure it can be properly managed.
C. Standards for Specific Temporary Uses. Temporary uses specified in Table 2.106, Temporary Uses, as a limited use (L) or as a temporary
conditional use permit (T), are subject to the standards of Table 2.210A, Limited and Conditional Use Standards for Specific Temporary Uses, in
addition to the other applicable provisions of this UDC.
Table 2.210A
Limited and Conditional Use Standards for Specific Temporary Uses
Temporary Use Location of Use Hours of Use Operational Limitations Duration of Use
Commercial Outdoor Sales Events and Public Special Events
Commercial Outdoor
Sales Events;
Seasonal Sales;
Sidewalk Sales;
Truckload Sales
In all districts: Allowed
only as an accessory use
to the principal
commercial or retail use
and in areas designated
on the approved site plan
In the C-2 district: The
hours of use are limited
to the normal hours of
operation for
commercial or retail
businesses.
In all districts: All events
shall occur on an
improved hard surface.
The area used for sale of
merchandise shall not
exceed more than 10
percent of the parking lot
See subsection D.,
Frequency and Duration
of Commercial Outdoor
Sales Events of this
Section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/438
of the temporary use
permit.
In the Central Business
District (C-2): All events
shall occur on-site or on
the public or private
sidewalk.
In all other nonresidential
districts: All events shall
be located at least 10 ft.
from public rights-of-way,
25 ft. from residentially
zoned or used lots or
parcels.
In all other
nonresidential districts:
The hours of use are
limited to the normal
hours of operation of
the principal
commercial or retail
use on the lot or parcel.
In all residential
districts: The hours of
use are limited to 7:00
AM to 8:00 PM.
(if applicable) and there
shall be at least four ft.
of unobstructed sidewalk
width during any
sidewalk sales event.
Public Special Events The size of the site shall
be large enough to
accommodate the
expected attendance in a
manner that is safe for
the site, neighborhood,
street, or other
infrastructure.
In accordance with the
temporary use permit
approval.
The Building Official
shall review electric and
lighting facilities for
electrical code
compliance and
compliance with the
standards for lighting set
out in Division 5.300,
Lighting, prior to issuing
a temporary use permit
for the special event.
Shall not be held on a lot
or parcel more than two
times per calendar year,
and shall be limited to no
more than four
consecutive days, not
including set-up and teardown,
unless approved by
the Building Official.
Neighborhood Events
Garage Sales On lot or parcel set back
at least 10 ft. from all lot
lines.
7:00 AM to 8:00 PM. The type and quantity of
merchandise that may
be sold is limited to that
normally found in a
residential household. All
garage sale signs shall
be removed when the
garage sale ends.
See Chapter 101, Garage
Sales, [Article 5.02] of the
Cuero Code or
Ordinances.
Neighborhood Special
Events
Neighborhood special events or community garage sales that involve a consolidation of merchandise and
sale from a common area or open space (rather than from an individual home), shall meet the standards
set out in Commercial Outdoor Sales Events and Public Special Events subsection, above.
Bed and Breakfast Home – Special Event Permit
Private events for
groups of 20 persons
or more pursuant to
Sec. 2.210, Temporary
Permitted, Limited, and
Temporary Conditional
Use Standards
On a property that has
received a Bed and
Breakfast Home
Conditional Use Permit
from the Planning and
Zoning Commission and
City Council, See Sec.
14.402, Conditional Use
Permits.
Determined by the
Building Official under
the conditions of a
Special Event Permit
application to include,
but not be limited to,
the Cuero Code of
Ordinances, Chapter
98 [Article 7.05], Litter
Control Sec. 98.16
[Sec. 7.05.002] and
Noise Secs. 98.60-
98.62 [Secs. 8.04.002-
8.04.004] and Sec.
98.65 [Sec. 8.04.001].
The Building Official
shall consider, but not be
limited to, occupancy
and parking capacity, fire
and safety compliance.
Establishment owners
shall comply with all
requirements of the
Texas Administrative
Code, Title 25 Health
Services, Part 1 —
Department of State
Health Services Chapter
228 — Retail Food,
Subchapter H —
Requirements Applicable
to Certain
Establishments, Rule
Sec. 228.223 — Bed
and Breakfast.
Determined by the
Building Official under the
conditions of a Special
Event Permit application
to include, but not be
limited to, the Cuero Code
of Ordinances, Chapter
98[Article 7.05], Litter
Control Sec. 98.16 [Sec.
7.05.002] and Noise Secs.
98.60-98.62 [Secs.
8.04.002-8.04.004] and
Sec. 98.65 [Sec.
8.04.001].
Bed and Breakfast Inn — Special Event Permit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/438
Private events for
groups of 40 persons
or more pursuant to
Sec. 2.210, Temporary
Permitted, Limited, and
Temporary Conditional
Use Standards.
On a property that has
received a Bed and
Breakfast Inn Conditional
Use Permit from the
Planning and Zoning
Commission and City
Council, See Sec.
14.402, Conditional Use
Permits.
Determined by the
Building Official under
the conditions of a
Special Event Permit
application to include,
but not be limited to,
the Cuero Code of
Ordinances, Chapter
98, [Article 7.05], Litter
Control Sec. 98.16
[Sec. 7.05.002] and
Noise Secs. 98.60-
98.62 [Secs. 8.04.002-
8.04.004] and Sec.
98.65 [Sec. 8.04.001].
The Building Official
shall consider, but not be
limited to, occupancy
and parking capacity, fire
and safety compliance.
Establishment owners
shall comply with all
requirements of the
Texas Administrative
Code, Title 25 — Health
Services, Part 1 —
Department of State
Health Services Chapter
228 — Retail Food,
Subchapter H —
Requirements Applicable
to Certain
Establishments, Rule
Sec. 228.223 — Bed
and Breakfast.
Determined by the
Building Official under the
conditions of a Special
Event Permit application
to include, but not be
limited to, the Cuero Code
of Ordinances, Chapter
98[Article 7.05], Litter
Control Sec. 98.16 [Sec.
7.05.002] and Noise Secs.
98.60-98.62 [Secs.
8.04.002-8.04.004] and
Sec. 98.65 [Sec.
8.04.001].
Temporary Construction, Storage, and Refuse Collection Uses
Asphalt or Concrete
Batching Plant
Not less than 500 ft. from
any residential property.
8:00 AM to 8:00 PM if
within 1,000 ft. of
residential property; or
6:00 AM to 10:00 PM in
all other locations.
The facility shall be used
only for a project within
the City of Cuero.
Established by approval to
coincide with the use of
the facility for a specified
construction project. Shall
be removed upon project
completion.
Model Homes and On-
Site Real Estate
Offices
On lot or parcel proposed
for development.
Not limited. Sales limited to units
located on the lot or
parcel proposed for
development; sales
offices within model
homes shall meet
applicable building code
criteria.
On-site real estate offices
shall be removed upon
completion of model home
or suitable permanent
floor area on-site; shall be
removed by issuance of
last certificate of
occupancy for
development.
Portable Storage Units On lot or parcel served by
portable storage unit. No
encroachment into
setbacks or over
sidewalks is permitted.
On nonresidential
parcels, must be located
behind principal building.
Not limited. Not limited. Three days if located in a
residential driveway; three
months if located behind
principal building and
screened from view from
public rights-of-way and
residential property.
Temporary
Construction Buildings
On lot or parcel proposed
for development set back
at least 10 ft. from all lot
lines.
Not limited. However,
the building may not be
used as a residence.
May be used by
construction
superintendent,
construction workers,
contractors, and other
personnel on a
construction team or as
a security office. The
building may not be used
as a residence.
Shall be removed prior to
the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy
for the last building as
detailed on the site plan.
Temporary
Construction
Dumpsters
On lot or parcel using
dumpster, set back at
least 10 ft. from the lot
line, and placed on an
improved hard surface.
In nonresidential and
mixed-use districts,
dumpsters shall be
located behind buildings
Not limited. Refuse shall be
contained within the
dumpster, and shall be
secured to prevent it
from being removed
from the dumpster by
wind or wildlife.
If used for construction or
renovation, may remain in
place for one week after
project completion. If used
for other purpose, 10
days.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/438
(where possible) and
shall not obstruct
required parking areas.
Temporary
Construction Yard
Within one-half mile of
the construction to which
the construction yard
relates.
8:00 AM to 8:00 PM if
within 1,000 ft. of
residential property; or
6:00 AM to 10:00 PM in
all other locations.
The facility shall be used
only for a construction
site within the City of
Cuero or an
infrastructure project that
is wholly or partially
located in the City of
Cuero.
Established by approval;
to coincide with the use of
the facility for a specified
construction project.
D. Frequency and Duration of Commercial Outdoor Sales Events. The maximum frequency and maximum duration of commercial outdoor
sales events are set out in Table 2.210B, Frequency and Duration of Commercial Outdoor Sales Events. E/D refers to the maximum number of
events/days that are allowed per calendar year. For example, if E/D is 2/6, then not more than two events are allowed per year, totaling not more
than 6 days (e.g., two 3-day events, or one 6-day event, etc.).
Table 2.210B
Frequency and Duration of Commercial Outdoor Sales Events
Zoning District AG R-1 R-2 NC NT C-1 C-2 I-1
Maximum - (E/Y = events/yr.; D/Y = total
days/yr.) E/D E/D E/D E/D E/D E/D E/D E/D
Commercial Event
Commercial Outdoor Sales Event1 X X X X X 4/12 6/18 X
Seasonal Sales1 X X X X X 2/60 2/60 X
Sidewalk Sales1 X X X X X 26/52 26/52 X
Truckload Sales X X X X X 3/9 3/9 X
TABLE NOTES:
1. Individual businesses may hold commercial outdoor sales events, seasonal sales, and sidewalk sales in the Central Business District (C-2) district without an
individual permit during established days and times of the City-sponsored Farmers' Market or other City-sponsored special events.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2016-25, sec. 4, adopted 1/11/17)
PART 2
DENSITY, INTENSITY, BULK AND SCALE
ARTICLE 3 RESIDENTIAL AND NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT YIELD
Division 3.100 New Neighborhoods Development Standards
Sec. 3.101 Development Standards for New Residential Neighborhoods
A. Generally. These standards apply to all subdivisions or resubdivisions of property that create at least two buildable lots and to all proposed
developments with at least two dwelling units on a single parcel.
B. Standard and Alternate Development. Set out in Table 3.101A, Standard and Alternate Residential Development Standards, and Table
3.101B, Residential Development Standards in Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Districts, are the standards that apply to new residential
development. The development (minimum lot area, minimum open space ratio, and maximum gross density) and lot and building standards (lot
width, setbacks, and building height) are set out for each zoning district and development option.
C. Interpretation of Table. Tables 3.101A and 3.101B may be interpreted as follows:
1. Development Option. District refers to the zoning districts set out in Table 1.101A, Zoning Districts Established.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/438
2. District Allowed. District Allowed indicates which districts the specified development option is allowed, which is further restricted
by Table 2.102, Residential and Commercial Uses of the Home.
3. Minimum Lot Area. Minimum Lot Area sets out the minimum lot size that is used to establish the gross density within each
development option.
4. Minimum Open Space Ratio. Minimum Open Space Ratio (OSR) sets out the minimum amount of common open space that is
required within each development option as part of the entire development.
5. Maximum Gross Density. Maximum Gross Density sets out the maximum number of dwelling units per acre for each
development option.
6. Lot Width. Lot Width sets out the minimum width of the lot at the building line.
7. Minimum Setbacks. Minimum Setbacks sets out the minimum front, interior and street side, and rear building setbacks for each
development option.
8. Maximum Building Height. Maximum Building Height sets out the maximum height of buildings within each development option.
Table 3.101A
Standard and Alternative Residential Development Standards
Development
Option
District
Allowed
Development Standards
Lot and Building Standards
Lot Width
Minimum Setbacks
Maximum
Building
Minimum Lot Height
Area
Minimum
Open
Space
Ratio
(OSR)1
Maximum
Gross
Density
Front
Interior
Side
Street
Side
Rear
Option #1 - Standard Development
(The following single-family detached housing configurations are permitted outright as part of standard development in the districts
specified.)
Agriculture,
Standard AG 2 ac. 0% 0.45 220' 50' 20' 30' 75' 45'
Single-Family
Detached
Residential2
R-1 13,500 sf 10% 2.52 75' 30' 10' 25' 20' 35'
Single-Family
Detached
Residential2
R-2 7,200 sf 15% 4.23 60' 20' 5' 15' 15' 35'
Option # 2A - Alternate Development for Single-Family Detached Planned Clusters
(The following single-family detached cluster development configurations are allowed as a limited or conditional use in the districts specified.
Higher densities are allowed in exchange for greater protections of open space.)
Agriculture,
Planned Cluster3 R-2 1.0 ac. 10% 0.81 125' 60' 15' 20' 40' 35'
Single-Family
Detached
Residential
Planned Cluster3
R-2 5,000 sf 20% 5.49 50' 20' 5' 15' 15' 35'
Manufactured
Home Park or
Subdivision4
AG
R-2
5,000 sf 25% 5.31 40' 20' 10' 15' 20' 35'
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/438
Recreational
Vehicle Parks5
AG
R-2
See Section 4.204, Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks
Option # 2B - Alternate Development for Single-Family Attached Planned Clusters3
(The following single-family attached planned development are allowed as a limited or conditional use in the districts specified. Higher
densities are allowed in exchange for greater resource protections of open spaces.)
Duplex R-2 9,000 sf7 25% 5.60 50' 20' 0' 15'8 15' 35'
Triplex R-2 6,600 sf7 25% 11.62 22' 20' 0' 15'8 15' 35'
Townhouse6 R-2 12,000 sf7 25% 12.55 20' 20' 0' 15'8 15' 40'
TABLE NOTES:
1. In certain circumstances, a greater open space ratio may be required to protect floodplains. Planned cluster development offers the highest densities with the
greatest amount of open space for resource protection purposes.
2. Lots in the R-1 and R-2 zoning districts that exist prior to the effective date of this UDC shall follow the development standards and lot and building standards
as are set out on approved preliminary or final plats, as follows: Minimum side yard = 5'; minimum street side yard = 5'; minimum rear yard = 15'; minimum front
yard = 20'; and minimum lot area = 5,000 sf.
3. The minimum area of the parcel proposed for development of a new planned cluster development is 10 acres.
4. The minimum and maximum area of the parcel proposed for development of a manufactured home park or subdivision is set out in subsection 4.203B,
Minimum and Maximum Site Area.
5. The minimum and maximum area of the parcel proposed for development of a recreational vehicle park is set out in subsection 4.204C, Minimum and
Maximum Site Area.
6. Townhouses shall not have more than six units per building and each building shall be separated by a minimum of 25 feet.
7. In addition to the common area needed for meeting the minimum open space requirements for the entire parcel proposed for development, the minimum lot
size consists of 9,000 sf for duplexes (two dwelling units at 4,500 sf each), 6,600 sf for triplexes (three dwelling units at 2,200 sf each), and 12,000 sf for
townhouses (up to six dwelling units at 2,000 sf each). The minimum lot area per dwelling unit may be platted as a single lot (with a condominium form of
ownership), or as separate lots (e.g., three lots at 2.200 [2,200] sf for triplexes under fee-simple form of ownership). See also Section 3.102, Alternate
Standards for Condominium and Alternate Land Ownership Patterns).
8. The street side setback is also the minimum side setback for end units.
9. The minimum principal dwelling size shall be for one bedroom – 800 square feet; two bedroom – 1000 square feet; three bedroom – 1,200 square feet.
Table 3.101B
Residential Development Standards in Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Districts
Development Option
District
Allowed
Development Standards Lot and Building Standards
Minimum Lot
Area
Minimum
Open Space
Ratio
(OSR)1
Maximum
Gross
Density
Lot Width
Minimum Setbacks
Maximum
Building
Height
Front
Interior
Side
Street
Side
Rear
Residential Housing Allowed in Nonresidential or Mixed-Use Areas
Multifamily
(Apartments)2 C-1 1,750 sf 3,4 25% 16.75 210' 25' 15' 15' 25' 35'
Live-Work Units5 C-2 N/A 5% 10.00 25' 5'6 0' 15' 25'7 35'
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/438
Multifamily
(Apartments)2
C-2 1,750 sf 3,4 10% 24.80 195' 10'6 0' 15' 25'7 45'
TABLE NOTES:
1. In certain circumstances, a greater open space ratio may be required to protect floodplains.
2. Multifamily apartment buildings shall be separated by a minimum of 25 feet.
3. In addition to the common area needed for meeting the minimum open space requirements for the entire parcel proposed for development, the minimum lot
size consists of the specified lot area per dwelling unit.
4. Multifamily apartments shall not have more than eight units per building and each building shall be separated by a minimum of 25 feet.
5. Live-work units shall be designed as either townhouse style dwelling units or residential (e.g., a loft) over nonresidential (e.g., retail or office).
6. The front setback line is a “build-to line.” Front stoops and stairs for entry may be allowed outside of the front building setback provided that it does not
interfere with pedestrian movement through the block or encroach into the minimum width of the sidewalk.
7. In the C-2 district, all required residential parking spaces shall be provided via an alley at the rear of the lot.
8. The minimum principal dwelling size shall be for one bedroom - 800 square feet; two bedroom - 1000 square feet; three bedroom - 1200 square feet.
D. New Neighborhoods/Subdivisions. Projects that propose new neighborhoods or subdivisions shall demonstrate compliance with this
Section using the entire parcel proposed for development regarding the calculation of minimum open space ratio and maximum gross density,
and are subject to the standards set out in Division 4.200, Residential Development Design.
E. Requirements for Phased Developments. Projects that are proposed to be phased shall demonstrate compliance with this Section using the
entire parcel proposed for development regarding the calculation of minimum open space ratio and maximum gross density.
F. Accessory Buildings and Structures. The standards for accessory buildings and structures are set out in Section 11.101, Accessory
Buildings and Structures, and Section 11.102, Accessory Dwelling Units, which apply to both new and established neighborhoods.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2018-09 adopted 8/13/18)
Sec. 3.102 Alternative Standards for Condominium and Alternative Land Ownership Patterns
A. Generally. The standards of Section 3.101, Development Standards for New Residential Neighborhoods, with respect to lot area, lot width,
and setbacks relate to the development of residential buildings on conventional lots that are intended to be owned in fee-simple by the owners of
the buildings. However, the standards are not intended to preclude other ownership types, such as single-ownership of all units (rentals);
condominiums (in which the land is owned in common by the owners of the condominium units); or common maintenance communities (in which
fee-simple ownership is limited to the land under the building, and, in some cases, a small area around it). The alternative standards of this
Section are intended to allow such alternative ownership arrangements, provided that the development could be approved pursuant to this UDC
using conventional fee-simple ownership arrangements.
B. Demonstration of Compliance. The proposed pattern of development will be allowed if it is demonstrated that it would comply with the
density, open space, and applicable setback requirements of this UDC if it were platted with lots that meet the minimum requirements of Section
3.101, Development Standards for New Residential Neighborhoods, and other applicable standards of this UDC.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 3.200 Established Neighborhoods
Sec. 3.201 Established Neighborhoods, Generally
A. Generally. This Division establishes standards for the development, redevelopment, and substantial improvement of lots and buildings in
established neighborhoods.
1. Neighborhood Conservation Standards. In the NC subdistricts of NC-R1, NC-R2, NC-R3, NC-R4, and NC-MH, all proposed
development of vacant lots, redevelopment of existing buildings, or expansion of existing buildings, shall comply with Section 3.202,
Neighborhood Conservation Standards.
2. Alternative Neighborhood Conservation District Standards. In the NC subdistricts of NC-R1, NC-R2, NC-R3, NC-R4, and NCMH,
alternative standards (see Section 3.203, Alternative Neighborhood Conservation Standards) are provided for the expansion or
reconfiguration of existing buildings when the expansion or reconfiguration cannot comply with the general development standards set
out in Section 3.202, Neighborhood Conservation Standards.
3. Alternate Neighborhood Transition District Standards. In the NT subdistrict of NT-R5 and NT-R6, standards are provided which
allow the aggregation of lots as a means to allow a different form of development or redevelopment than what was traditionally
allowed.
B. Conforming Buildings and Lots.
1. Buildings. All buildings that lawfully existed or were the subject of an active building permit on the effective date of this UDC are
“conforming” buildings with respect to the height and setback requirements set out in this Division if they are located in the NC-R1,
NC-R2, NC-R3, NC-R4, NC-MH, NT-R5, or NT-R6 subdistricts. However, this Section does not make the following buildings
conforming:
a. Buildings that were constructed without required permits; and
b. Buildings that were constructed in violation of permit requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/438
2. Lots. All lots that lawfully existed on the effective date of this UDC are “conforming” with respect to lot width and lot area if they
are located in the NC-R1, NC-R2, NC-R3, NC-R4, NC-MH, NT-R5, or NT-R6 subdistricts. The lot width and lot area requirements of
Table 3.202, Lot and Building Standards for Neighborhood Conservation Subdistricts, or Table 3.204A, Lot and Building Standards for
NT-R5, or Table 3.204B, Lot and Building Standards for NT-R6 Lots, apply only to the subdivision or combination of existing lots or
parcels within these districts after the effective date of this UDC. However, this Section does not make originally platted conforming
lots, later split by a metes and bounds description, into a nonconforming lot.
C. Nonresidential Uses.
1. All lawfully permitted nonresidential uses may be continued provided that they were constructed in conformance with the original
permit or conditional use permit and the development regulations at the time of permitting.
2. Expansions to existing nonresidential uses shall be in conformance with the original permit or conditional use permit and the
development regulations at the time of permitting. If an expansion was not considered during the initial grant of approval, the
expansion shall comply with subsection C.3., below.
3. Substantial improvement, redevelopment, and new nonresidential development, shall comply with all applicable provisions of this
UDC, including those set out in Part 1, Zoning Districts and Land Uses, Division 2.200, Limited and Conditional Use Standards,
Division 3.300, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Lot and Scale Standards, Article 11, Supplemental Standards, applicable sections of
Part 3, Site Design, among other applicable sections of this UDC.
D. Relationship to Variances. Compliance with the standards of this Division are not considered variances. Variances shall not be granted to
allow encroachments if the encroachments could be permitted pursuant to the general or alternative standards of this Division.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 3.202 Neighborhood Conservation Standards
A. Generally. The standards of this Section are applied as a matter of right in the NC-R1, NC-R2, NC-R3, NC-R4 and NC-MH subdistricts. If
an application does not comply with these standards, which are consistent with those of existing development, then the parts of the application
that do not comply (e.g., setbacks) are evaluated according to the alternate development standards set out in Section 3.203, Alternative
Neighborhood Conservation Standards. If parts of the application do not comply with either these standards or the alternative standards, then a
variance may be sought.
B. Setbacks. Setback standards apply in a different manner than in conventional zoning districts. In the NC district, they apply:
1. To new homes that are built on vacant lots, or on lots where the existing building is torn down and rebuilt; and
2. To determine how expansions to existing homes are approved, as follows:
a. Expansions of existing buildings that are set back in accordance with the setback standards are approved by the issuance
of a new permit; and
b. Expansions of existing buildings that are not set back in accordance with the setback standards are reviewed for
compliance with alternative development standards before a permit can be issued (see Section 3.203, Alternate Neighborhood
Conservation Standards).
C. Lot Standards. The lot standards in each NC subdistrict are set out in Table 3.202, Lot and Building Standards for Neighborhood
Conservation Subdistricts. These standards do not make existing development nonconforming.
Table 3.202
Lot and Building Standards for Neighborhood Conservation Subdistricts
Subdistrict
Equivalent
District Prior
to Effective
Date
Predominant
Housing Type
Minimum
Lot Width
Lot Area Minimum Setback Maximum
Building
Height
Minimum Maximum Front Interior
Side
Street
Side
Rear
NC-R1 R-1 Single-family
detached
dwellings
40' 4,000 sf 8,000 sf 20' 5' 5' 15' 35'
NC-R2 R-2 Duplex (twofamily
residential)
dwellings1
N/A N/A N/A 20' 5' 5' 15' 35'
NC-R3 R-3 Multi-family
dwellings1
N/A N/A N/A 20' 5' 5' 15' 35'
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/438
NC-R4 R-1 Single-family
detached
dwellings
80' 8,000 sf N/A 20' 5 5' 15' 35'
NC-MH MH Manufactured
Homes2
40' 4,000 sf N/A 20' 5' 5' 15' 35'
MHP
10' 10' 20'
MHO NC-R1
NT-R5
Manufactured
Homes [3]
40' 4,000 sf N/A 20' 10' 10' 15' 35'
TABLE NOTES:
1. Duplex and multi-family buildings are conforming. Expansions to individual dwelling units are allowed provided that no portion of any building shall be closer
than 20 feet from any other building and all lot and building standards of this Section have to be met. No new dwelling units are allowed.
2. Manufactured homes are allowed to be replaced provided that the replacement units meet the standards of this Section as well as Section 10.103,
Manufactured Home Unit Standards and Section 12.107, Nonconforming Manufactured Homes.
3. Manufactured homes only as permitted under Section 4.205, Manufactured Home Overlay (MHO) District as well as meeting the standards defined in
Section 10.103, Manufactured Home Unit Standards.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2016-13, sec. 4, adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. 3.203 Alternative Neighborhood Conservation Standards
A. Generally. This Section applies only to modifications of existing buildings, where the proposed modification involves encroachment into a
setback that is required by Table 3.202, Lot and Building Standards for Neighborhood Conservation Subdistricts. Any specific setback (e.g., front
yard, interior side yard, street side yard, or rear yard) that complies with the table is not subject to further review under this Section.
B. Relationship to Variances. Compliance with the standards of this Section is equivalent to compliance with the standards of Section [Table]
3.202, Lot and Building Standards for Neighborhood Conservation Subdistricts, and approvals hereunder are not considered variances.
Variances shall not be granted to allow encroachments if the encroachments could be permitted pursuant to the standards of this Section.
C. Relationship to Easements and Rights-of-Way. The standards of this Section shall not be construed to authorize construction of buildings or
portions of buildings in utility or drainage easements or public rights-of-way.
D. Alternative Front Setbacks. The following standards may be applied to front setbacks as an alternative to the front setback standards in
Table 3.202, Lot and Building Standards for Neighborhood Conservation Subdistricts:
1. Enclosure of Front Porches. Front setbacks may be reduced by up to one foot from their existing location in order to enclose an
existing front porch.
2. Addition of Front Porch. Front setbacks may be reduced by up to six feet from the standards set out in Table 3.202, Lot and
Building Standards for Neighborhood Conservation Subdistricts, in order to allow for the construction of a front porch, provided that:
a. The added front porch would not be located closer than 10 feet to the front property line;
b. The area of the front porch (including areas under roof overhangs) that is in the reduced setback area is not more than 60
sf.; and
c. The porch may be enclosed with a screened enclosure, but shall not be fully enclosed with walls and windows.
3. Front Setback Averaging. Front setbacks may be reduced to the average front setback along the same side of the same street
segment in the same zoning district, provided that:
a. The parcel proposed for development is not counted in the calculation; and
b. If the parcel proposed for development takes vehicular access from the front, the driveway must be at least:
i. 25 feet long, measured from the property line at the right-of-way to a building wall or garage door; and
ii. The width of the garage door(s) are not more than 18 feet or less than nine feet in width (see Figure 3.203, Illustrative
Front Setback Averaging).
Figure 3.203
Illustrative Front Setback Averaging
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/438
In the illustration above, the general setback, labeled “G,” is 20 feet. However, the average setback of all other lots on the same side of the street segment is 14
ft. ((10 + 15 + 10 + 25 + 10) / 5 = 14), which is labeled as “A.”
If the building on the parcel proposed for development meets the vehicular access requirements of a 9 ft. x 25 ft. driveway, the front setback may be reduced to
14 feet.
E. Alternative Street Side Setbacks. The following standards may be applied to street side setbacks as an alternative to the street side setback
standards set out in Table 3.202, Lot and Building Standards for Neighborhood Conservation Subdistricts.
1. Wide Planting Strip. The street side setback may be reduced by up Table 3.202, Lot and Building Standards for Neighborhood
Conservation Subdistricts, if:
a. There is an existing sidewalk along the side street that is at least four feet wide;
b. A planting strip is located within the public right-of-way between the edge of the sidewalk and the property line;
c. The planting strip is at least five feet wide along the portion of the property that would be affected by the setback reduction;
and
d. The street is classified as a local residential street and there are no plans for expansion of the paved width of the street.
2. Subdivision Fencing Along Arterial or Collector Street. The street side setback may be reduced to five feet if:
a. The street side yard abuts a bufferyard that screens the development from an arterial or collector street;
b. The bufferyard includes an opaque fence that complies with the standards of Section 11.103, Fences and Walls, with
respect to the continuity of subdivision fencing, and separates the side yard from the street;
c. There is at least four feet of clearance between the building wall of the dwelling unit and the fence at all points;
d. The setback reduction applies to not more than 40 percent of the length of the side building wall of the dwelling unit; and
e. The portion of the building to which the reduced setback applies is not more than one story in height.
F. Alternative Interior Side Setbacks. Interior side setbacks may be reduced to three feet along lot lines that abut tracts that are designated as
permanent open space or servitude, provided that the tracts are at least 50 feet wide along the entire length of the lot line.
G. Alternative Rear Setbacks. The following standards may be applied to rear setbacks as an alternative to the rear setback standards set out
in Table 3.202, Lot and Building Standards for Neighborhood Conservation Subdistricts.
1. Abutting Permanent Open Space. Rear setbacks that abut lots or parcels that are designated as permanent open space or
servitude that is at least 50 feet wide along the distance of the lot proposed for development may be reduced to 10 feet.
2. Subdivision Fencing Along Arterial or Collector Street. The rear setback may be reduced to 10 feet if:
a. The rear yard abuts the right-of-way for an arterial or collector street;
b. An opaque fence that complies with the standards of Section 11.103, Fences and Walls, with respect to the continuity of
subdivision fencing, separates the rear yard from the street;
c. The setback reduction applies to not more than 40 percent of the length of the rear building wall of the dwelling unit; and
d. The portion of the building to which the reduced setback applies is not more than one story in height.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 3.204 Alternate Neighborhood Transition Standards
A. Generally. For the purpose of enabling and encouraging neighborhood transition or redevelopment to occur on vacant lots and blocks within
the NT district, alternate lot, building, and design standards are provided in this Section. In general, this Section provides alternate lot and
building standards (i.e., reductions) from those set out in Table 3.202, Lot and Building Standards for Neighborhood Conservation Subdistricts,
which are intended to allow the aggregation and redevelopment of existing lots using different housing types (e.g., cottages, duplexes, triplexes,
and townhouses) to improve development yield during redevelopment. For lots that cannot be aggregated, lot and building standards have been
set to still allow single-family detached dwellings and/or in some cases, cottages, while still meeting the minimum performance standards.
B. Alternate Standards for the NT-R5 Subdistrict.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/438
1. NT-R5 Lot and Building Standards. New development, redevelopment, and substantial improvement of lots within the NT-R5
subdistrict shall comply with the standards of Table 3.204A, Lot and Building Standards for NT-R5 Lots.
Table 3.204A
Lot and Building Standards for NT-R5 Lots
Subdistrict
Equivalent
District Prior
to Effective
Date
Predominant
Housing Type1
Minimum
Number of
Existing
Lots
Needed2
Total
Units
Number of
Bonus
Units
Minimum Lot
Width
Lot Area Minimum Setback Max.
Building
Height
Minimum Maximum Front Interior
Side
Street
Side
Rear
NT-R5 R-1 Single-Family
Detached
1 1 0 40' 4,000 sf 12,000 sf+ 15' 5' 5' 15' 35'
Duplex 3 4 1 30' 3,000 sf N/A 15' 0' 5' 15' 35'
Triplex 4 6 2 22' for interior
units
2,200 sf N/A 15' 0' 5' 15' 35'
27' for end units 2,700 sf
Townhouse 5 7 2 24' for interior
units
2,400 sf N/A 15' 0' 5' 15' 35'
40' for end units 4,000 sf
MHO NC-R1
NT-R5
Manufactured
Homes [3]
1 1 0 40' 4,000 sf N/A 20' 10' 10' 15' 35'
TABLE NOTES:
1. Any unit for single-family detached (including cottages) or attached housing may be industrialized housing; provided however, that the building form and
design meets the minimum lot and design standards of this Section and Table 2.202, Residential Limited and Conditional Use Standards. Manufactured homes
are not allowed unless they existed on the effective date.
2. In order to develop the duplex, triplex, or townhouse types of housing, an aggregation of contiguous lots is necessary. For example, in the NT-R5 subdistrict,
three 40-foot contiguous lots would need to be aggregated, and then then [sic] either platted as four separate 30-foot duplex lots (or consolidated into a single
lot using a condominium form of ownership meeting the same lot and design standards). This aggregation of three existing lots allows the development of one
additional dwelling unit when redeveloped under the new standards set out in this Section.
3. Manufactured homes only as permitted under Section 4.205, Manufactured Home Overlay (MHO) District as well as meeting the standards defined in
Section 10.103, Manufactured Home Unit Standards.
2. Illustrative Lot Configurations. Set out in Figure 3.204A, NT-R5 Illustrative Lot Configurations, are illustrative lot configurations
depicting how the aggregation and replatting of lots and different housing types can used to improve development yield.
Figure 3.204A
NT-R5 Illustrative Lot Configurations
Single-Family Detached
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/438
Duplexes
Triplexes
Townhouses
C. Alternate Standards for the NT-R6 Subdistrict.
1. NT-R6 Lot and Building Standards. New development, redevelopment, and substantial improvement of lots within the NT-R6
subdistrict shall comply with the standards of Table 3.204B, Lot and Building Standards for NT-R6 Lots.
Table 3.204B
Lot and Building Standards for NT-R6 Lots
Subdistrict
Equivalent
District Prior
to Effective
Date
Predominant
Housing Type1
Minimum
Number of
Existing
Lots
Needed2
Total
Units
Number
of Bonus
Units
Minimum
Lot Width
Lot Area Minimum Setback9 [sic] Max.
Building
Height
Minimum Maximum Front Interior
Side4
[sic]
Street
Side
Rear4
[sic]
NT-R6 R-1 Cottage 1 1 0 30' 2,700 sf 4,000 sf 15' 2.5' 7.5' 15' 35'
Duplex +
Cottage
4 5 1 30' for
cottage
2,700 sf N/A 15' 0' 5' 15' 35'
22.5' for
duplex
2,025 sf
Triplex 5 6 1 20' for
interior units
1,800 sf N/A 15' 0' 7.5' 15' 35'
27.5' for end 2,475 sf
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/438
units
Townhouse 5 7 2 20' for
interior units
1,800 sf N/A 15' 0' 5' 15' 35'
25' for end
units
2,250 sf
TABLE NOTES:
1. Any unit for single-family detached (including cottages) or attached housing may be industrialized housing; provided however, that the building form and
design meets the minimum lot and design standards of this Section and Table 2.202, Residential Limited and Conditional Use Standards. Manufactured homes
are not allowed unless they existed on the effective date.
2. In order to develop the duplex, triplex, or townhouse types of housing, an aggregation of contiguous lots is necessary. For example, in the NT-R5 subdistrict,
three 40-foot contiguous lots would need to be aggregated, and then then [sic] either platted as four separate 30-foot duplex lots (or consolidated into a single
lot using a condominium form of ownership meeting the same lot and design standards). This aggregation of three existing lots allows the development of one
additional dwelling unit when redeveloped under the new standards set out in this Section.
2. NT-R6 Illustrative Lot Configurations. Set out in Figure 3.204B, NT-R6 Illustrative Lot Configurations, are illustrative lot
configurations depicting how the aggregation and replatting of lots and different housing types can used to improve development
yield.
Figure 3.204B
NT-R6 Illustrative Lot Configurations
Cottages
Cottage and Duplexes
Triplexes
Townhouses
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/438
D. Design Standards for Improvement of Existing NT Buildings. Front setbacks may be reduced for lots with existing buildings for the following
purposes.
1. Enclosure of Front Porches. Front setbacks may be reduced by up to one foot from their existing location in order to enclose an
existing front porch.
2. Addition of Front Porch. Front setbacks may be reduced by up to six feet from the standards set out in Table 3.202, Lot and
Building Standards for Neighborhood Conservation Subdistricts, in order to allow for the construction of a front porch, provided that:
a. The added front porch would not be located closer than 10 feet to the front property line;
b. The area of the front porch (including areas under roof overhangs) that is in the reduced setback area is not more than 60
square feet; and
c. The porch may be enclosed with a screened enclosure, but shall not be fully enclosed with walls and windows.
E. Design Standards for the Development, Redevelopment, and Substantial Improvement of NT Lots. All of the following apply for the
development, redevelopment, and substantial improvement of NT lots.
1. Housing Types. The use of alternative housing types (i.e., duplexes, triplexes, and townhouses) shall only be used when the lots
are aggregated and replatted meeting the standards of lot and building standards as set out in Table 3.204A, Lot and Building
Standards for NT-R5 Lots and Table 3.204B, Lot and Building Standards for NT-R6 Lots.
2. Front Porches.
a. Front porches are required with all new development, redevelopment, and substantial improvement.
b. The added front porch cannot be located closer than 10 feet to the front property line, although the unenclosed and
uncovered stairs may extend an additional five feet towards the front property line;
c. The area of the front porch (including areas under roof overhangs) that is in the reduced setback area cannot exceed 60
square feet; and
d. The porch may be enclosed with a screened enclosure, but shall not be fully enclosed with walls and windows.
3. Parking. New parking spaces are required with all new development, redevelopment, and substantial improvement.
a. New parking spaces are required as set out in Table 5.101A, Residential and Commercial Use of the Home Parking
Requirements.
b. New parking spaces shall be an improved hard surface and may require the improvement of the rear alley where the
parking spaces take access.
c. Parking spaces shall be designed as follows:
i. Cottages. May be allowed to park in the street.
ii. Single-family detached: New parking spaces may be located in the front yard, provided that the parking space is long
enough to allow the vehicle to be parked without blocking pedestrian movement along the sidewalk, or in the rear yard via
rear alley access.
iii. Duplexes, Triplexes, and Townhouses. New parking spaces shall be provided in the rear yard with alley access.
4. Sidewalk. Starting at the property boundary, a three foot street tree lawn and five five [sic] foot sidewalk shall be provided with all
new development, redevelopment, and substantial improvement.
5. Tree. One tree shall be provided on each lot with all new development, redevelopment, or substantial improvement. The tree
may be located in the street tree lawn or in any yard.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2016-13, sec. 5, adopted 7/19/16)
Division 3.300 Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Lot and Scale Standards
Sec. 3.301 Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Development Standards
A. Generally. The standards that are applicable to nonresidential and mixed-use parcels proposed for development are provided in Table
3.301A, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Development Standards. The table includes provisions for minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR), floor
area ratio (FAR), minimum lot area, minimum street frontage, and maximum building height.
B. Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Development Standards.
Table 3.301A
Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Development Standards
Standard Stories Zoning District
C-1 C-2 I-1 PR
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/438
Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio
(LSR)
N/A 15% 1% 15% 20%
Floor Area Ratio (“FAR”)2 1 0.280 0.962 0.462 0.342
2 0.335 1.852 N/A 0.435
3 N/A 2.680 N/A 0.478
Density N/A N/A See Notes 1
and 4 N/A N/A
Minimum Area of Parcel Proposed
for Development N/A 1 ac. N/A 2 ac. 1 ac.
Minimum Frontage N/A 100' 25' 100' 125'
Maximum Building Height3 N/A 45' 50' 50' 45'
TABLE NOTES:
N/A - Not Applicable
1. No off-street parking is required in the C-2 district, except for live-work units and multi-family as set out in Table 3.101B, Residential Development Standards
in Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Districts.
2. The FARs account for the landscape surface ratio (including setbacks, bufferyards, on-site drainage, and parking lot landscaping) and required on-site
parking, excluding the C-2 district. Multiplying the site area by the FAR determines the maximum building size.
3. Refer to subsection D.2.c., Setback Planes, of this Section.
4. Refer to the maximum gross density for live/work units in the C-2 district. See Table 3.101B, Residential Development Standards in Nonresidential and
Mixed-Use Districts.
C. Subdivision of Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Parcels.
1. Street Frontage and Area. The minimum street frontage and minimum area of parcels proposed for development may be
reduced with respect to the subdivision of individual lots within a development if it is demonstrated that:
a. The area of the principal parcel from which the lot is subdivided complies with the requirements of Table 3.301A,
Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Development Standards, before subdivision;
b. Appropriate easements are recorded to provide for:
i. Cross-access between the lots;
ii. Article 5, Parking, Loading, Access, and Lighting; and
iii. Appropriate covenants are recorded that provide for the required landscape surface ratio (LSR) to be maintained in
proportion to the principal parcel area before the subdivision, designating the landscaped areas, and providing for their
maintenance.
2. Building Spacing. For the purposes of the requirements of Table 3.301B, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Setbacks, lots created
pursuant to this Section shall be considered part of the principal parcel. However, buildings shall be spaced at least 20 feet apart.
3. Access. Lots created pursuant to this subsection are not entitled to individual access to abutting streets unless they meet the
access management requirements set out in Division 5.200, Access Management and Circulation.
4. Required Buffer. Lots created pursuant to this Section are not required to be buffered from the principal parcel from which they
are subdivided unless they are in different zoning districts.
D. Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Setbacks.
1. Generally. The standards of this subsection apply to nonresidential and vertically mixed-use buildings. If Division 7.300,
Bufferyard Landscaping, requires a bufferyard that is wider than the setback that is required by this Section, then the width of the
setback shall be at least the width of the required bufferyard.
2. Principal Buildings.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/438
a. The required setbacks for nonresidential and mixed-use buildings are set out in Table 3.301B, Nonresidential and Mixed-
Use Setbacks.
b. Residential district boundary setbacks (set out in the last row of Table 3.301B, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Setbacks),
apply to buildings or outdoor uses (except parking) on parcels that abut property that is located in the R-1, R-2, NC or NT
districts. If the residential district boundary setback is indicated as “N/A,” then there are no special setback requirements in
relation to abutting residentially zoned property (i.e., the other columns of the table control).
Table 3.301B
Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Setbacks
Standard Zoning District
C-1 C-2 [3] I-1 PR
Front 25' 0' 25' 50'
Interior Side 15' 0' 20' 50'
Street Side 15' 0' 25' 50'
Rear 25' 0' 40' 50'
Residential District Boundary1,2 20' N/A 100' 50'
TABLE NOTES:
1. Refer to subsection D.2.c., Setback Planes, of this Section.
2. If a two-story structure is constructed on a lot or parcel that abuts or is contiguous to a residential district or use, there shall be no windows, doors, or other
openings constructed on that side of the second story facing the residentially zoned or used property.
3. Refer to subsection E., C-2 District Setbacks, of this Section.
c. Setback Planes. Where a nonresidential or mixed-use building abuts or is contiguous to a residentially zoned or used
property, then in addition to the building setback line as set out in Table 3.301B, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Setbacks, the
building shall be set back one foot from the property line for each one foot in building height over the maximum building height
(see Figure 3.301A, Setback Planes.) This is applicable if the maximum building height set out in Table 3.301B, Nonresidential
and Mixed-Use Setbacks is greater than that allowed in the residential district.
Figure 3.301A
Setback Planes
E. C-2 District Setbacks.
1. Generally. For all development in the C-2 district, principal structures shall be built on the front lot line (the “build-to line”).
Portions of the facade that are recessed in order to satisfy the requirements of Division 10.200, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Design
Standards, are permitted to be set back from the build-to line by up to three feet. All buildings shall meet these requirements, except
under the following conditions (see Figure 3.301B, Permitted Setbacks in the C-2 District):
Figure 3.301B
Permitted Setbacks in the C-2 District
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/438
a. Where the use, in whole or in part, is an existing dwelling unit.
b. Where the use is established in an existing building that exceeds the build-to line as of the effective date of this UDC. In
this case, the existing building may:
i. Remain in its current location, utilizing the front setback as:
1. A yard or courtyard;
2. Public plaza or outdoor service area (e.g., outdoor seating for a restaurant, outdoor display area for a retail
store, etc.); or
3. Off-street parking provided it was used for parking as of the effective date of this UDC.
ii. Be extended to the build-to line provided it:
1. Meets all other requirements and standards of this UDC;
2. Is a conforming use; and
3. Complies with subsection E.1.d., below (i.e., provision for a public sidewalk).
c. Where the average setback of buildings along the block front or, in the instance of a corner lot, along one or both block
fronts exceed the build-to line. In this case, the building may be:
i. Constructed at the build-to line; or
ii. Set back to match the average front setback along the same side of the same street segment in the same zoning
district, provided that the parcel proposed for development or redevelopment is not counted in the calculation.
d. Where there is a public sidewalk that is up to six feet wide, the building must be set back in order to provide the additional
space to expand the sidewalk onto the private lot to construct a sidewalk that is at least six feet in width. In this case, the
building shall be constructed to a build-to line that is coterminous with the edge of the sidewalk that is provided on the private
lot.
e. Buildings may be set back up to a distance of 20 feet from the build-to line in order to provide a designated public plaza or
outdoor service area according to the following standards:
i. The public plaza or outdoor service area shall be designated upon development approval and maintained as a publicly
accessible space;
ii. Any service uses that take place in the designated setback area must directly relate to the activity of the primary
ground floor use (e.g., outdoor seating for a restaurant, outdoor display area for a retail store, etc.); and
iii. When the area is not being used as an outdoor service area, it shall remain generally accessible to the public and
function as an extension of the public sidewalk environment.
2. Side and Rear Setbacks. Side and rear setbacks are not required in the C-2 district, except when the C-2 district abuts an NC or
NT district (including applicable subdistricts), the same setbacks applicable to the NC or NT district shall also apply to the abutting or
contiguous lot line(s) of the C-2 district.
3. Encroachments. The City may permit, by recorded license agreement, encroachments into the public right-of-way if the
encroachments meet all of the following standards (see Figure 3.301C, Permitted Encroachments):
a. Encroachments up to 18 inches into the right-of-way are permitted below an elevation of eight feet above grade if it is
demonstrated that:
i. The encroachment does not impact the general functionality of the public sidewalk; and
ii. The encroachment does not make the sidewalk noncompliant with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA).
b. Encroachments up to four feet are permitted above an elevation of eight feet above grade if it is demonstrated that:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/438
i. The encroachment does not impact the general functionality of the public sidewalk;
ii. The encroachment is set back at least one foot from the face of the curb; and
iii. The encroachment does not create unsafe clearances from other elements of the right-of-way (e.g., street lighting,
landscaping, vehicular movement, etc.).
Figure 3.301C
Permitted Encroachments
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 3.302 Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Scale
A. Generally. The gross floor area of nonresidential buildings in the R-1, R-2, NC, and NT districts shall be limited based on the type of street
from which primary access is taken, as provided in Table 3.302, Building Scale.
Table 3.302
Building Scale
Classification of Street from
which Access is Taken Maximum Floor Area
Arterial Street 25,000 sf
Collector Street 10,000 sf
Local Street 5,000 sf
B. Exemption. The standards set out in Table 3.302, Building Scale, do not apply to the development of public schools.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
PART 3
SITE DESIGN
ARTICLE 4 SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
Division 4.100 General Requirements for Development Design
Sec. 4.101 Subdivision and Development Design
A. Generally. It is the policy of the City that this Section be applied to the maximum extent practicable without imposing restrictions that reduce
the density or intensity of development that is permitted on the subject property by this UDC. The City may require modifications to proposed
subdivision plats or site plans that otherwise conform to the standards of the UDC in order to enhance the quality of the design in accordance
with the qualitative principles of this Section. The standards of this Section shall be applied and interpreted in the context of the other applicable
standards that are set out in other Articles of this UDC.
B. Applicability. These regulations and development standards shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/438
1. The division of land into two or more tracts, lots, sites, or parcels.
2. The dedication, vacation, or reservation of any public or private easement through any tract of land regardless of the area
involved, including those for use by public and private utility companies.
3. The dedication or vacation of any street or alley through any tract of land regardless of the area involved.
C. Limits of Control. The provisions of this Article shall not be applicable to plats of the subdivisions recorded as required by law and approved
by the City Council prior to the effective date of this UDC.
D. Exceptions. The standards of this Article apply to all development except single-family detached houses or duplexes that are constructed
on individual lots or parcels that are not subdivided.
E. Compatibility Required. The parcel proposed for development shall be designed in a way that:
1. Provides appropriate space for bufferyards and transitions between land uses or obvious changes in density or intensity along
side and rear lot lines;
2. Protects and preserves site resources to the benefit of both the subject property and abutting properties;
3. Provides appropriate vehicular and pedestrian linkages between residential uses and retail, service, and office uses, providing
access while protecting neighborhood integrity and individual property values;
4. Maximizes the access to and benefit of open spaces by providing for a connection to or continuation of the open spaces of
abutting properties and providing for maximum frontage and access to such open spaces;
5. Protects neighboring property from undue stormwater runoff;
6. Anticipates and provides for future vehicular and pedestrian connections to neighboring properties that are likely to be developed
or redeveloped with similar or supportive land uses, in accordance with the City's adopted Thoroughfare Plan;
7. Minimizes interference with existing access to abutting and nearby properties, unless new and improved access is provided by
the proposed development; and
8. Does not reduce the level of service of public utilities that are provided to surrounding development.
F. Consistency with Capital Improvement Plans. The proposed development shall conform to all adopted and applicable capital improvement
plans of the City, DeWitt County (for capital improvement plans within the City), and the State of Texas with regard to public infrastructure and
facilities, including water, sewer, gas, electric, streets, trails, and parks and recreation improvements.
G. Future Abutting Development. The parcel proposed for development shall be designed in a way that shows how future development of
abutting parcels under common ownership will relate to the parcel proposed for development in terms of transportation linkages, open spaces,
and utilities.
H. Preservation of Density and Intensity. Design review is intended to permit plan modifications that improve design, but not to require a
density or intensity reduction. The design review shall focus on revising the development site plan by altering roads, lots, landscaping, or other
plan elements, but not by altering development density or intensity unless the density or intensity exceeds permitted standards or the open
space, buffering, landscaping, or resource protection does not meet the requirements of this UDC.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 4.102 Lots
A. Generally.
1. New lots shall be dimensioned according to the requirements of Division 3.100, New Neighborhood Development Standards.
The size, shape, and orientation of lots shall be appropriate to the district in which they are located, the location of the proposed
development, and to the type of development contemplated. The lots shall provide an adequate buildable area for the development
that is contemplated.
2. Lots are required to be platted unless specifically exempted by this UDC. Lots shall be of appropriate size and arrangement to
provide for adequate off-street parking, loading facilities, landscaping, and other required site improvements or open space/bufferyard
areas. No lot shall be created for any nonresidential use that has an area, width, or depth that is less than required to accommodate
the use and all site requirements under this UDC.
B. Shape. Side lot lines shall be approximately at right angles to the centerlines of abutting streets. Alternative configurations may be
approved in order to accomplish a public purpose, such as the preservation of natural resources.
C. Access and Frontage.
1. Frontage Width. The width of required frontage shall not be less than the required lot width.
2. Residential Lots (except mixed-use and multi-family).
a. Generally, new single-family detached and single-family attached dwellings shall front only on local streets. Alternatively,
such lots may front on common open spaces, provided that vehicular access is taken from an alley that serves not more than 12
dwelling units. Through lots shall take access from the side from which the address is assigned, which shall not be collector or
arterial streets.
b. Manufactured home lots may front only on local streets or private streets within a manufactured home park or subdivision.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/438
3. Nonresidential, Mixed-Use, and Multi-Family Lots. Nonresidential, mixed-use, and multi-family lots that take access from
collector or arterial streets shall provide adequate on-site maneuvering areas for automobile turnaround.
D. Through Lots. Through lots for single-family detached and single-family attached dwellings are not permitted. Where residential
development is bounded by one or more arterial streets, lots shall be separated from the arterial street rights-of-way by a Type B bufferyard that
is owned and maintained by a property owners' association (see Division 7.300, Bufferyard Landscaping).
E. Orientation.
1. T-Intersections. The building envelope of lots at the terminal end of a T-intersection shall be offset a minimum distance of 25 feet
from the edge of the right-of-way in order to mitigate the impacts of oncoming traffic on the use and enjoyment of the lots.
2. Facing Public Street.
a. Each lot shall face a public street.
b. Where corner lots are key lots, where lots face the frontage street and also other lots face the side street, the corner lot
shall have a front building line on both streets.
F. Width of Irregular Lots. Key lots or irregular shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet frontage requirements. Also,
the rear width shall be sufficient to provide access for all utilities including garbage collection, but not less than 10 feet.
G. Minimum Lot Depth. No lot shall be platted less than 100 feet in depth except in cases where an irregular shaped tract is platted into lots
and a remnant piece of property is of sufficient area to plat one or more lots. The City Council may waive the depth requirement to prevent a
hardship on the developer.
H. Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
I. Replat Affecting Lot Size. No lot shall be replatted to reduce the size of the lots originally platted by a common dedicator, unless the consent
of all the property owners in the same addition has been obtained. The required consent may be implied where another lot or lots in the addition
as recorded have already been subdivided and built upon in the manner prescribed above. No residential lot will be reduced in width below 50
foot frontage with an area of 5,000 square feet.
J. Permit Issuance. A building permit may be issued when an applicant exhibits a duly executed and recorded deed covering a lot having
dimensions of 50 feet by 100 feet and the lot is being assessed for City taxes and conforms to the established lot pattern.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 4.103 Blocks
A. Generally. The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be determined with regard to the following:
1. The provision of adequate building sites suitable to the particular needs of the type of use contemplated;
2. The required lot widths and lot areas for the development;
3. The need for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic;
4. The need to provide for mobility and accessibility for people who use alternative modes of transportation; and
5. Limitations and opportunities of soils, natural resources, and uses or features that bound the parcel proposed for development.
B. Dimensions. Blocks shall be dimensioned according to the following standards:
1. Blocks that are used to provide access to single-family detached and/or single-family attached uses shall be of sufficient width to
allow two tiers of lots with appropriate lot depths (according to the lot widths and areas applied), unless such arrangement is not
feasible.
2. Generally, blocks that are used to provide access to residential uses shall not be longer than 800 feet. Blocks may be up to
1,200 feet in length if there is a mid-block pedestrian crossing to abutting blocks.
3. Blocks for nonresidential uses shall be of a width suitable for the intended use, with due allowance for off-street parking lots and
loading facilities and other site improvements, landscape areas, and open space areas required by this UDC.
C. Relationship to Existing Arterial and Collector Streets. Residential blocks shall be designed so that lots are not oriented for access from
arterial or collector streets. Marginal access streets may be approved if necessary for the efficient layout of lots on a parcel proposed for
development, provided that:
1. Access to the marginal access street meets access management requirements of this UDC; and
2. The following bufferyards are provided between the marginal access street and the abutting arterial or collector street:
a. Collector streets: Type A bufferyard; and
b. Arterial streets: Type B bufferyard.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 4.104 Access and Easements
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/438
A. Generally. During development approval, the City may require the granting of a variety of easements on private property or lots. These
easements may be for any of the following, or other approved, purposes:
1. Utilities;
2. Fire protection;
3. Police protection and other emergency services;
4. Access to public utilities or drainage areas;
5. Drainage and low impact development applications;
6. Pedestrian access; and
7. Natural resource or open space conservation.
B. Utility Easement Width and Location. Where required, all lots shall provide utility easements for sewer, water, gas, drainage, electricity,
cable, fiber-to-the-home, or other public utilities that are necessary or desirable to serve the subdivision. Their width and location shall be such
that access and maintenance, repair or reconstruction can be accomplished without undue hardship to the utility. Easement standards shall be
maintained by the Building Official and the City Secretary's Office.
C. Drainage and Low Impact Development Easements. To the extent possible, existing surface drainage patterns serving any off-site
properties or two or more proposed lots or properties shall be protected by easements or open space. In addition, drainage and low impact
development easements shall be placed on lots to convey surface water to storm sewers located on the street or to surface drainage channels
located in easements or open spaces as topography and grading dictate.
D. Fire Protection Easements. Rear fire protection access easements, where necessary to provide adequate protection for the structure, shall
be improved as appropriate for fire protection equipment, at a width of 20 feet, with appropriate turning radii for the City's fire protection
equipment as determined by the Fire Chief.
E. Pedestrian Access Easements. Pedestrian access easements may be required in accordance with Article 8, Streets, Sidewalks and Trails,
and Infrastructure.
F. Conservation Easements.
1. The City shall require conservation easements to preserve open space as required by this UDC, and to protect natural resources
that this UDC requires to be protected.
2. Conservation easements shall exclude other easements that would result in the disturbance of the land, except that pedestrian
access easements and nondestructive utility and drainage easements are permitted within areas protected by conservation
easements.
3. Conservation easements shall provide for permanent management and maintenance of the property by a responsible party other
than the City, such as a nonprofit land trust or property owners' association.
4. All conservation easements shall run in favor of three parties:
a. All lots or unit owners in the development; and
b. A nonprofit organization such as a land trust; and
c. The City.
5. The conservation easements shall be in a form approved by the City Attorney.
G. Encroachments and Removal of Encroachments. No permanent encroachment or structures shall be allowed to be located within the area
of any easement required by this Section. While the City or utility benefiting from the easement will make efforts to minimize disturbances, both
shall have the right to remove any encroachment, structures, fences, landscaping or other improvements placed upon such easements. The City
and/or utility shall not be obligated to restore or replace any such encroachment but shall restore any disturbed ground surfaces with seeding.
The City may assess the cost of removing an unauthorized improvement from an easement against the landowner, including the placing of a lien
on the property.
H. Maintenance of Easements. The responsibility for the regular maintenance of the ground surface in any easement shall rest with the owner
of the property within which the easement exists.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 4.105 Open Spaces
A. Generally. This Section is designed to achieve the open space requirements of bufferyards, resource protection, recreation, stormwater
management, and preservation of community character.
B. Principles.
1. Integrated Design. Generally, open spaces shall be integrated into the development design to bring significant open space to the
maximum number of properties, as well as visibility from public rights-of-way within the proposed development. Visual or physical
access to open spaces may be limited if such limitations would materially enhance natural resource management.
2. Trails and Drainage Corridors/Waterbodies/Watercourses. Open space shall be designed to provide trails along drainage
corridors, waterbodies, and watercourses. The landscaping along drainage corridors, waterbodies, [and] watercourses shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/438
designed to enhance the filtering of surface and subsurface water flows. Trails shall provide access along the drainage corridor or
watercourse for the residents of the proposed development.
3. Other Open Spaces. Formal open spaces shall be designed to provide areas of focus within the development. Landscaping,
furniture, and other amenities for pedestrians shall be installed to enhance this effect.
C. Design. The proposed subdivision plat or site plan shall be designed to allocate required open space and/or landscape areas according to
the following priorities.
1. Floodplains. Avoid development within floodplains and on land that is less than one foot above base flood elevation or in areas
which, if developed, would materially increase soil erosion and siltation of waterbodies or watercourses.
2. Buffers. Provide appropriate buffers between areas of different uses in accordance with the provisions set out in Division 7.300,
Bufferyard Landscaping.
3. Tree Protection. Provide for the protection of protected trees in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.103, Land Clearing
and Existing Trees.
4. Recreation and Public Gathering Spaces.
a. Residential Districts. In residential districts, use required open space areas to provide active and passive recreation
opportunities.
b. Mixed-Use Districts. In mixed-use districts (i.e., the C-2 district), use required open space areas to provide for public
gathering spaces such as landscape plazas (i.e., visible and accessible from the street), and landscaped courtyards or atriums
(i.e., visible and accessible to building occupants).
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 4.106 Streets
A. Generally. This Section sets out the general subdivision and land planning considerations for the layout and alignment of streets. The
design objectives, criteria, and dimensional requirements for streets, cul-de-sacs, and alleys are provided in Division 8.100, Streets.
B. Conformity to the Thoroughfare Plan. The location and width of all streets shall conform to the thoroughfare plan in conformance with
Section 8.103, Thoroughfare Plan.
C. Alignment of Subdivision Streets with Existing Streets.
1. Streets shall be configured as required by Section 8.101, Street Standards.
2. Streets shall, to the extent practicable, align with existing streets, and be given the name of the streets with which they align, or
shall be offset the minimum distance specified in Section 8.101, Street Standards, relating to jogs, offsets, reverse curves, and
alignments.
D. Alignment of Local Streets with Arterials and Collectors. Generally, local streets shall be either:
1. Perpendicular to arterial or collector streets; or
2. Loop streets, reverse frontage roads, or cul-de-sacs (which are limited by subsection 8.102 [8.102D], Dead-End Streets/Cul-de-
Sacs). See Figure 4.106, Local Street Orientation.
Figure 4.106
Local Street Orientation
E. Width of Public Ways. The minimum width of public street rights-of-way in subdivisions shall be established according to the functional
classification of each street, pursuant to Section 8.101, Street Standards.
F. Grades and Curves of Public Ways. The City Engineer shall promulgate the requirements for grades and curves of public ways.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 4.107 Utilities
A. Generally.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/438
1. All developments shall make provision for water, sewer, stormwater, electric, telephone, and cable service, and may make
provision for fiber-to-the-home and other public and/or private utilities available to City residents.
2. All drainage and utilities shall be efficiently and unobtrusively integrated into the design and shall avoid off-site impacts.
3. Utility infrastructure shall be underground and pad mounted at ground level; if within the right-of-way, should not block sidewalks
or visibility at intersections.
4. Once utility service lines have been installed underground, the installation of new aboveground lines in that location is prohibited.
B. Capacity. Where a parcel proposed for development is part of a larger tract of land, the City shall require the capacity of facilities to be
adequate to serve the entire tract to the extent that the capacity is matched to that of the lines that are extended to the parcel proposed for
development. Where the parcel proposed for development is part of a larger utility service area, the City may require the capacity of the
appropriate facilities to be adequate to serve the remainder of the service area.
C. Potable Water Line Loops. Potable water lines shall be looped and shall have a secondary feed to the potable water supply.
D. Interceptors. Where an interceptor is to be extended through the area being developed, the landowner shall provide the necessary
easements.
E. Common Use Easements. Wherever possible, the City shall require compatible utilities to share easements (see Section 4.104, Access and
Easements).
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2017-09, sec. 1, adopted 4/11/17)
Sec. 4.108 Naming and Numbering
A. Generally. To facilitate way-finding and the provision of emergency response services, the name of a subdivision, other land development,
and streets shall not be the same or substantially similar to the name of another subdivision, other land development, or the name of an existing
street, which is located within the City.
B. Residential Subdivision and Nonresidential Complex Names.
1. Naming. Residential subdivisions, other residential land development (e.g., apartment complexes or condominiums, etc.), and
nonresidential complexes (e.g., office or industrial parks, etc.), shall not be duplicated or be confused with existing names. Names are
subject to approval by the Building Official to eliminate duplicate names.
2. Exception. Exceptions shall be made for a group of related, abutting subdivisions (or other land development) that are part of an
overall plan of development which include common names according to a common theme (e.g., Pebble Ridge, Pebble Estates, etc.),
or given the same name followed by a phase number to identify each phase of the project.
C. Street Names.
1. Naming. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with other existing and named streets, shall bear the assigned name
of the existing streets. In no case shall the name of proposed streets duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street name,
irrespective of the use of suffix (e.g., Park Street versus Park Avenue) and/or prefix (e.g., West Elm Street versus East Elm Street) if
the streets are not contiguous and separated by a thoroughfare that commonly separates the City into quadrants (i.e., Esplanade
Street or Main Street).
2. Interagency Coordination. Street names will be submitted in writing to the 9-1-1 Coordinator of the Golden Crescent Regional
Planning Commission, in Victoria, Texas, for additional review as it relates to the provision of dispatching emergency services.
D. Property Numbering. The Building Official shall provide appropriate “property numbers” for all lots for all parcels proposed for development.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 4.109 Dedications and Improvements
A. Generally. All dedications of streets, easements, open spaces, recreation areas, or any other dedication shall be made on a form approved
by the City Attorney. All dedicated areas shall be shown on the subdivision plat or site plan for the parcel(s) proposed for development where
such approvals are required, unless the City determines that another form of dedication (e.g., a recorded easement) is more appropriate.
B. Easements. Easements for utilities and drainage shall be provided by the applicant as necessary to effectuate their purpose.
C. Streets.
1. Streets Within the Proposed Development. Street dedication(s) shall include required dedications of rights-of-way as needed, or
as required by the Thoroughfare Plan. Such dedications shall be made no later than the earliest of the following events:
a. The submittal of a final plat for the first phase of development;
b. The approval of a site plan; or
c. The issuance of a permit for a new principal building or structure that has a value of at least 50 percent of the assessed
value of the land described in the permit application.
2. Existing Streets. Existing streets shall be evaluated based on the capacity and condition of the existing streets' ability to support
the nature of uses proposed. Where found deficient, the streets shall be constructed or reconstructed according to City standards
based upon a traffic generation study or traffic impact analysis (if required as a result of the traffic generation study or traffic impact
analysis), that extends to the nearest street capable of carrying the additional traffic generated by the proposed development. Rightof-
way for such streets shall be dedicated to the City or other entity that controls the impacted street right-of-way.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/438
D. Open Space Parcels. Land areas that are used to satisfy open space ratio requirements shall be shown as separate parcels on plats. The
open space parcels shall be restricted to open space uses by plat restrictions or separately recorded covenants, conditions, and restrictions (see
also Section 4.110, Required Property Owners' Association and CCRs).
E. Recreation and Other Public Use Areas. Consideration shall be given by the developer to the dedication or reservation of suitable sites for
parks, playgrounds, and other areas for public use so as to conform to the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission in the
adopted Cuero Comprehensive Plan or other plan that focuses on parks and recreation areas in the City. Areas to be dedicated or reserved for
parks, playgrounds, and other public use areas should be indicated on the preliminary plat in order that it may be determined when and in what
manner such areas will be dedicated to, or acquired by the appropriate jurisdictional authority. In general, whenever the proposed subdivision
contains 20 acres or includes more than 100 lots, consideration shall be given to the reservation or dedication of a suitable area for recreation
purposes.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 4.110 Property Owners' Association and CCRs
A. Property Owners' Association.
1. Continuing Obligation. Any subdivision or development that provides for a continuing obligation (e.g., to own and maintain
common open space) may, at the subdivider's discretion, have the provision of a property owners' association and a recorded
declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CCRs) that ensures the maintenance and management of such continuing
obligation.
2. Incorporation of Property Owners' Association. If a continuing obligation is proposed by the subdivider, at the subdivider's
discretion, the subdivider may incorporate a property owners' association that will bear responsibility for ensuring continuing
compliance as described.
B. Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions (CCRs).
1. Declaration. Continuing obligations that necessitate ongoing efforts of tenants or successors in title may be included in a
declaration of CCRs for the property that shall be recorded in the public records in the chain of title for the property at the subdivider's
expense.
2. Timing. If proposed, the subdivider shall provide proposed CCRs to the City:
a. Upon filing the application for plat approval; or
b. If no plat approval is sought, before the issuance of any permit that directly authorizes development (development
approvals that require CCRs shall be contingent upon approval of the CCR document).
3. Plat Annotations. Where a plat is required, the CCRs shall be referenced on the plat.
C. Limited Review of Incorporation Documents and CCRs.
1. Generally. The City's right of enforcement shall extend only to those matters that substantially bear upon them. The City will not
seek to intervene in purely private disputes about CCRs. The City Attorney shall review the incorporation documents and CCRs to
ensure that the following provisions are included in a form that is acceptable to the City:
a. All items that are required by this UDC or conditions of approval, which may include specific rights of enforcement being
granted to the City;
b. Membership in the property owners' association shall be mandatory for all owners of property in the subdivision or
condominium;
c. Dues are payable to the property owners' association at regular intervals;
d. The property owners' association has lien rights with respect to unpaid dues;
e. The property owners' association has a perpetual existence;
f. The property owners' association has all responsibilities required by these regulations or conditions of approval (e.g.,
ownership and maintenance of common elements); and
g. The property owners' association has the capacity to sue and be sued.
2. Optional Elements. The CCRs may include any provisions considered desirable by the subdivider with respect to the
management and maintenance of the subdivision or condominium, provided that they do not undermine any of the following
requirements:
a. Required membership in, and payment of dues to, the property owners' association;
b. Inclusion and enforcement of all of the provisions required by these regulations and any conditions of approval, in a form
acceptable to the City Attorney;
c. Clauses that provide for enforceability by the City of those CCRs that relate to this UDC or conditions of approval; and
d. Applicable requirements of this UDC at the time of approval of the CCR document.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 4.111 Survey and Monumentation
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/438
A. Survey Required.
1. Generally. The following shall be used for mapping natural resources or other features of subdivision plats, site plans, or other as
otherwise required by this Section. In general, boundaries shall be measured as follows:
a. Measurements for the boundary are to be made horizontally, perpendicular from, or radial from any feature or point.
b. Boundaries that are dependent on elevation shall be based upon on-site elevations and shall not be interpolated.
2. Waterbodies and Watercourses.
a. Floodplains. All development within the City, not part of a previously approved plan or plat, shall show the boundary of the
floodplain and floodway, if such exist on the site. Such delineation shall be by a registered professional land surveyor.
b. Streams. Streams (perennial, intermittent, mapped, and unmapped) with identifiable banks and beds shall have their
boundaries set at the top of the bank.
c. Wetlands. Wetlands shall be measured by the criteria of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
d. Other Waterbodies/Watercourses. Initial identification of other watercourses/ waterbodies not otherwise classified shall be
made using the U.S. Geological Survey quadrangle maps or more accurate information, as available. Field survey verification to
determine evidence and location of channelized flow is required for subdivision plats and development plans.
3. Soils. If septic tanks are to be used, soils shall be delineated by on-site testing of the soils to determine soil boundaries.
4. Topography. Topographic lines shall be at two-foot contour intervals unless such intervals are impractical due to essentially flat
topography.
5. Vegetation. Vegetation shall be measured by the canopy line for the determination of areas of woodlands or trees. Other
vegetation types shall be measured from the middle of the vegetation transition.
B. Monumentation.
1. Generally. Monuments shall be placed to mark the following:
a. Lot corners, points of curvature, points of tangency, and reference points; and
b. Street centerlines, points of curvature, points of tangency, reference points, and where street lines intersect the exterior
boundaries of the subdivision.
2. Requirements. The following guidelines apply to artificial monuments to be set.
a. Monuments consisting of a metal pipe must have at least one inch outside diameter and must be at least four feet in length
(longer in soft or unstable soil). Such monuments shall be set in concrete six inches in diameter by 18 inches long. Concrete
monuments must be at least 3 inches in width or diameter by 24 inches in length, reinforced with an iron rod at least 1/4 inch in
diameter, and may contain a precise mark on top indicating the exact location of the corner.
b. Marks on existing concrete, stone, or steel surface must consist of drill holes, chisel marks or punch marks and must be of
sufficient size, diameter or depth to be definitive, stable and readily identifiable as a survey monument. Marks on asphalt roads
may consist of railroad spikes, large nails, “PK nails,” or other permanent metal spikes or nail-like objects.
c. Wooden stakes shall not be set as permanent boundary monuments.
3. Installation. Monuments must be set vertically whenever possible and the top must be reasonably flush with the finished grade
when practical. Monuments subject to damage from earthwork, construction or traffic should be buried at a sufficient depth to offer
protection.
4. Witness Monuments. When physically impossible to set a monument at the corner, witness monuments shall be set when
possible, preferably on each converging line at measured distances from the corner and identified as such in the description and on
the plat of the property.
5. Benchmarking. For all subdivisions of five lots or more, a permanent benchmark shall be accessibly placed, the elevation of
which shall be based on mean sea level as determined by the U.S. Geological Survey and accurately noted on the subdivision plat.
Such permanent benchmark shall be brass capped, set in concrete, with a minimum dimension of six inches in diameter, four feet
long with a flat top. The top of the brass monument shall have an indented cross to identify properly the location and shall be set flush
with the finished grade stamped with one-half-inch numbers.
C. As-Builts. As-built plans, certified by a registered land surveyor, shall be submitted to the Building Official and reviewed by the City
Engineer upon completion of subdivision infrastructure.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 4.200 Residential Development Design
Sec. 4.201 Standard Residential Neighborhood
A. Generally. New residential subdivisions or neighborhoods using the standard development option shall comply with the provisions of this
Section using the development standards set out in Division 3.100, New Neighborhoods Development Standards.
B. Form of Development. A standard residential neighborhood can include only two different housing types, where most of the land is owned
by individual homeowners (either single-family detached, or manufactured housing in a manufactured home park or subdivision). Single-family
detached dwellings are residences for one family that are typically located on a privately owned lot, with private yards on each side of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/438
dwelling unit. Single-family detached lots may be owned in fee-simple, or part of a condominium form of ownership surrounded by limited
common elements for use by residents of the single-family home, which would serve the same purpose as a private yard.
C. Minimum Design.
1. Identifiable Neighborhood. If a standard residential neighborhood exceeds 150 dwelling units, it shall be designed as multiple
identifiable “neighborhoods” with distinct boundaries.
2. Common Open Space. Common open space is generally utilized for bufferyard, recreation, and drainage purposes. The general
layout and design of the parcel proposed for development shall be configured so as to maximize the number of lots that are within
1,320 feet of usable open space (e.g., park, trail, etc.).
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 4.202 Planned Cluster Residential Neighborhood
A. Generally. New residential subdivisions or neighborhoods using the planned cluster development option shall comply with the provisions of
this Section using the development standards set out in Division 3.100, New Neighborhoods Development Standards.
B. Form of Development. A cluster neighborhood allows multiple housing types (i.e., single-family detached, duplex, triplex, and townhouse)
with smaller lots and building sites that are clustered together in order to provide for additional common open spaces. Often, the common open
space is set aside for resource features such as steep slopes, waterbodies, watercourses, woodlands, floodplains, etc. Therefore, cluster
development may be used to preserve environmental resources by clustering development on the buildable portions of the property.
C. Minimum Design.
1. Interconnected. Designated resource protection areas shall, to the greatest extent practicable, be interconnected with other open
space areas, greenways, and trail systems (if provided) within the parcel proposed for development and on abutting lands where such
integration is practical and does not materially compromise the resource value of the protection areas.
2. Access. Open space shall be integrated into the development design so as to bring access to significant open space to the
maximum number of properties; provided, however, that physical access may be limited if such limitation would material [materially]
enhance natural resource management.
3. Clustered Setback. Dwelling units on clustered lots shall be set back from the perimeter of the parcel at least the following
distances:
a. One to four lots: as required for individual lots
b. Five to 20 lots: 75 feet
c. 21 or more lots: 100 feet.
4. Compatibility. Where a planned cluster neighborhood abuts, is adjacent to, or is located across a local street from existing
residentially zoned or used property, the housing types that are nearest or across the street shall be comparable to the existing
housing types in terms of the housing type, scale, and method of access.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 4.203 Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision
A. Generally. Manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be designed according to the standards of Division 4.100, General
Requirements for Development Design, and this Section. Additional requirements are set out in Table 2.202, Residential Compatibility Standards,
and individual manufactured homes are subject to the standards set out in Section 10.103, Manufactured Home Standards.
B. Minimum and Maximum Site Area.
1. Minimum Area of Parcel Proposed for Development. The minimum area of a manufactured home park or subdivision is five
acres.
2. Maximum Extent of Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The maximum extent of a manufactured home park or subdivision
is 15 acres.
C. Site Design. Manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet the following site design standards:
1. Lot Dimensions. Lot dimensions shall be as provided in Section 3.101, Development Standards for New Residential
Neighborhoods.
2. Park or Subdivision Access and Circulation.
a. No vehicular entrance to, or exit from, any manufactured home park or subdivision, wherever such may be located, shall be
within 200 feet along streets from any school, public playground, place of public assembly, hospital, library, or institution for
dependents or for children, except where such property is in another block or another street which the premises in question do
not abut.
b. The entrance to the manufactured home park or subdivision shall have a pavement width of 30 feet with adequate curb
radius and shall have at least one direct connection to a paved public street.
c. The interior roadway shall be in accordance with the standards for public or private local streets and shall not include deadend
streets unless a cul-de-sac is installed in accordance to City specifications.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/438
3. Lot or Space Access. Each manufactured home lot or space shall have direct access to the interior roadway.
4. Off-Street Parking. The number of off-street parking spaces per manufactured home lot shall be in conformance with Division
5.100, Parking and Loading.
5. Lighting. Lighting shall be provided for interior roads and walkways and shall be in conformance with the applicable standards of
Division 5.300, Lighting.
6. Laundry and Maintenance Buildings. Laundry and maintenance buildings (for use by residents only) may be included in the site
design.
7. Recreation. When manufactured home parks or subdivisions are established:
a. Recreational areas shall be provided which shall be a minimum of 10 percent of the overall parcel proposed for
development, exclusive of streets and parking areas; and
b. A portion of that area shall be improved for recreational use prior to the owner/operator starting operations.
8. Required Bufferyard. All manufactured home parks or subdivisions shall provide a Type C bufferyard (Option 1) on all borders,
including along all street frontage. Buffers which are located along the borders of existing residential lots shall include a six-foot tall
opaque masonry fence or wall (see Division 7.300, Bufferyard Landscaping).
9. Solid Waste Collection. Centralized solid waste collection, if applicable, shall be in accordance with the provisions set out in
Section 11.106, Solid Waste Collection.
10. Utilities. All units are served with sanitary sewer, potable water, and electrical power, which are installed underground. All
electrical service equipment is mounted on the structure to which service is provided.
11. Fire Protection.
a. Open fires shall be allowed only in a manner and within a container approved by the Fire Chief.
b. Each manufactured home lot or space shall be within 500 feet of a fire hydrant, except where NFPA Standard #501A allows
a different spacing.
12. Maintenance. All grounds in the manufactured home park or subdivision shall be
a. Shall be paved, covered with stone, rock, or other similar solid material, or protected with vegetative cover that is capable
of preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust; and
b. Maintained free of accumulation of high grass, weeds, and debris so as to prevent rodent and snake harborage or the
breeding of flies, mosquitoes, or other pests. This does not apply to the required bufferyard, which should be allowed to fill in
with natural vegetation over time.
D. Recreational Vehicle Spaces. Any manufactured home park or subdivision that was lawfully under construction or in operation on July 7,
2011, is allowed to maintain the recreational vehicle (RV) spaces that existed prior to that date. Manufactured home parks or subdivisions that
are created after that date shall not include spaces for recreational vehicles, nor allow recreational vehicles, boats, etc. to be located on site.
E. Site Plan. A site plan is required showing conformance with each of the site design criteria detailed in this Section, as well as other
applicable requirements of this UDC which will be used for review and consideration by the applicable administrative body having jurisdiction.
F. Expansion or Modification of Existing MHPs or Subdivisions.
1. Re-review Required. Any enlargement (e.g., size of property or additional manufactured home lots or spaces, etc.) or
modification of site layout of an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall require a re-review and approval as if it were a
new application.
2. Existing Facilities Brought Into Conformance. No enlargement or extensions to any manufactured home park or subdivision shall
be permitted unless the existing facility is made to conform with all the requirements for new construction in conformance with this
Section.
G. Unit Inspection. When a unit is to be conveyed to a new owner or leased to a new occupant, it shall be inspected by the Building Official. All
units that do not comply with standards for manufactured housing shall be given a complete interior and exterior inspection focusing on
habitability and safety. If the unit is deemed unfit, the Building Official may require improvements or replacement with a newer unit certified by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
H. Plat Notation. A note shall be added to the plat stating that only single-wide or double-wide manufactured homes are allowed, and that
double-wide manufactured homes shall not be allowed on lots designed for single-wide manufactured homes.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 4.204 Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks
A. Generally. Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks shall be designed according to the standards of this Section.
B. Purpose and Intent. The City Council finds that RV parks can contribute to the City's long-term economic and social well-being if they are
properly located, designed, and maintained to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the RV park users, abutting properties, and the
City as a whole.
C. Minimum and Maximum Site Area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/438
1. Minimum Area of Parcel Proposed for Development. The minimum area of an RV park is two acres.
2. Maximum Extent of RV Park. The maximum extent of a RV park is 10 acres.
D. Site Design. RV parks shall meet the following site design standards:
1. Maximum Density. The maximum site density for RV parks shall be 20 spaces per acre, where only one recreational vehicle is
permitted per recreational vehicle space.
2. RV Spaces. Each recreational vehicle space shall comply with the following:
a. Minimum Space Area. A minimum of 1,750 square feet in area and 25 feet in width is required consisting of:
i. Permanent RV Parking Pad. No less than 10 feet in width by 24 feet in depth shall be used to construct a permanent
parking pad consisting of concrete, gravel, asphalt, crushed rock, or similar material; and each parking pad shall be
separated by at least 10 feet from any other parking pad;
ii. Non-RV Off-Street Parking Space. Each RV space shall have a minimum of one off-street parking space for a vehicle
that is not the recreational vehicle.
iii. Remaining Area. The remaining area of the recreational vehicle space shall comply with subsection C.11. [D.11.],
Maintenance, below;
b. Space Marker. A permanent space marker identifying the space number is required to be visible day and night, which shall
be visible from the internal private roadway;
c. Accessory Structures. Individual RV spaces are not allowed to have accessory structures (e.g., awnings, cabanas,
carports, garages, porches, storage sheds, etc.), with the exception of factory installed recreational vehicle extensions (e.g.,
expandable spaces or awnings).
3. RV Park Access and Circulation.
a. The entrance of the internal private roadway shall have a pavement width of 30 feet with adequate curb radius and shall
have at least one direct connection to a paved public street.
b. The internal private roadway shall have a pavement width of 24 feet in accordance with City specifications, and shall
consist of concrete, asphalt, or crushed limestone. The roadway may be 15 feet in width if it is designed for one-way roads as
long as there is a minimum of 24 feet of unobstructed clearance, and a minimum of 60 feet in turning area and radii, to permit
the free movement of emergency vehicles.
c. No dead-end streets unless a cul-de-sac is installed in accordance to City specifications.
4. Lot Access. Each recreational vehicle space shall have direct access to the interior private roadway and shall be constructed of
concrete, gravel, asphalt, crushed limestone, or similar material that controls or reduces dust.
5. Required Facilities. Each RV park shall install and maintain the following required facilities:
a. Office. An office for the manager and a publicly available telephone which shall be accessible for emergency use 24 hours
a day, seven days a week.
b. Laundry and Maintenance Facilities. A laundry and maintenance building shall be included in the site design.
c. Off-Street Parking. Each RV park shall provide a common guest parking lot consisting of one parking space for every five
recreational vehicle spaces.
d. Sanitary Facilities. The RV park shall provide the following sanitary facilities in the quantities specified below. Each
calculation shall be rounded up to the next nearest whole number, where a minimum of at least one is required. Facilities for
males and females shall be separate and located within a permitted building.
i. Toilets. One toilet for each sex for every 40 RV spaces;
ii. Washbasins. One washbasin shall be provided within the bathroom for every two toilets provided; and
iii. Showers. One shower for each sex.
e. Design and Maintenance of Sanitary Facilities. Design and maintenance of the sanitary facilities shall be in accordance
with the following:
i. Buildings shall be well lit at all times, day or night, well ventilated with screened openings, and constructed of
moisture-proof material to permit rapid and satisfactory cleaning, scouring and washing;
ii. The floors shall be of concrete or other impervious material, elevated not less than four inches above grade, and each
room shall be provided with floor drains.
iii. Toilet and bathing facilities shall be in separate rooms or each toilet provided in a community toilet house shall be
partitioned apart from any other toilet in the same room. The floor surface around the commode shall not drain into the
shower floor.
iv. Toilet floors and walls shall be of impervious material, painted white or a light color, and be kept clean at all times.
Shower stalls shall be made of tile, plaster, cement or some other impervious material and shall be kept clean at all times.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/438
Shower stalls shall be partitioned in any manner as to provide privacy and promote cleanliness. If a shower stall is of some
impervious material other than tile, cement or plaster, it shall be white or some light color and kept clean at all times.
v. The floor of any bathroom, other than the shower stall, shall be of some impervious material, and the walls of the
bathroom, other than the shower stall, shall be made of a washable surface, kept clean at all times.
6. Lighting. All common buildings and access thereto shall be well lit both inside and out during the night hours and the lighting
design shall be in conformance with Division 5.300, Lighting.
7. Required Bufferyard. All RV parks shall provide a Type C bufferyard (Option 1) on all borders, including along all street frontage.
Buffers which are located along the borders of existing residential lots shall include a six-foot tall opaque fence or wall (see Division
7.300, Bufferyard Landscaping).
8. Solid Waste Collection. Centralized solid waste collection shall be in accordance with the provisions set out in Section 11.106,
Solid Waste Collection.
9. Utilities. In addition to the following, the installation of utilities shall be in compliance with all building codes and other applicable
provisions of this UDC.
a. Drainage. The ground surface in all parts of the RV park shall be graded and designed to drain all stormwater and surface
water in a safe, efficient manner. A stormwater management plan is required in conformance with 8.302, Stormwater
Management, Drainage, and Low Impact Development.
b. Water System. All common buildings and RV spaces shall be provided with a connection to the City water system if it is
located within 1,000 feet of the RV park. If the City water system is not available, then a permit from the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ) shall be obtained to install a well. The City must approve all proposed water facility plans prior to
construction. The water distribution system shall be designed as follows:
i. A master water meter shall be installed to serve the RV park. Sub-metering or remetering for private purposes by the
owner/operator of the RV park is permitted however sub-metering or remetering of individual RV spaces for public
purposes, as determined by the City, such as meter reading and utility billing of individual RV spaces is not permitted.
ii. A reduced pressure principle backflow preventer will be required to be placed at the lot line on the discharge side of
the master meter. In addition, one must be placed at each of the connections for each RV spaces and located on the right
side of the space.
iii. Water riser service branch lines shall extend at least four inches above ground elevation. The branch line shall be at
least 3/4-inch.
iv. Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service lines, valves and riser pipes. Surface drainage shall
be diverted from the location of utility connections at each space.
v. A shut-off valve below the frost line shall be provided on each branch line.
vi. The owner/operator shall have complete maintenance responsibility for the water system within the RV park.
vii. The City has no maintenance responsibility for service lines within the RV park. The responsibility of the City stops at
the lot line.
c. Wastewater System. All common buildings and RV spaces shall be provided with a connection to the City wastewater
system if it is located within 1,000 feet of the RV park. If the City wastewater system is not available, then a permit from the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) shall be obtained prior to placement of an on-site sewage facility. The City
must approve all proposed wastewater facility plans prior to construction. The wastewater distribution system shall be installed
as follows:
i. Each RV space shall be provided with a four-inch diameter wastewater riser and shall extend above grade four to six
inches. The wastewater riser pipe shall be so located on each stand so that the wastewater connection to the RV drain
outlet will approximate a vertical position. Each inlet shall be provided with a gas-tight seal when connected to a
recreational vehicle or have a gas-tight seal plug when not in service.
ii. The wastewater connection to each RV space shall consist of a single four-inch service line without any branch lines,
fittings, or connections. All joints shall be watertight.
iii. Surface drainage shall be diverted away from the riser. The rim of the riser pipe shall extend at least four to six inches
above the ground elevation.
iv. Each collection wastewater line shall provide a vent extending a minimum of 10 feet in height.
v. The owner/operator shall have complete maintenance responsibility for the wastewater system within the RV park.
vi. The responsibility of the City stops at the lot line.
vii. Each RV park shall be required to install at the lot line, where connection to the City wastewater system is made, a
sample well site. The sample well site shall be installed according to City specifications.
d. Electrical System. All common buildings and RV spaces shall be provided with a connection to the City electrical system,
which shall be installed underground in accordance with the most currently adopted National Electric Code. The electrical
system shall be installed as follows:
i. A master electric meter shall be installed to serve the RV park. Sub-metering or remetering for private purposes by the
owner/operator of the RV park is permitted however sub-metering or remetering of individual RV spaces for public
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/438
purposes, as determined by the City, such as meter reading and utility billing of individual RV spaces is not permitted.
ii. The City has no maintenance responsibility for service lines within the RV park. The responsibility of the City stops at
the weatherhead.
iii. The location of all underground lines shall be clearly marked by surface signs at approved intervals.
iv. Power supply to each space shall be a minimum of one 20-amp and one 50-amp power supply.
v. Outlets (receptacles or pressure connectors) shall be housed in an Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., approved
weatherproof outlet box.
vi. A watertight seal shall be provided for underground conduit in floodplain installations and a riser extending a
minimum of two feet above the floodplain elevation shall be provided.
10. Fire Protection.
a. Open fires shall be allowed only in a manner and within a container approved by the Fire Chief.
b. Each RV space shall be within 600 feet of a fire hydrant. If the City water system is not available, the owner/operator shall
install and maintain a pond or container on the property that has a minimum capacity of 20,000 gallons, if one does not already
exist on-site. The pond or container shall be filled at all times and be connected to a dry hydrant. The dry hydrant shall have a
standard four-inch connection or other such size as approved by the Fire Chief and be installed in a location that is accessible to
emergency vehicles.
11. Maintenance. In conformance with the landscape surface ratio (LSR) of the district, all grounds in the RV park shall be
a. Paved, covered with stone, rock, or other similar solid material, or protected with vegetative cover that is capable of
preventing soil erosion and eliminating dust; and
b. Maintained free of accumulation of high grass, weeds, and debris so as to prevent rodent and snake harborage or the
breeding of flies, mosquitoes, or other pests. This does not apply to the required bufferyard, which should be allowed to fill in
with natural vegetation over time.
E. Site Plan. A site plan is required showing conformance with each of the site design criteria detailed in this Section (including all proposed
on-site utilities, rights-of-way/easements and roadway configuration, storm drainage, recreational vehicle space layout, building improvements,
fencing, buffering, lighting and signage), as well as other applicable requirements of this UDC which will be used for review and consideration by
the applicable administrative body having jurisdiction.
F. License. The owner/operator is required to hold a valid license issued annually from the City to operate an RV park in the City in accordance
with Chapter 159, Recreational Vehicle Parks, of the City's Code of Ordinances, as amended from time to time.
Editor's note–Chapter 159 of the 1994 Code of Ordinances, Recreational Vehicle Parks, is repealed by section 15.305 of the Unified Development Code. The
reader is directed to section 14.304H of the development code, relating to recreational vehicle park licenses.
G. Operations. The owner/operator shall collect the following information as part of the registration process for each person renting an RV
space in the RV park:
1. Name;
2. Full address of permanent residence;
3. Automobile and recreational vehicle license plate number and the state in which each is registered;
4. Photocopy of the driver's license of the primary tenant;
5. The number or letter of the designated space being rented; and
6. The date of arrival and departure.
H. Expansion or Modification of Existing RV Parks.
1. Re-review Required. Any enlargement (e.g., size of property or additional RV spaces, etc.) or modification of site layout of an
existing RV park shall require a re-review and approval as if it were a new application.
2. Existing Facilities Brought Into Conformance. No enlargement or extensions to any RV park shall be permitted unless the
existing facility is made to conform with all the requirements for new construction in conformance with this Section.
I. Inspections.
1. Authorized. The Building Official shall make at least two annual inspections, at six-month intervals, per RV park and additional
inspections as are necessary, without prior notice, to determine compliance with this Section.
2. Entry On Premises. The Building Official and Code Enforcement Officer shall have the power to enter, during normal operating
hours, upon any private or public property with the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of
this Section.
J. Suspensions.
1. Notice. Whenever, upon inspection of any RV park, the Building Official finds that conditions or practices exist which are violation
of any provision of this Section applicable to such park, the Building Official shall provide notice in writing to the owner/operator, and if
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/438
such conditions or practices have not been corrected in the timeframe set forth in the notice, the Building Official will suspend the RV
park license and give notice of such suspension.
2. Cessation of Operations. Upon suspension of the RV park license, the owner/operator shall cease operation of the RV park.
3. Appeal. The suspension of the license may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as set out in Section 14.401,
Appeals of Administrative Decisions.
K. Abandonment and Restoration.
1. Plan. In the event that operations should cease for a period of 24 months, the owner shall be required to provide a written plan
and agreement to the Building Official showing evidence of a pending lease/sale agreement or a plan of action setting forth how the
site's improvements (e.g., internal roadways, RV parking pads, buildings and structures, utilities, signs, and other non-vegetative
improvements) shall be dismantled and the site restored to its previous unoccupied, natural condition. The start of the 24-month
timeframe begins upon notification to the City by the owner/operator, or upon the initial inspection by the Building Official, whichever
comes first.
2. Restoration. If the City deems the abandoned RV park is public health or safety hazard after the 24 months have expired, the
City may restore the property to its natural conditions and place a lien on the property to recover both restoration and administrative
costs.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 4.205 Manufactured Home Overlay (MHO) District
A. Purpose and Intent. Within the districts established by this chapter, or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots and uses of
lands, buildings and structures, uses of land and buildings in combination, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this chapter was
passed and amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. It is the intent
of this chapter to consider certain lots or land uses for manufactured homes in an Overlay District under conditional use criteria. Additionally, the
purpose of the Manufactured Home Overlay (MHO) District is to provide for areas where manufactured homes may be placed on individual lots
as a conditional use to assist with individual needs for a Primary Residence-Owner Occupied Premises. It is intended to provide areas and
settings for a quality living environment for manufactured home residents and neighboring property owners.
B. Generally. Manufactured homes within the Manufactured Home Overlay (MHO) District shall comply with, but not limited to, Section 14.402,
Conditional Uses Permits, in addition to those standards that may be applicable in Section 4.203, Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision,
Section 10.103, Manufactured Home Unit Standards, and in Section 12.107, Nonconforming Manufactured Homes, Table 2.102, Residential and
Commercial Uses of the Home, Table 2.202, Residential Limited and Conditional Use Standards, Table 3.202, Lot and Building Standards for
Neighborhood Conservation Subdistricts, Table 3.204A, Lot and Building Standards for NT-R5 Lots and Table 5.101A, Residential and
Commercial Use of the Home Parking Requirements.
C. Standards and Criteria. A manufactured home proposed to be located within a Manufactured Home Overlay (MHO) District shall be
considered under Conditional Use Permit criteria, Section 14.402, Conditional Uses Permits, in addition to and provided that:
1. Proof of satisfaction for all taxes and liens is to be provided with a Conditional Uses Permit application.
2. Each manufactured home shall be placed with a model constructed no greater than five years from the date of the proposed
placement.
3. Each manufactured home is to be considered as a primary, owner occupied residence. Proof of ownership by deed is required
under permit procedures and utilities are to be maintained in the same proven ownership, upon initial placement and subsequent
transfer of ownership.
4. The manufactured home must meet the minimum standards as a HUD manufactured home unit in accordance with the
Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (HUD Code) for the state of Texas.
5. The manufactured home must display a certification label on the exterior of each transportable section.
6. The manufactured home is attached to and installed on a permanent foundation and the provisions of the Unified Development
Code Section 10.103, Manufactured Home Unit Standards and Table 3.202, Lot and Building Standards for Neighborhood
Conservation Subdistricts or Table 3.204A, Lot and Building Standards for NT-R5 Lots setbacks, as well as design standards set forth
in Section 4.203, Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision are complied with.
7. The wheels, tongue, and traveling lights must be removed within 15 days after the manufactured home is placed on the lot.
8. Required skirting is affixed to the manufactured home, pursuant to Section 10.103, Manufactured Home Unit Standards, (E).
9. Provision of two (2) off-street improved parking spaces required in connection with the placement of the manufactured home,
pursuant to Table 5.101A, Residential and Commercial Use of the Home Parking Requirements.
10. Required landscaping, screening and fencing of the side and rear yards shall consist of fence and a 3-foot planting area.
Provided plant options available in the attached Appendix A Plant Lists, see also Section 11.103, Fencing and Walls.
11. The proposal must comply with all other development standards of the underlying zoning district.
D. Applicability of additional regulations. Permitted uses within the Manufactured Home Overlay (MHO) District include all uses in the
underlying zoning district. All structures are required to meet the applicable design and setback standards.
E. Permit procedures. A request for a manufactured home within a Manufactured Home Overlay (MHO) District shall be processed in
accordance with the building permit application entitled MHO Building Permit and other applications, as required. The permit request will be
reviewed for compliance with the standards and criteria of this section by the Building Official. Fees and additional applications as shown, but are
not limited to, as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/438
1. City of Cuero House Move Permit application;
2. City of Cuero Manufactured Home Placement application;
3. City of Cuero MEP Permit application, for the required connection of water and electric utilities.
F. Design Standards: Manufactured homes placed in the Manufactured Home Overlay (MHO) District are required to meet the design
standards set forth in Section 10.103, Manufactured Home Unit Standards.
(Ordinance 2016-13, sec. 1, adopted 7/19/16)
Sec. 4.206 Bed and Breakfast Home or Inn
A. Purpose and Intent. Within the districts established by this chapter, or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots and uses of
lands, buildings and structures, uses of land and buildings in combination, and characteristics of use which were lawful before this chapter was
passed and amended, but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. It is the intent
of this chapter to consider certain lots or land uses for Bed and Breakfast Home or Inn (Overnight Accommodations) establishments under
Conditional Use Permit application and criteria. It is intended to provide areas and settings for a quality living environment for Bed and Breakfast
establishments and neighboring property owners.
B. Generally. Bed and Breakfast establishments shall comply with, but not be limited to, Section 14.402, Conditional Uses Permits and Section
4.206, Bed and Breakfast Home or Inn, in addition to those standards that may be applicable in Table 2.102, Residential and Commercial Uses
of the Home, Table 2.203, Commercial Use of the Home Limited and Conditional Use Standards, Table 5.101A, Residential and Commercial Use
of the Home Parking Requirements and Table 2.210A, Limited and Conditional Use Standards for Specific Temporary Uses.
C. Standards and Criteria. Bed and Breakfast Homes are allowed in an NC Neighborhood Conservation or NT Neighborhood Transition
Zoning District, if it is demonstrated that:
1. Overnight accommodations (lodging) shall occur in the existing primary residence by the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit;
2. The minimum gross habitable floor area for a non-owner occupied Bed and Breakfast Home is 800 square feet. For an owner
occupied Bed and Breakfast Home, the minimum gross habitable floor area is 1,200 square feet, with a minimum of two bedrooms
each with a dedicated bathroom provided;
3. No entrance is specifically dedicated for the Bed and Breakfast Home, unless otherwise required by law;
4. Proposed external alterations, construction or reconstruction of the dwelling unit to accommodate the Bed and Breakfast Home
is to be considered under Conditional Use Permit review;
5. There shall be no outdoor display or storage of goods, materials, merchandise, or equipment related to the Bed and Breakfast
Home that is visible from the exterior of the dwelling unit;
6. Meals are provided to residents and overnight guests only (e.g. not to function as a commercial kitchen for non-residents or
guest);
7. Small private events for groups of 20 or more in Bed and Breakfast Homes are allowed only by the issuance of a Special Event
Permit, see Table 2.210A, Limited and Conditional Use Standards for Specific Temporary Uses;
8. All off-street parking complies with the provisions set out in Table 5.101A, Residential and Commercial Use of the Home Parking
Requirements, and may require privacy screening from adjacent properties with a Type A buffer yard, see Section 7.302, Required
Buffer yards, to be determined under Conditional Use Permit review;
9. Signage is limited to a single, non-illuminated placard or nameplate with a maximum size of two square feet that is affixed
securely and flat against a wall of the home;
10. The business is conducted so that it does not create parking or traffic congestion or otherwise unreasonably interfere with the
peace and enjoyment of surrounding homes as places of residence;
11. The Bed and Breakfast Home will not create or cause any perceptible noise, odor, smoke, heat, dust, electrical interference, or
vibrations that constitute a public or private nuisance to neighboring properties;
12. The home is inspected by the Building Official and Fire Marshal, with a written record indicating that the home meets all
applicable building and fire codes prior to occupancy as a Bed and Breakfast Home; and
13. The proposal must comply with all other development standards of the underlying zoning district.
D. Standards and Criteria. Bed and Breakfast Inns are allowed in a C-1 Commercial, General or C-2 Central Business District Zoning District,
if it is demonstrated that:
1. Overnight accommodations (lodging) shall occur in the existing primary residence and may occur in a guesthouse or accessory
dwelling by the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit;
2. The minimum gross habitable floor area is 1,200 square feet, with a minimum of one main and one separate guest bathroom
provided;
3. Meals are provided to residents and overnight guests only (e.g. not to function as a commercial kitchen for non-residents or
guest);
4. Small private events for groups of 40 or more in Bed and Breakfast Inns are allowed only by the issuance of a Special Event
Permit, see Table 2.210A, Limited and Conditional Use Standards for Specific Temporary Uses;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/438
5. The principal use of the Bed and Breakfast Inn is for temporary or overnight accommodations with an accessory use for catering
of small private events, as established under a Conditional Use Permit; the preparation of food for catering of small private events is
allowed under a Conditional Use Permit, provided ample parking is contained on-site or other arrangements are made to meet the
parking needs of the event, when necessary;
6. All off-street parking complies with the provisions set out in Table 5.101A, Residential and Commercial Use of the Home Parking
Requirements, and may require privacy screening from adjacent properties with a Type B buffer yard, see Section 7.302, Required
Buffer yards, to be determined under Conditional Use Permit review;
7. Signage is limited to a single, non-illuminated placard or nameplate with a maximum size of two square feet that is affixed
securely and flat against a wall of the home, and/or a freestanding sign placed no greater than 6 feet from the Bed and Breakfast Inn
dwelling unit and no greater than four feet in height and four feet in area. Compliance with other criteria as set out in Article 9 Sign of
the Unified Development Code;
8. The business is conducted so that it does not create parking or traffic congestion or otherwise unreasonably interfere with the
peace and enjoyment of surrounding homes as places of residence;
9. The Bed and Breakfast Inn will not create or cause any perceptible noise, odor, smoke, heat, dust, electrical interference, or
vibrations that constitute a public or private nuisance to neighboring properties;
10. The home is inspected by the Building Official and Fire Marshal, with a written record indicating that the home meets all
applicable building and fire codes prior to occupancy as a Bed and Breakfast Inn; and
11. The proposal must comply with all other development standards of the underlying zoning district.
E. Applicability of additional regulations. All structures are required to meet applicable state, local and international codes, where applicable.
Bed and Breakfast Home and Inn establishment owners shall also comply with all requirements of the Texas Administrative Code, Title 25 -
Health Services, Part 1 - Department of State Health Services, Chapter 228 - Retail Food, Subchapter H - Requirements Applicable to Certain
Establishments, Rule § 228.223 - Bed and Breakfast.
F. Permit procedures. Once a Conditional Use Permit application has been submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department and received
approved [approval] by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, a request for a Bed and Breakfast Home or Inn shall be
processed in accordance with the building permit application entitled Bed and Breakfast Compliance Permit-Registry application. The permit
request will be reviewed for compliance with the standards and criteria of this section by the Building Official. Fees and additional applications as
shown, but are not limited to, as follows:
1. Conditional Use Permit application;
2. Bed and Breakfast Compliance Permit—Registry application.
(Ordinance 2016-25, sec. 1, adopted 1/11/17)
ARTICLE 5 PARKING, LOADING, ACCESS, CIRCULATION, AND LIGHTING
Division 5.100 Parking and Loading
Sec. 5.101 Required Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces
A. Purpose. The main purpose of this Division is to establish standards ensuring the availability and safe use of parking lots.
B. Applicability of Division.
1. All new development shall provide all of the parking spaces required by this Section and shall comply with all other provisions of
this Division.
2. Expansions to existing development and changes in use of existing buildings that require additional parking shall provide parking
to the extent of the new demand created by the expansion or change in use, as set out in Section 12.105, Nonconforming Parking
and Landscaping.
3. Changes in use of existing buildings that result in a fewer required parking spaces shall not be required to provide additional
parking spaces.
C. Calculations. The number of required parking spaces is calculated according to the formulas set out in this Section, and then adjusted per
the standards set out in Section 5.103, Alternatives or Modifications to Required Parking.
1. Variables for Calculating Required Parking. The variables used for parking calculations are measured as follows:
a. Per Square Foot (sf) of Parking Floor Area (PFA). The phrase “per sf of PFA” means that the number of parking spaces is
calculated based on the number of “parking-related” square feet of floor area put to the use. The “PFA” is 85 percent of the
gross floor area, plus (unless otherwise specified) the area of any parts of the parcel proposed for development that are
delineated and used in a manner that is comparable in function and intensity of use to the use of the inside of the building (e.g.,
outdoor dining areas).
b. Per Dwelling Unit (DU) or Per Bedroom (BR). The phrase “per # DU” means that the number of parking spaces is
calculated based on the number of dwelling units. In some cases, the parking requirements are based on the number of
bedrooms (per # BR unit) in the dwelling units.
c. Per Bed. The phrase “per bed” means that the number of parking spaces is based on the number of beds in the facility
instead of the number of sleeping rooms or some other measure. Per bed calculations are normally applied to uses that offer
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/438
residential care or overnight accommodations with shared rooms.
d. Per Employee. The phrase “per employee” means that the number of parking spaces is based on the number of employees
during the shift in which the maximum number of employees is present.
e. Per Seat Capacity. The phrase “per seat” means that the number of parking spaces is based on the number of seats that
are provided for guests (patrons, members, etc.), with benches or pews measured as one seat per each two feet of width; and
f. Per Square Feet (sf) of Assembly Area. The phrase “per sf of assembly area” means that the number of parking spaces is
based on the number of square feet in the largest room used for assembly (e.g., at a school, this is often a gymnasium, but it
could also be a theater or a lunch room).
g. Others. Other variables are measured according to their common meanings.
2. Rounding. If the final calculation of the number of required parking spaces includes a fractional space, the number of required
parking spaces is rounded up to the nearest whole number, regardless of the fraction.
3. Multiple Mixed-use or Nonresidential Uses. If several mixed-use or nonresidential uses occupy a single parcel or building, the
off-street parking and loading requirements shall be the cumulative total for all uses, or as set out in Section 5.103, Alternatives or
Modifications to Required Parking, whichever is lesser.
D. Required Parking. The parking spaces required for individual uses are provided in this subsection delineated by the land use classifications
set out in Part 1, Zoning Districts and Land Uses.
1. Residential and Commercial Use of the Home. Required off-street parking for residential and commercial uses of the home are
set out in Table 5.101A, Residential and Commercial Use of the Home Parking Requirements.
Table 5.101A
Residential and Commercial Use of the Home Parking Requirements
Use Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Residential Uses (Housing Types)
Single-Family Detached
- Cottage 2 spaces per du.
- Industrialized Housing 2 spaces per du.
- Single-Family Detached 2 spaces per du.
- Manufactured Home 2 spaces per du.
Single-Family Attached
- Duplex 2 spaces per du.
- Triplex 2 spaces per du.
- Townhouse 2 spaces per du.
- Live-Work Unit 3 spaces per du.
Multi-family
- Apartment 1.5 spaces for efficiency unit and 1 BR; 2 spaces per
du for 2 BR plus
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/438
Special Neighborhood Types
Planned Cluster Individual spaces as set out above + 1 visitor space
per each 5 dwelling units
Manufactured Home Park, Subdivision or
Manufactured Home Overlay District (MHO)
Individual spaces as set out above + 2 visitor spaces
per each 5 manufactured home spaces
Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park 1 space per RV pad (not including RV space) + 2
visitor spaces for each 5 recreational vehicle spaces
Commercial Uses of the Home
Bed and Breakfast Home or Inn (overnight
accommodations)
1 space per guest room + 1 space per 300 sf. PFA of
meeting rooms, ballrooms, administrative offices,
outside gathering areas and/or areas used for selfservice
breakfast for guests only.
Child-Care, Family Home 1 space per each 3 children on the premises at any
one time + 1 space per each provider, staff member,
or employee on duty at any one time
Child-Care Facility, Group Home Greater of: 1 space per 3 rooms or 1 space per BR
Child-Care Facility, Residential (foster home/
agency foster home)
Greater of: 1 space per 3 rooms or 1 space per BR
Child-Care Facility, Residential (other) Greater of: 1 space per 3 rooms or 1 space per BR
Home Occupation No additional parking required
2. Institutional, Recreation and Amusement Uses. Required off-street parking for institutional, recreation and amusement uses are
set out in Table 5.101B, Institutional, Recreation and Amusement Use Parking Requirements.
Table 5.101B
Institutional, Recreation and Amusement Use Parking Requirements
Use Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Institutional Uses
Assisted Living Facility 1 space per 3 du's; if not configured as individual du's;
1 space per each employee + 1 space for each 4 beds
Child-Care Facility, Day-Care 1 space per 300 sf PFA
Hospitals Special Study. See subsection 5.103B, Special Study.
Medical Office/Clinic/Medical Lab 1 space per 250 sf PFA
Nursing/Convalescent Home 1 space per 3 beds + 1 space per 2 employees on the
largest shift
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/438
Place of Public Assembly (event facilities;
meeting halls; fraternal organizations; places of
worship)
1 space per 200 sf PFA
Schools, Private Special Study. See subsection 5.103B, Special Study.
Schools, Public Special Study. See subsection 5.103B, Special Study.
Recreation and Amusement Uses
Commercial Amusement, Indoor 6 spaces per 1,000 sf
Commercial Amusement, Outdoor Special Study. See subsection 5.103B, Special Study.
Golf Course/Club 3 spaces per hole + 3 spaces per 4 driving range
stations (if applicable)
Recreation and Fitness, Indoor 1 space per 300 sf PFA
Recreation and Fitness, Outdoor Greater of: 1 space per each 5 persons seat capacity
+ 1 space per each 4 seats; or 1 space per each 30 sf
PFA
Sexually Oriented Business Greater of: 4 spaces per 5 seats; or 1 space per 250
sf of PFA
3. Commercial Uses. Required off-street parking for commercial uses are set out in Table 5.101C, Commercial Use Parking
Requirements.
Table 5.101C
Commercial Use Parking Requirements
Use Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Commercial Uses
Alcohol Beverage Sales On-site consumption: 1 space per 75 sf PFA
Off-site consumption: 1 space per 300 sf PFA
Animal Grooming Facilities 1 space per 400 sf PFA
Animal Boarding or Veterinarian Services, Large
Animal
1 space per 200 sf PFA
Animal Boarding or Veterinarian Services, Small
Animal
1 space per 300 sf PFA
Bar or Nightclub 1 space per 75 sf PFA
Drive-In, Drive-Through Facility 1 space per 75 sf PFA
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/438
Heavy Retail/Home Center 1 space per 400 sf PFA + 1 space per 1,000 sf
outdoor sales and display area
Mixed-Use Minimum 3 spaces
Nursery/Greenhouse, Retail 1 space per 300 sf PFA of office or sales floor area + 1
space per 5,000 sf of outdoor nursery area
Office, General 1 space per 300 sf PFA
Overnight Accommodations (hotels, motels) 1 space per guest room + 1 space per 300 sf PFA of
meeting rooms, ballrooms, administrative offices, and
areas used for self-service breakfast for guests only +
75% of parking requirements for integrated
restaurants and bars that are open to the public
Pawn Shop 1 space per 200 sf PFA
Restaurant 1 space per each 200 sf PFA; or 1 space per each 4
seats; whichever is greater
Vehicle Gas or Fueling Station 1 space per 250 sf PFA
Vehicle Sales, Rental, and Service 1 space per employee on maximum shift + 3 spaces
per service bay or fueling stall + 1 space per 125 sf
PFA of convenience store floor area
Wholesale 1 space per 1 employee + 1 space per business
vehicle parked on-site + 2 spaces for customer
parking
4. Agriculture, Industrial, Transportation, Utility and Communication Uses. Required off-street parking for agriculture, industrial,
transportation, utility and communication uses are set out in Table 5.101D, Agriculture, Industrial, Transportation, Utility and
Communication Use Parking Requirements.
Table 5.101D
Agriculture, Industrial, Transportation, Utility and Communication Use Parking Requirements
Use Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
Agriculture, General
Agriculture, General N/A
Nursery/Greenhouse, Wholesale 1 space per 300 sf PFA of office or sale floor area + 1
space per 5,000 sf of outdoor nursery
Industrial
Heavy Industry Special Study. See subsection 5.103B, Special Study.
Light Industry 1 space per 400 sf PFA
Mining/Extraction 1 space per employee on the largest shift
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/438
Oil/Gas Operations 1 space per employee on the largest shift
Storage, Self 1 space per 25 storage units + 1 space per 300 sf of
office space
Storage Yard 1 space per 300 sf PFA
Vehicle Wrecking and Salvage Yard; Junkyard 1 space per 3 stalls
Warehousing and Logistics 4 spaces per 5,000 sf of PFA + 1 space over each
additional 5,000 sf PFA
Waste Transfer Station/Recycling Collection
Facility
1 space per 500 sf facility
Transportation Uses
Airport Special Study. See subsection 5.103B, Special Study.
Helistop Special Study. See subsection 5.103B, Special Study.
Parking, Stand-Alone No minimum
Rail Yard Special Study. See subsection 5.103B, Special Study.
Utility Uses
Power Generation, Small-Scale (renewable,
noncombustible)
Special Study. See subsection 5.103B, Special Study.
Power Generation, Utility Scale Special Study. See subsection 5.103B, Special Study.
Public Utilities Special Study. See subsection 5.103B, Special Study.
Wireless Telecommunication Facility (WTF) Uses
WTF, Attached 1 space per each freestanding facility (may be grass
pavers)
WTF, Freestanding Non-Stealth 2 spaces per tower
WTF, Freestanding Stealth 2 spaces per tower
E. Required Disabled Parking. As required by the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) a certain number of required disabled parking spaces
are required as part of new development and redevelopment (see Section 4.1.2, Accessible Sites and Exterior Facilities: New Construction, of
the Texas Accessibility Standards). The disabled parking spaces shall be incorporated into, rather than in addition to, the overall number of
parking spaces required by this Section.
F. Required Loading Spaces. Where loadings spaces are required as set out in Table 5.101E, Required Loading Spaces, each space shall be
a minimum of 35 feet in length by 12 feet in width, and 15 feet in height.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/438
Table 5.101E
Required Loading Spaces
Gross Floor Area (square feet) Minimum Loading Spaces
Up to 20,000 sf 1
Over 20,001 sf to 40,000 sf 2
Over 40,001 sf to 100,000 sf 3
Each additional 60,000 sf over 100,000 sf 1 additional
G. Uses Not Listed. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine the parking requirements for uses that are not listed based on the
uses that are most similar to the proposed uses (see Division 2.200, Limited and Conditional Use Standards) or based on parking studies of
similar uses that are provided by the applicant and certified by a qualified transportation planner or professional engineer (see Section 5.103,
Alternatives or Modifications to Required Parking).
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2016-13, sec. 6, adopted 7/19/16; Ordinance 2016-25, sec. 5, adopted 1/11/17)
Sec. 5.102 Location, Design, and Use of Required Parking and Loading
A. Location.
1. Generally. All off-street parking and loading spaces shall be located on the same lot and in the same zoning district as the
building and/or use to be served, except the owners of two or more separate uses may establish a shared parking area to provide the
total number of required off-street parking and loading spaces if such proposal is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and/or City Council, including any special conditions that may be imposed by the Commission or Council.
2. Parking Setback. On-site off-street parking shall be set back behind any required bufferyard (see Figure 5.102A, Location of
Required Parking and subsection 7.302C., Street or Railroad Bufferyards).
Figure 5.102A
Location of Required Parking
B. Dimensions of Standard Parking Spaces. Parking spaces shall have the following dimensions.
1. Generally: Nine feet in width by 20 feet standard stall depth which equals to 180 total square feet.
2. 90-degree parking spaces that abut a curb or the edge of pavement (allowing an overhang): Nine feet width by 18 feet reduced
stall depth provided there is a six-foot-wide sidewalk, or a minimum five-foot landscape area (see Figure 5.102B, Parking Space
Dimensions).
3. Parallel (0 degree) parking spaces: Nine feet width by 20 feet standard stall depth.
Figure 5.102B
Parking Space Dimensions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/438
C. Parking Space Design and Markings.
1. Vertical Clearance. All parking spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least eight feet. Some larger vehicles like vans, SUVs,
and light trucks may need a higher clearance. The applicant should note the maximum vehicle size to be accommodated. All parking
structure entrances shall have a clearly marked bar to alert oversized vehicles of height limitations before they enter.
2. Markings.
a. All parking spaces that are located in parking lots or provided on a street shall be clearly marked.
b. All handicap accessible spaces shall be designed with an upright sign exhibiting the universal symbol for accessibility by
the handicapped. All such spaces shall be designed in compliance with the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
c. Parking spaces for residential uses that are located in private garages, carports, or individual driveways do not have to be
marked. An area on a private residential lot is considered a parking space if:
i. The area is at least nine feet width by 20 feet stall depth in dimension;
ii. The area does not encroach upon a public sidewalk;
iii. The area has an improved hard surface; and
iv. The area is accessible from the street.
3. Parking Module Standards. Table 5.102, Parking Module Standards, sets out the minimum horizontal widths for standard parking
space depths, parking aisles, and combined parking aisle/stall modules. See also Figure 5.102C, Illustrative Parking Module
Configurations.
Table 5.102
Parking Module Standards
Dimension One-Way
Parallel
Space Angle (degrees)
30 45 60 90
Single Row of Parking
Stall depth 9' 18' 21' 22' 20'
Parking aisle 12' 12' 13' 18' 24'
Minimum width of module (stall depth &
aisle)
21' 30' 34' 40' 44'
Two Rows of Parking
Stall depth 18' 36' 42' 44' 40'
Parking aisle 12' 12' 13' 18' 24'
Minimum width of module (stall depth & 30' 48' 55' 62' 64'
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/438
aisle)
Figure 5.102C
Illustrative Parking Module Configurations
Illustrative dimensions for one parking row and parking aisle
Illustrative dimensions for two parking rows and parking aisle
4. Parking for Residential Development. The following types of vehicles are allowed in residential parking areas:
a. The outdoor parking or outdoor storage of not more than two recreational vehicles, campers or boats, or trailers on property
zoned NC and NT, stored only in the side or rear yard meeting the setback requirements set out in Division 3.100, New
Neighborhood Development Standards and Division 3.200, Established Neighborhoods.
b. The parking of one commercial car or truck not exceeding seven feet in height nor having more than one and one-half ton
capacity as specified by the manufacturer, that is used in connection with the occupant's business or livelihood.
c. The parking of passenger cars owned by the occupants of the dwelling and their visitors.
D. Loading Space Design and Markings. All uses shall provide off-street loading spaces as set out in Section 5.101, Required Off-Street
Parking and Loading Spaces.
1. Dimensions.
a. Minimum width of loading bay (side to side): 12 feet;
b. Minimum length of loading bay (front to back):
i. For semi-trailers: 60 feet;
ii. All other loading spaces: 25 feet;
c. Minimum vertical clearance: 15 feet.
2. Use of Rights-of-Way. Where off-street loading [spaces] are required, at no time shall any part of a truck or van be allowed to
extend into a public right-of-way while the truck is being loaded and unloaded.
3. Design. Off-street loading spaces shall be designed to not conflict with the general circulation patterns on the site, nor interfere
with any fire exits or emergency access facilities to either the building or site.
E. Use of Required Parking.
1. Generally. Required off-street parking spaces shall be available for operable passenger automobiles of the residents, customers,
patrons, and employees of the use to which they relate.
2. Storage. Storage materials, boats, campers, recreational vehicles, or inoperable vehicles, or overnight parking of trucks or
trailers is prohibited in parking areas of multi-family, nonresidential, and mixed-use developments, unless:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/438
a. Outdoor storage is permitted by this UDC in the applicable zoning district and approved for such use as part of the zoning
certificate or conditional use permit.
b. The area used for outdoor storage is not counted towards the minimum parking requirements for the use.
c. The area used for outdoor storage is in conformance with Section 11.104, Outdoor Storage and Display of Merchandise.
3. Outdoor Display of Merchandise. The sale of goods or merchandise is prohibited in parking areas unless in conformance with
Section 11.104, Outdoor Storage and Display of Merchandise.
4. Prohibition. No area required by the City for the use of private, off-street parking shall be used as a commercial parking lot.
F. Surfacing. All parking and loading areas shall be graded and maintained so that water does not accumulate on such areas nor flow or drain
onto abutting public or private property. The surfacing of parking and loading areas shall be as follows:
1. Paved Parking. Except as otherwise specifically required, all off-street parking and loading spaces together with access and
circulation drives, driveways, and parking aisles shall be surfaced or improved with an improved hard surface approved by the
Building Official or City Engineer, that will provide an equal protection against potholes, erosion, and dust. Such parking surfaces shall
not, however, be required for off-street parking facilities serving athletic fields, outdoor public active or passive recreation areas, public
or private parks, or agricultural uses.
2. Pervious Pavement. All development with paved parking shall be encouraged to use pervious pavement or pervious pavement
systems. From the standpoint of complying with Subsection F.1., above, pervious pavement shall be considered “paved” if it complies
with the following:
a. The pervious pavement or pervious pavement system shall be designed and certified by a registered engineer or
landscape architect to carry a wheel load of 4,000 pounds.
b. In nonresidential and mixed-use districts for uses other than residential, pervious pavement or pervious pavement systems,
except pervious asphalt or pervious concrete, shall not be used for access and circulation drives, driveways, parking aisles,
disabled parking spaces, or loading spaces.
c. Pervious pavement or pervious pavement systems that utilize turf grass shall be limited to overflow parking which is not
typically used on a daily or regular basis.
d. The use of pervious pavement or pervious pavement systems shall not count as landscape area nor allow parking lots to
be located anywhere not otherwise permitted by this UDC.
e. The use of pervious pavement or pervious pavement systems shall be prohibited in areas on a lot used for the dispensing
of gasoline or other engine fuels or where hazardous liquids may be absorbed into the soil.
3. Unpaved Parking. Off-street parking areas that are not required to provide the type of surface set out in subsection F.1., above,
shall be graded and surfaced with crushed stone, gravel, or other suitable material to provide a surface that is stable and that will help
to reduce dust and erosion. The perimeter of such parking areas shall be defined by bricks, stones, railroad ties, or other similar
devices. In addition, whenever such parking area abuts a paved street, the driveway approach shall be paved with asphalt, concrete,
bituminous surface treatment, or other such material meeting the City's construction and material specifications, for a distance of 25
feet back from the edge of the paved street to prevent gravel from being deposited on the paved public or private street.
G. Maintenance. Access and circulation drives, driveways, parking aisles, off-street parking and loading spaces, and on-site traffic directional
or control devices shall be kept in good condition and parking space lines or pavement markings on improved hard surfaces shall be kept clearly
visible and distinct.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 5.103 Alternatives or Modifications to Required Parking
A. Generally. This Section sets out several ways to modify or reduce the number, or determine the adequate number, of off-street parking
spaces that must be provided by Section 5.101, Required Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces.
B. Special Studies. Some of the uses that are listed in the tables set out in Section 5.101, Required Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces,
have nonlinear or widely varying parking demand characteristics. Accordingly, their parking requirements are listed in the table as “Special
Study.” Required parking for these uses shall be established by special study according to the standards of this Section. A special study shall
also be required for any land use not listed in Section 5.101, Required Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces.
1. Requirements.
a. The special study shall be conducted by a qualified transportation planner or traffic engineer at the applicant's expense.
The Building Official shall maintain a list of qualifications and/or certifications that are acceptable to the City for this purpose.
b. The special study shall provide:
i. A peak parking analysis of at least five comparable uses.
ii. Documentation regarding the comparability of the referenced uses, including name, function, location, floor area,
parking availability, access to transportation network (including vehicular or other if applicable), use restrictions, and other
factors that could affect the parking demand.
2. Approval of Special Study.
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council may rely upon the special study or may request one round of
additional information or analysis, including, but not limited to alternative or new data points, or consideration of additional or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/438
alternative factors related to comparability or peak demand, as supported by sound engineering principles.
b. As a condition of approval of a special study, the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council may require that
land be reserved or land-banked for additional parking if there is a demonstrably high probability the use could change, resulting
in a higher demand for parking.
C. Reduction of Parking or Loading Requirements by Demonstration of Lesser Demand Management. The City may approve a reduction in
the number of required parking or loading spaces if the applicant demonstrates that such a reduction is appropriate based on specific parking
demand forecasts for the proposed use, provided that:
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council may require that space be reserved or land-banked for additional
parking upon a determination that there is a reasonable likelihood that the use itself or the nature of the use could change in a manner
that increases its parking demand.
2. The City may rely on the applicant's special study (see subsection B., Special Studies, above) or the special study conducted by
the City's consultant.
3. The City may retain a qualified traffic engineer, at the applicant's expense, to review the parking demand forecast and provide
recommendations to the City.
4. The comparability of the uses shall be documented in detail, which includes their location, gross floor area, street access, use
types and restrictions, hours of operation, peak parking demand periods, and all other factors that were considered by the traffic
engineer that could affect parking demand.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 5.200 Access Management and Circulation
Sec. 5.201 General Access and Circulation Requirements
A. Generally. For the purposes of this Section:
1. Arterials. Arterials include both primary arterials and minor arterials, including all arterials identified on the latest version of the
City's Thoroughfare Plan.
2. Access Points. Access points include highways, public and private streets, alleys, driveways, and marginal access streets.
B. Access to Single-Family Detached and Attached Lots.
1. Existing Lots. Existing access to single-family detached and duplex lots from arterial or collector streets is permitted. However,
the existing access shall be moved from the arterial or collector to a local street if:
a. The lot has access to a local street; and
b. The principal building is redeveloped (or a new principal building is constructed).
2. New Lots. New single-family detached, duplex, or single-family attached dwelling units shall not take access to arterial or
collector streets unless they have more than 200 feet of frontage (see Table 5.201, Access Spacing Same Side of Street). The
driveway shall be at least 12 feet wide, but not more than 25 feet wide at the property line, and shall be designed to prevent vehicles
from backing onto an arterial or collector street.
C. Access and Circulation of Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Lots.
1. Parcels proposed for development that front on arterial and collector streets shall provide cross-access to abutting parcels
unless cross-access is unfeasible.
2. Where connections to abutting parcels are possible, but not currently provided:
a. The parcel proposed for development shall include a stub-out at a location that allows for a reasonable connection to the
abutting parcel (i.e., one that allows for reasonable development of both parcels) in the future; and
b. The applicant shall record a cross-access easement in a form acceptable to the City Attorney to allow for future connection
of the stub-out to a comparable facility on the abutting parcel. In general, the City may require cross-access easements to
include one or more of the following:
i. Sufficient width to accommodate a two-way access between properties;
ii. Stub-outs and other design features to allow abutting properties to be tied in to provide future cross-access; or
iii. Linkage to other cross-access drives in the area.
3. All entrances and exits to a parking lot and interior circulation patterns, shall be clearly delineated by appropriate directional
signage and/or pavement markings. If directional signs are used as part of this delineation, the signs shall be in accordance with
Article 9, Signs.
4. Driveways providing access to parking lot circulation drives and parking aisles shall be at least 25 feet wide, but not more than
45 feet wide (at the property line), and configured to direct traffic safety into and out of the parcel proposed for development. Such
configuration may include or require a median separation between ingress and egress lanes.
5. No more than one driveway access point is allowed per lot per frontage serving a single use. Lots that have frontage on two
separate streets (e.g., a corner lot) may have a single driveway access point on each street. No more than two of ingress/egress is
allowed per lot. Points of access to a shopping center, industrial plant, or other similar multi-use or high traffic volume use with similar
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/438
characteristics shall be determined by the Building Official at the time of approval of the site plan based on a traffic impact analysis.
Based on the traffic analysis, acceleration and deceleration, and left-hand turn lanes may be required at the expense of the applicant.
6. Access shall be spaced according to the subsection C., Access Spacing, Same Side of the Street, of this Section. Temporary
access (or a continuation of current access) may be provided to parcels which cannot comply with this requirement, provided that
reasonable access is unavailable through improved cross-access easements or consolidation of abutting lots.
C. Access Spacing, Same Side of the Street. The minimum access spacing for access points on the same side of the street is set out in Table
5.201, Access Spacing, Same Side of the Street.
Table 5.201
Access Spacing, Same Side of the Street
Street Classification Local Collector Primary or Minor Arterial
Posted Speed Limit any any <= 30 <= 35 <= 40 <= 45 <= 50
Access Serves Residential Land Use 20' 40' 200' 250' 300' 360' 425'
Access Serves Nonresidential or
Mixed-Use Land Use 40' 200' 200' 250' 300' 360' 425'
Access Serves Industrial Land Use 60' 200' 200' 250' 300' 360' 425'
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 5.300 Lighting
Sec. 5.301 General Outdoor Lighting Requirements
A. Generally. The maximum permitted illumination and the maximum permitted luminaire height shall conform to the standards of this Section.
B. Fixture Type.
1. Generally, light fixtures shall be “cut-off” fixtures that limit lighting that is visible or measurable at the property line.
2. “No cut-off” fixtures may be used only for decorative purposes, provided:
a. They have luminaires that produce no more than 1,500 lumens (approximately equal to a 100 watts incandescent bulb);
and
b. They have a maximum height of 15 feet.
C. Cut-off Requirements.
1. Except as otherwise allowed for in this Division, all lighting (including, but not limited to street, parking lot, security, walkway, and
building) shall conform with the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (“IES”) criteria for full cut-off fixtures, which is 100
percent of light output below 90 degrees, and 90 percent of light output below 80 degrees from a vertical line through the fixture.
2. Lighting fixtures that illuminate landscape plantings, pedestrian walkways, signage, or product display areas shall also conform
to the full cut-off fixture requirement.
3. All lighting fixtures that are mounted within 15 feet of a residential property line or public right-of-way boundary shall be classified
as IES Type III or Type F (asymmetric forward throw). These fixtures shall be fitted with a “house side shielding” reflector on the side
facing the residential property line or public right-of-way.
4. Light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues, or any other objects mounted on a pole, pedestal, or platform shall use a narrow
cone beam of light that will not extend beyond the illuminated object.
5. For upward-directed architectural, landscape, and decorative lighting, direct light emissions shall not be visible above the primary
building roofline.
D. Maximum Freestanding Fixture Height. No freestanding light fixture shall be greater than 25 feet in height.
E. Maximum Illumination.
1. Outdoor lighting shall be deflected, shaded, and focused away from abutting properties and shall not be a nuisance to such
abutting properties.
2. Outdoor lighting shall be designed so that any overspill of lighting onto abutting properties shall not exceed three-tenths
footcandle, measured vertically, and three-tenths footcandle, measured horizontally, on abutting properties.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/438
3. The ground-level luminance ratio (the ratio between the luminance of the brightest point on the property and the darkest point on
the property) shall not exceed 12 to one.
4. If additional light is necessary, it shall be provided within an enclosed structure.
F. Canopy Lighting. Canopy lighting for uses that have sheltered outside work or service areas, such as vehicle gas and fueling stations, shall
meet the standards of this Section. All luminaires shall be recessed into the canopy so that they cannot be viewed off-site from an eye height of
four feet (to protect automobile drivers from glare).
G. Outside Wall-Mounted Lighting. Outside wall-mounted lighting shall also comply with the standards of this Section, except that lighting that
is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (“FAA”) shall comply with federal standards.
H. Prohibited Lighting.
1. Generally. No outdoor lighting may be used in any manner that is likely to interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on
public thoroughfares.
2. Prohibitions. The following are prohibited:
a. Any fixed light not designed for roadway illumination that produces incident or reflected light that could impair the operator
of a motor vehicle;
b. The installation, use, or maintenance of beacons or searchlights;
c. Lights that are mounted on the ground or poles for the purpose of illuminating a building facade, except in the C-1, C-2, and
PR districts where not visible from other districts or public rights-of-way; and
d. Exposed strip lighting or neon tubing used to illuminate building facades or outline buildings or windows or flickering or
flashing lights installed in like fashion, except for temporary decorative seasonal lighting.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 5.302 Outdoor Recreation and Commercial Amusement Lighting Requirements
A. When Required. Limited use approval is required for any lighting fixture or luminaire that:
1. Exceeds 25 feet in height;
2. Is brighter than 5,000 lumens (approximately four times the light of a 100 watt incandescent bulb); or
3. Includes more than three luminaires per pole.
B. Limited Use Standards, General. Except for the recreational uses set out in subsection C., below, lighting may be approved by limited use
approval if all of the following are demonstrated:
1. Luminaires are no more than 40 feet above grade.
2. The light sources are full cut-off fixtures that are positioned to prevent glare on public rights-of-way.
C. The Lighting Plan Results In.
1. Ground-level illumination of no more than one footcandle; and
2. A luminance ratio of no more than 12 to one.
D. Limited Use Standards, Recreation Fields. Ball diamonds, playing fields, driving ranges, tennis courts, and similar amusement or recreation
uses have unique requirements for nighttime visibility and, generally, have limited hours of operation. These uses may meet the following limited
use standards for approval of lighting:
1. The site plan meets all other UDC requirements and, to the maximum extent possible, lighting is located to avoid shining at
residential uses.
2. Luminaires are no more than 80 feet above grade.
3. The light sources are full cut-off fixtures. The luminaire may have a cut-off angle that extends beyond the property boundaries if:
a. A landscaped bufferyard is provided to prevent light and glare spillover to abutting residential property. The Building Official
may require more opaque bufferyards than those in Division 7.300, Bufferyard Landscaping, to achieve this objective.
b. The maximum permitted illumination does not exceed one footcandle at the residential property line or the street curb,
whichever is less.
4. If the development is within 300 feet of a residential district, the lights are turned off by 10:00 PM.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
ARTICLE 6 ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY AND RESOURCE PROTECTION
Division 6.100 Open Space
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/438
Sec. 6.101 Use of Designated Open Space
A. Generally. This Section lists the uses that are permitted in the designated open spaces that are required elsewhere in this UDC. If the use
is located within a floodplain or floodway, then the standards of Section 6.102, Use of Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), Flood Fringe and
Floodways, also applies. These standards do not apply to open spaces that are owned by public entities, including the City of Cuero.
B. Permitted Uses and Functions. Open spaces may be put to the following uses or functions, subject to any applicable standards of this
Division, and other applicable sections of this UDC.
1. Agricultural Uses. Where agricultural and outdoor nursery/greenhouse, wholesale uses are allowed by Section 2.105,
Agricultural, Industrial, Transportation, Utility, and Communication Uses, the area of land put to agricultural and outdoor
nursery/greenhouse, wholesale uses is counted as open space. In other districts, noncommercial production of crops (e.g., orchards
or garden plots that are an amenity to development) is allowed in designated open space areas.
2. Landscaped or Natural Systems.
a. Landscaped areas or natural areas.
b. Floodplains and floodways.
c. Waterbodies.
d. Watercourses.
e. Wetlands.
3. Public Facilities.
a. Public utilities subject to the standards of Division 8.300, Infrastructure.
b. Stormwater management facilities subject to the standards of Section 8.302, Stormwater Management, Drainage, and Low
Impact Development.
c. Solar arrays and small wind energy systems (SWES) that comply with Section 11.105, Solar Arrays and Small Wind Energy
Systems (SWES), as applicable, are allowed in designated open space areas that are not floodplains.
4. Recreation Uses.
a. Ball fields, golf courses, nature areas, picnic areas, and play courts are allowed in designated open space areas, provided
that the provided that [sic] associated buildings, structures, parking lots, and other impermeable surfaces do not exceed more
than 15 percent of the designated open space area and no structures are allowed within the floodplain.
b. Nature centers are allowed in designated open space areas, provided that associated buildings, structures, parking lots,
and other impermeable surfaces do not exceed more than 20 percent of the designated open space area.
c. Pools are allowed in designated open space areas, provided that if a pool house is present, it is less than 1,500 square feet
in floor area.
d. Trails and associated structures necessary for trail crossings are allowed in designated open space areas, including the
floodplain.
e. Passive recreation uses.
C. Temporary Uses. Public interest or special events are allowed in designated open space areas, subject to the requirements of Section
2.106, Temporary Uses, and Section 2.210, Temporary Permitted, Limited, and Temporary Conditional Use Standards.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 6.102 Use of Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA), Flood Fringe, and Floodways
A. Generally.
1. This Section sets out the permitted uses and restrictions of land that is within the special flood hazard area (SFHA), flood fringe
or floodway, and performance standards for the construction and operation of the uses. If the land within the SFHA, flood fringe or
floodway is also designated open space, then the standards of Section 6.101, Use of Designated Open Space, also apply.
2. Floodplain must be preserved for the primary function of conveying unobstructed floodwaters. Land within the floodplain may be
used for other purposes so long as the primary conveyance and storage function of the floodplain is preserved, the use is not a
detriment to water quality, and the use is consistent with the UDC.
B. Permitted Uses of SFHAs. The City has determined that the following uses and improvements may be considered within a SFHA if it is
determined that the proposed use or improvement is in conformance with the floodplain management regulations and floodplain management
goals. It must be demonstrated that none of the conditions in subsection D., below, will occur as a result of the proposed use or improvement.
1. Agricultural Uses. The following agricultural uses are allowed in the SFHA:
a. Agriculture (including crop production, livestock grazing, and fish hatcheries) and nursery/greenhouses, wholesale, where
allowed in the applicable zoning district.
b. Noncommercial production of crops (e.g., orchards or garden plots that are an amenity to development)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/438
2. Recreation Uses. The following recreation uses are allowed in the SFHA:
a. Nature areas, picnic areas, and trails.
b. Ball fields.
c. Golf courses, provided that:
i. The applicant provides a management plan that demonstrates that downstream water quality will not be adversely
affected by fertilizers and pesticides associated with the use;
ii. Tees and greens are elevated above base flood elevation, and no fill is used to raise tees or greens, except in areas
where the fill causes no rise in the floodway; and
iii. Pedestrian or golf cart trails and bridges that are designed to pass the 10-year flood event with freeboard as per
requirements set out in Section 6.203, Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction.
d. Play courts/playground equipment.
e. Recreational camps.
f. Trails and paths open to the general public.
3. Public Facilities. The following public facilities are allowed in the floodplain.
a. Structures for watershed protection and similar uses.
b. Detention and water quality facilities associated with approved master drainage plans.
c. Local streets which perpendicularly cross the floodplain to provide access; provided that alternative access outside of the
SFHA is also available.
d. Underground public utilities as long as adequate cover exists to protect the utilities.
e. Parking for active park and public facilities.
4. Landscaping. Landscaping and landscape areas in conformance with the uses allowed in Section 6.203, Standards for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
C. Nonpermitted Uses of the SFHA.
1. Use Factors. In general any use that has potential for the following to occur is prohibited in the SFHA:
a. Obstruction of the floodwater flow so that the SFHA is altered in elevation in excess of the allowable criteria (unless
approved through a floodplain modification study).
b. Reduction in the carrying capacity of the channel (unless approved through a floodplain modification study).
c. Potential for material, equipment, or facilities to become dislodged or displaced and to be deposited downstream causing
culvert or bridge blockage, channel degradation, or damages to other properties.
d. Potential for negatively impacting water quality.
2. Prohibited Uses. The City has determined that the following uses are prohibited within the SFHA:
a. All structures including residential, nonresidential, mixed-use, recreational or temporary.
b. Substantial improvement to existing structure(s).
c. Additions to or placement of manufactured homes.
d. Fencing, including solid or perforated wood, split rail, chain link, stone, brick and/or other materials.
e. Landscaping walls or structural walls that extend or flatten land and that encroach into the floodway or flood fringe.
f. Permanent toilet facilities.
g. Structures, ponds, or appurtenances related to water and wastewater treatment facilities.
h. Parking lots not associated with an approved SFHA use.
i. Detention or water quality ponds not part of a regional or approved drainage master plan.
3. Storage of Materials.
a. Storage of hazardous or floatable materials in the SFHA, flood fringe and floodway is prohibited. These materials represent
a significant potential public health, environmental or safety risk. Floatable materials can also become lodged in culverts, bridges
and channels resulting in increased damages resulting from increased flood depths or diversion of floodwaters.
b. Temporary storage of construction-related vehicles and materials may be permitted, depending upon location and type of
material storage, as long as the material can be relocated in accordance with an emergency action plan that has been approved
by the Floodplain Administrator.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/438
D. Performance Standards for Use of SFHAs, Flood Fringe, and Floodways.
1. No SFHA use shall adversely affect the efficiency of or unduly restrict the capacity of the channels or floodways of any tributaries
to the main stream, drainage ditches, or any other drainage facilities or systems.
2. No structure (temporary or permanent), fill, (including fill for roads and levees), deposits, obstruction, storage of materials, or
other SFHA uses which, acting alone or in combination with existing or future SFHA uses, shall be permitted that adversely affect the
efficiency or the capacity of the floodway, or which increases flood heights or adversely affects the storage capacity of the SFHA
based on the assumption of an equal degree of encroachment extending for a significant reach on both sides of the stream.
3. Impervious surfaces in the SFHA shall be minimized. Proposed impervious surfaces in the floodplain are subject to approval by
the City Engineer with respect to generated stormwater runoff.
4. All uses of the SFHA shall comply with applicable floodplain management regulations contained in Division 6.200, Floodplain
Management and Flood Damage Prevention.
5. No fill is allowed within the flood fringe.
E. Uses Not Listed. Uses not specifically listed above may be permitted if, in the opinion of the Building Official, they are similar in character to
permitted uses in this Section, and are in conformance with the intent of this Section and other applicable sections of this Article. Uses not
specifically prohibited in this Section should not be construed as allowed by exclusion. However, since floodplains are subject to periodic
inundation and are therefore unsuitable for human habitation, no new structure in the SFHA shall be used for human habitation.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 6.200 Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention
Sec. 6.201 Authority, Findings of Fact, Purpose, Interpretation, and Methods
A. Authority. Section 16.315, Tex. Water Code (the Flood Control Insurance Act) delegates the responsibility to local governmental units to
adopt regulations that are designed to minimize flood losses. The City Council adopts this Division pursuant to this grant of authority. The
regulations of this Division are intended to set out requirements that are not less stringent than those which are required for participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
B. Findings of Fact. The City Council finds that:
1. The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all
of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights
and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they
are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
C. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Division to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
1. Protect human life and health;
2. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
3. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
4. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sanitary sewer lines;
streets and bridges located in floodplains;
6. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to
minimize future flood blight areas; and
7. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
D. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of the floodplain management regulations, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the City; and
3. Deemed neither to limit or repeal any other powers granted under state statutes or the City's Home Rule Charter.
E. Methods. In order to accomplish its purposes, this Division sets out regulations that:
1. Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood
heights or velocities;
2. Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time
of initial construction;
3. Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/438
4. Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and
5. Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood
hazards to other lands.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 6.202 General Provisions
A. Applicability. This Division applies to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City.
B. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the DeWitt County, Texas and
Incorporated Areas (City of Cuero, Community ID #480196), dated January 6, 2011,” with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or
Flood Boundary - Floodway Maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated January 6, 2011, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this Division.
C. Establishment of a Floodplain Development Permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the
provisions of this Division.
D. Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this
Division and other applicable regulations.
E. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This Division is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants,
conditions, or restrictions (CCRs). However, where this Division and another ordinance, easement, covenant, condition, or restriction (e.g., a
deed restriction) conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
F. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Division is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Division does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Division shall not create liability on the part of the City or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Division or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 6.203 Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
A. Generally. This Section sets out the general and specific standards for flood hazard reduction.
B. General Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction.
1. Generally. The requirements of this subsection apply to all new construction and substantial improvements in areas of special
flood hazard.
2. Resistance to Hydrodynamic and Hydrostatic Loads. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
3. Construction to Minimize Flood Damage. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
4. Flood Damage Resistant Materials. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage.
5. Protection of Building Service Facilities. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
6. Protection of Water Supply Systems. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
7. Protection of Sanitary Sewer Systems. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
8. Location of On-Site Waste Disposal Systems. On-lot sanitary sewage disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
9. Limitations on Fill.
a. No fill shall be placed within a special flood hazard area unless the effect of the fill on water storage and water quality is
fully mitigated in one or more of the following ways:
i. Excavation of a volume of soil comparable to the volume that was filled to bring the surface of the land to the base
flood elevation. However, excavation is prohibited at depths that would be likely to:
a. Increase the velocity of stormwater flows;
b. Cause significant new erosion; or
c. Expose groundwater to contamination by pollutants which may be present in stormwater runoff;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/438
ii. A stormwater management system is installed or improved in a location and manner that compensates for the
removal of the filled area from the floodplain; or
iii. If the compensatory storage is provided in the floodplain, the combination of filling, compensatory storage, and
detention is intended to lower the flood elevation by increasing channel capacity.
b. If fill is placed, the applicant shall provide a Hydraulics and Hydrology (H&H) study, which shall verify full mitigation, or,
alternatively, support [supply] a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
C. Specific Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction.
1. Generally. The requirements of this subsection apply to all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in:
a. Section 6.202B., Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard;
b. Section 13.202B.5., Floodplain Information and Determination; or
c. Subsection D.3., Generation of Base Flood Elevation Data, of this Section.
2. Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor
(including basement), duct work, exposed plumbing, and electrical components elevated at least one foot above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator
that the standard of this subsection is satisfied (see Section 14.303D., Floodplain Development Permit).
3. Nonresidential Construction.
a. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either:
i. Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or
ii. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below an elevation that is two feet above the
base flood elevation, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. This
option is only allowed if the Floodplain Administrator finds that the criteria for a floodplain variance that are set out in
Section 14.303E., Floodplain Development Variance, are met.
b. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for
the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice as outlined in this subsection.
c. A record of such certification which includes, if applicable, the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
4. Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
a. A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot
of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided;
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
5. Manufactured Homes.
a. Manufactured Homes in Zone A. All manufactured homes to be placed within special flood hazard area Zone A shall be
installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Manufactured Homes in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE. All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved
within special flood hazard area Zones A1-30, AH, and AE, on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii)
in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or
(iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as
a result of a flood, shall be:
i. Elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest structural member of the manufactured home is elevated at
least one foot above the base flood elevation; and
ii. Securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
c. Manufactured Homes in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE (Existing Manufactured Home Parks and Subdivisions). All
manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with
Zones A1-30, AH and AE that are not subject to the provisions of subsection C.5.b., of this subsection be elevated so that
either:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/438
i. The lowest structural member of the manufactured home is at least one foot above the base flood elevation; or
ii. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are:
a. No less than 36 inches in height above grade; and
b. Securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
6. Recreational Vehicles.
a. Recreational vehicles that are placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE shall:
i. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
ii. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or
iii. Meet the permit requirements of Section 14.303D., Floodplain Development Permit, and the elevation and anchoring
requirements for “manufactured homes” in subsection C.5., of this subsection.
b. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick
disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
D. Standards for Subdivision Proposals.
1. Generally. All subdivision proposals (including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions) shall be designed
in light of the findings of fact contained in Section 6.201B., Findings of Fact, and in a manner that is consistent with Section 6.201C.,
Purpose, and Section 6.201E., Methods.
2. Permit Requirements. All proposals for the development of subdivisions (including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions) shall meet Floodplain Development Permit requirements of Section 14.303D., Floodplain Development Permit, and
Division 6.200, Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention.
3. Generation of Base Flood Elevation Data. Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other
proposed development (including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions) which is greater than 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to Section 6.202B., Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood
Hazard, and Section 13.202B.5.a., Floodplain Information and Determination.
4. Adequate Drainage Required. All subdivision proposals (including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions)
shall have adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
5. Arrangement of Development. The standards of Part 2, Density, Intensity, Bulk and Scale, allow for the use of varied lot sizes
and/or housing types in order to achieve the permitted density and protect the required amount of open space. In the application of
these standards, parcels proposed for development shall be located outside of special flood hazard areas if possible.
6. Modification of Open Space Ratio. Not less than 30 percent of the special flood hazard area of a parcel proposed for
development shall be protected as common open space. This area is counted towards the open space ratio required by Section
3.101, Development Standards for New Residential Neighborhoods, then the larger open space ratio applies.
7. Elevated Primary Access Required. The primary access to the subdivision (the access that connects to the highest order street
or that provides the most direct route to the largest number of lots in the subdivision, as determined by the City Engineer) shall be
elevated to or above the base flood elevation to allow for access by emergency vehicles.
8. Location of Public Utilities and Facilities. All subdivision proposals (including the placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions) shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water distribution systems located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
E. Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones).
1. Generally. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 6.202B., Basis for Establishing the Areas of
Special Flood Hazard, are areas designated as areas of shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with
flood depths of one to three feet, where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the provisions of this
subsection shall apply.
2. Elevation of New Construction and Substantial Improvements (Residential). All new construction and substantial improvements
of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to the highest of the following:
a. One foot above the depth number specified on the applicable FIRM; or
b. One foot above the highest adjacent grade; or
c. One foot above the highest abutting curb elevation.
3. Elevation of New Construction and Substantial Improvements (Nonresidential).
a. All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to the highest of the following:
i. One foot above the depth number specified on the applicable FIRM; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/438
ii. One foot above the highest adjacent grade; or
iii. One foot above the highest abutting curb elevation.
b. In the alternative to elevating the building, the building may be floodproofed such that, together with attendant utility and
sanitary facilities, it is designed so that below an elevation that is one foot above the depth number specified for the AO Zone, or
below an elevation that is one foot above the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, the structure is watertight, with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. This option is allowed only if the Floodplain Administrator finds that the criteria
for a floodplain variance that are set out in subsection 14.303E., Floodplain Development Variance, are met.
4. Certification Required. A registered professional engineer, architect (for floodproofing options only), or registered professional
land surveyor (for building elevation options only) shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
Section are satisfied. See Section 14.303D., Floodplain Development Permit.
5. Drainage Paths. Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths around structures shall be provided on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
F. Floodways.
1. Generally. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 6.202B., Basis for Establishing the Areas of
Special Flood Hazard, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the provisions of this subsection shall apply:
2. Encroachments Prohibited. Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other
development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood
levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
3. Permitted Exceptions.
a. If subsection F., of this subsection is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all
applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 6.202, General Provisions, and this Section; and
b. Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a
community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood
elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 6.300 General Environmental Standards
Sec. 6.301 General Environmental Standards
A. Generally. All uses and activities permitted by this UDC within the City shall conform to the performance measures and standards of this
Section, using adequate and appropriate prevention and/or mitigation techniques as necessary.
B. Noise. No use shall be permitted that causes serious annoyance to occupants of abutting properties due to excessive noise.
C. Vibration. No use shall be permitted which produces ground vibrations noticeable without instruments at the lot line of the premises on
which the use is located.
D. Smoke Emissions. All uses shall comply with local, state and federal regulations pertaining to the emission of smoke.
E. Odors. No use shall be permitted to produce the emission of objectionable or offensive odors in such concentration as to be readily
perceptible at any point at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located, subject to applicable state air quality regulations.
F. Dust and Debris. Uses shall be maintained in an orderly condition and conducted in a manner that avoids the spread of dust, debris, and
litter to other properties and public rights-of-way. Hazardous materials, refuse, or items that can be carried away by wind or water shall be
secured in buildings, structures, or other such enclosure.
G. Toxic or Noxious Matter. No use shall for any period of time discharge across boundaries of a lot line on which it is located, toxic or noxious
matter in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, comfort, or welfare, or cause injury or damage to
persons, property, or the use of property or land, or render unclean the waters of the state to the extent of being harmful or inimical to public
health, animal or aquatic life, or the use of such waters for domestic water supply, recreation, or other legitimate and necessary uses. Disposal of
toxic or hazardous waste within the City is specifically prohibited.
H. Nuclear Radiation. Any operation involving radiation (i.e., the use of gamma rays, x-rays, alpha and beta particles, high speed electrons,
neutrons, protons, and other atomic or nuclear particles), shall be permitted only in accordance with state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations, or any other applicable regulation.
I. Electromagnetic Radiation and Interference. No person shall operate or cause to be operated for any purpose a planned or unplanned
source of electromagnetic radiation which does not comply with the current regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
regarding such sources of electromagnetic radiation. No use, activity, or process shall be conducted which produces electromagnetic
interference with normal radio or television reception.
J. Heat or Glare. Any activity producing heat or glare shall be carried on in such a manner that such heat or glare is not perceptible at any lot
line. Exposed sources of light, including bare bulbs and tubes and immediately adjacent reflecting surfaces, shall be shielded to avoid creating a
nuisance across lot lines. The light intensity from illumination of any kind shall not exceed fifty footlamberts at any point along the line of the lot
containing the light source.
K. Pedestrian and Environmental Safety.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/438
1. All nonresidential, mixed-use, or multi-family construction sites shall be enclosed with a barrier fence approved by the Building
Official.
2. Any type of excavation shall be enclosed by a silt fence, hay bales, or other proven practice of runoff mitigation measures, and/or
a barrier fence approved by the Building Official until covered or enclosed by a permanent fence.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
ARTICLE 7 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING, AND TREE PROTECTION
Division 7.100 General Landscaping Requirements
Sec. 7.101 General Requirements
A. Generally. Requirements for the removal and/or planting of all landscape material is set out in this Article. The minimum open space ratio
(OSR) from Table 3.101A, Standard and Alternative Residential Development Standards, and Table 3.101B, Residential Development Standards
in Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Districts, or the minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR) from Table 3.301A, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use
Development Standards, is combined with this Article, in addition to other applicable requirements of this UDC, to determine the type, quality,
quantity, and location of required landscape material on a parcel proposed for development.
B. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this Article is to establish landscaping standards that protect and preserve the appearance and
character of the City, improve the compatibility of abutting uses, protect the health and quality of life of the residents through the preservation of
protected trees on property within the City, and conserve scarce water resources by promoting the planting of native and drought-resistant trees
and shrubs. In establishing these standards, it is the City Council's intent to encourage the preservation of trees and their value to the
community, increase the compatibility of abutting uses, and to minimize the effects on the surrounding environment due to noise, dust, debris,
artificial light intrusions, and other impacts of an adjoining or nearby use.
C. Applicability of Standards. This Article applies to all new development, redevelopment, and substantial improvements in the City, and where
specifically indicated, to existing trees and landscaping. The application of this Article may be limited by Article 12, Nonconformities.
D. Exceptions. The following are exceptions to the standards of this Article:
1. Individual existing lots of record that are used for existing single-family detached or attached dwellings, or duplexes, unless
required by this Article (see Section 7.103, Land Clearing and Existing Trees) or are redeveloped or substantially improved as set out
in Division 3.200, Established Neighborhoods.
2. Modifications to nonresidential buildings where the building expansion or redevelopment does not exceed the gross floor area of
the existing building by more than 10 percent or 3,000 square feet, whichever is less.
3. Sites that are proposed for redevelopment or substantial improvement, where due to the geometry of the site or existing
improvements, installation of landscaping in compliance within this Article would be impractical or unreasonable, in which case the
Building Official may approve a lesser landscaping requirement, provided that the reduction of landscaping standards is only the
extent necessary to make the installation practicable. In no case shall this exception be interpreted to lessen these requirements for
reasons other than those provided.
E. Approved, Allowed, and Prohibited Plants.
1. Approved Landscape Plants. Only approved landscape plants count towards the landscape requirements of this Article. A list of
such plants is set out in Appendix A, Plant Lists.
2. Allowed Landscape Plants. Plants that are not listed on the approved plant list are allowed, but they are not counted towards
compliance with this Article. Applicants who wish to count such plants are advised to seek an amendment to the approved plant list to
include them. See Section 7.104, Selection of Landscape Material.
3. Prohibited Plants. Plant species that are listed in Appendix A, Plant Lists as prohibited plants are not allowed in the City.
F. Planting Locations. In addition to the other requirements of this Article, the following rules apply to the installation of plants.
1. Distance from Utilities.
a. No street trees or large trees shall be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of any overhead utility lines.
b. No trees, except street tree species that are approved by the City, shall be planted over or within five lateral feet of any
underground water line, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility line, or as required by the owner of the utility or the
requirements of the specific easement.
2. Sight Distance Triangles. Trees shall not be installed in locations where there is a substantial likelihood that the mature form of
the tree would have to be materially compromised in order to maintain sight distance triangles. See Section 8.102E., Sight Distance
Triangle Requirements.
G. Completion of Landscape Improvements.
1. Bufferyard and Street Trees. Bufferyard and street tree landscaping must be completed prior to a certificate of occupancy being
issued. If this requirement would result in the installation of landscaping during an inappropriate season, then the City may:
a. Allow the site plan to be recorded upon condition that security is provided for the installation of the required landscaping
during planting season; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/438
b. Issue a temporary certificate of occupancy, on the condition that a permanent certificate of occupancy will not be issued
unless the required landscaping is installed.
2. All Other Landscaping. All other landscaping must be installed before issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy. A
temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued if necessary to allow for the planting of landscaping improvements during an
appropriate season or weather condition.
H. Irrigation Systems. A water-efficient irrigation system is required for all new landscape plantings (including street trees) for nonresidential,
mixed-use, and multi-family lots that require continued or periodic watering to be sustained.
I. Maintenance.
1. For a period of one year from the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, maintenance of the landscape areas and plantings
required by this Article shall be maintained and all plant materials that die shall be replaced by the owner/operator.
2. The City may inspect each site periodically after issuance of the certificate of occupancy to ensure compliance with the Article.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 7.102 Landscape Plan Approval
A. Generally. Compliance with the standards of this Article shall be demonstrated by schematic landscape and irrigation plan.
B. Contents of Schematic Landscape Plan. The landscape plan shall include the elements that are set out in this Section. The Building Official
may waive elements of the landscape plan if the Building Official finds that they are unnecessary due to the type of development approval
sought, or the conditions of the site being developed, or both. The Building Official is authorized to require additional information on the
landscape plan as needed to administer the requirements of this UDC. The schematic landscape plan shall include all of the following
information:
1. Plan Drawing. A plan view, drawn to scale, that shows:
a. The location and species of each plant, showing the anticipated canopy or spread of the plant five years after installation;
b. The general layout of irrigation systems;
c. The location of existing landscaping for which credit is requested, including the diameter at breast height measurements of
large trees; and
d. The location of property lines; building footprints, utility easements, and power lines.
2. Tabular Information. Tabular information that shows, for each landscape area required by this Article:
a. The surface area available for planting;
b. The number of large trees, evergreen trees (note: evergreen trees are denoted in “remarks” in the tables of Appendix A,
Plant Lists), small trees, and shrubs, perennials, or ornamental grasses that are required in each area; and
c. The number of, and species of, large trees, evergreen trees, small trees, and shrubs, perennials, or ornamental grasses
that are provided in each area (if any conversions from one classification of plant to another are applied, the conversions shall
also be shown); and
d. Any credits that are requested for preserving existing trees or shrubs pursuant to Section 7.103D., Credit for Preservation
of Trees.
C. Approval and Timing of Approval.
1. Plans meeting the standards of this UDC shall be approved. However, in reviewing the plans, adjustments in the location of
plants may be required where the City finds such alterations would better serve the purposes for which they are intended.
2. Landscape plans containing street trees, open spaces, and residential bufferyards shall be submitted for approval at the
preliminary plat application stage.
3. Landscape plans containing development landscaping; nonresidential, mixed-use, or multi-family bufferyards; shall be submitted
for approval during the site plan review process, which is prior to the building permit stage.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 7.103 Land Clearing and Existing Trees
A. Purpose. Existing trees, because of the beneficial qualities and natural beauty they add to the community, shall be retained to the maximum
extent practicable in any development or for any redevelopment or substantial improvement of an existing property.
B. Preservation of Protected Trees. Development shall be designed to the maximum extent practicable so that existing protected trees
(including historic street trees) are preserved and located in designated open spaces or landscape surface areas.
1. Tree Preservation. Site plans and plats shall be designed to preserve existing trees and vegetation to the greatest extent
possible and shall seek to incorporate existing stands of trees as well as individual trees. Sensitivity to site grading, storm drainage,
building location and orientation and parking lot configuration shall be demonstrated by the developer to ensure tree and vegetation
preservation. The intent of these regulations is to recognize the need to alter the landscape during site development activities, while
setting out standards necessary to ensure tree preservation to the greatest extent possible.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/438
2. Trees Preserved - Plat or Plan Review Determination. The developer shall prepare and present a tree preservation concept plan
and statement at the pre-application conference with the Department or with application for a plat or site plan review. The concept
plan shall clearly indicate the general location and massing of woodland areas, areas with dense shrubbery, and isolated individual
protected trees and designate which areas or trees are to be preserved and which are to be removed. The Building Official or
Planning and Zoning commission shall have the authority to review and evaluate the above and advise the applicant to proceed
forward or seek alternative site design to improve preservation of existing trees.
C. Limitations on Clear Cutting. Sites that include more than three protected trees per acre shall not allow land disturbing activity in
preparation of development that results in a clear cut of existing vegetation. Instead, protected trees shall be removed only if:
1. They are on the prohibited plant list (see Appendix A, Plant Lists);
2. They are unhealthy or structurally unsound;
3. They are within 10 feet of an approved building footprint;
4. They are within five feet of the paved area of an approved street or parking lot;
5. They are within eight feet [of] an approved outdoor recreation area that by its nature requires the removal of the trees (e.g.,
ballfields);
6. They are within an approved stormwater retention/detention area and are not adapted to such conditions; or
7. They are within six feet of a utility easement and would interfere with the use of the easement as determined by the City
Engineer.
D. Credit for Preservation of Trees. It is the policy of the City to promote the preservation of its healthy mature tree canopy. Healthy, mature
trees that are preserved on-site shall count as more than one tree for the purposes of landscaping requirements, as set out in Table 7.103, Credit
for Preservation of Trees.
Table 7.103
Credit for Preservation of Trees
Preserved Healthy Tree Unit of Measurement (use whichever one produces the most credit) Credit for
Preserved Tree
Diameter at Breast Height Tree Height Years Established
At least 3.5 inches, but less than 5 inches At least 10 ft., but less than 15 ft. Any 1 large tree
At least 5 inches, but less than 9 inches At least 15 ft., but less than 24 ft. 5 2 large trees
At least 9 inches, but less than 12 inches At least 24 ft., but less than 32 ft. 10 3 large trees
At least 12 inches, but less than 16 inches At least 32 ft., but less than 40 ft. 15 4 large trees
16 inches or more 40 ft. or more 20 years or more 5 large trees
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 7.104 Selection of Landscape Material
A. Generally. Plant material that is used to demonstrate compliance with this Article shall be selected as provided in this Section.
B. Approved Plant List. A list of approved plants is set out in Appendix A, Plant Lists. The list separates plants into “large trees,” “small trees,”
“evergreen trees,” and “shrubs,” and classifies each according to whether or not the species counts towards the Xeric planting requirements. The
Tree Board (see Section 13.104, Tree Board) is the delegated the authority to modify the approved plant list. At least 75 percent of each category
of plants (i.e., large trees, small trees, evergreen trees, and shrubs) that are used to meet the landscaping requirements of this Article shall be
listed as Xeric in Appendix A, Plant Lists.
C. Minimum Size of Plants at Installation. Plant material that is installed to comply with the requirements of this Article shall be of the following
minimum sizes at installation as set out in Table 7.104, Minimum Size of Plants at Installation.
Table 7.104
Minimum Size of Plants at Installation
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/438
Type of Plant Material Minimum Size at Installation
Large Tree 3 inch caliper
Small Tree 2.5 inch caliper
Evergreen Tree 6 feet in height
Palm Tree 10 feet clear trunk height
Shrub 5 gallon container
D. Substitution of Large Trees. No more than 40 percent of the required trees to comply with this Article may be palm trees.
E. Quality of New Plantings.
1. All landscape material shall be in compliance with the standards of the American Nursery and Landscape Association.
2. All plant material shall have a habit of growth that is normal for the species and shall be of sound health, vigorous growth, and
free from insect pests, diseases and injuries.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 7.200 Development Landscaping
Sec. 7.201 Street Trees
A. Generally. Street trees are those trees which are planted at regular intervals in the street right-of-way and shall be planted according to the
standards of subsection B., below, in the following circumstances:
1. Along both sides of all streets (except alleys) in the C-2 and R-2 districts (except where the street is an existing street without
room for the installation of street trees);
2. Along both sides of new streets in other districts where there is sufficient right-of-way width to accommodate the street tree lawn;
and
3. Along existing rights-of-way where a street tree lawn is present and the entity responsible for the right-of-way authorizes the
improvement.
B. Street Tree Requirements. Street trees shall be provided in street tree lawns or street tree grates in sidewalks as follows (see Figure 7.201,
Street Trees; Street Tree Lawns and Street Tree Grates):
1. Along new public streets or private street easements that are created on a parcel proposed for development;
2. In medians (including cul-de-sacs) that are created on a parcel proposed for development (see Figure 7.201, Street Trees; Street
Trees in Cul-de-sacs);
3. In medians that are constructed near a parcel proposed for development in order to manage the traffic impacts of the
development, provided that the medians:
a. Are of sufficient width to accommodate the root system;
b. Are maintained by the property owners' association of the development that provides the median; and
c. The installation of street trees in the median would not be detrimental to public safety.
Figure 7.201
Street Trees
Street Tree Lawns
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/438
Street Tree Grates
Street Trees in Cul-de-sacs
C. Required Spacing.
1. Generally. Street trees shall be spaced 60 feet on center in street tree lawns or street tree grates, but shall not be installed in
locations that interfere with required sight triangles (see Section 8.102E., Sight Distance Triangle Requirements). Special plantings
may be clustered if it is demonstrated that the cluster arrangement will not negatively affect the long-term health of the clustered
trees.
2. Wide street tree lawns and medians.
a. If a median or street tree lawn is greater than 20 feet in width, then large trees shall be installed in two rows, with trees
staggered, each row spaced 60 feet on-center.
b. If a median is 11 feet or more in width, up to 20 feet in width, then it shall be planted with large trees, spaced a distance
equal to the diameter of the tree canopy at maturity, less than 10 percent.
D. Types and Species of Street Trees.
1. Type. To maintain a consistent appearance along individual street segments, all trees planted shall be large trees with singlestemmed
trunks, branched no lower than six feet above median grade (for visibility purposes), and shall be suitable for installation in
the space within the street tree lawn or within a street tree grate.
2. Species. Allowable street trees are identified as large trees in Appendix A, Plant Lists.
E. Substitution of Large Trees. Small trees may be substituted for large trees in locations where building setbacks or build-to lines would
create conflicts between buildings and large trees, or where overhead utilities require trees with a mature height that is less than the elevation of
the power lines. However, if such substitutions are made, then:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/438
1. Small trees shall be:
a. Clustered in groups of three; or
b. Spaced at intervals of 20 feet on center.
2. If used, small trees shall be selected which will fit within the street tree lawn without interfering with the street or sidewalk right-ofway.
F. Maintenance. Street trees required by this UDC shall be maintained by a developer, lot owner/operator, tenant, property owners' association
or other entity having a legal interest in the ownership of the subdivision or lots in the subdivision.
G. Street Tree Plan Approval.
1. A street tree plan shall be submitted to the City with the preliminary or final plat, and all site plans.
2. The requirement for street trees may be waived for streets that provide access to fewer than 16 lots and do not provide through
access to abutting development.
H. Timing of installation. Street trees shall be installed prior to the acceptance of subdivision improvements, or if the development is not a
subdivision, then prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 7.202 Residential Landscaping
A. Generally. Residential lot landscaping and open space landscaping are required on parcels proposed for development as follows:
1. Residential Lot Landscaping. Residential lot landscape areas are required on lots (see subsection B., below) within new
residential subdivisions and when new houses are constructed on infill lots within the NC and NT districts.
2. Minimum OSR Requirements. All landscape area plantings on a lot may be used to meet the open space ratio (OSR)
requirements as set out in Table 3.101A., Standard and Alternative Residential Development Standards, or Table 3.101B., Residential
Development Standards in Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Districts. Required street tree plantings may not be used to satisfy the
minimum OSR requirements, as they are planted in the right-of-way, and not on individual lots.
B. Residential Lot Landscaping.
1. Generally. Single-family detached and single-family attached residential lots shall be surrounded by yard areas.
2. Required Plantings and Location. Required plants shall be installed as specified below. Any plants in excess of the minimum
required plants may be installed in any location on the lot provided there is adequate room for healthy growth and stability.
a. Front Yards. Front yards shall be planted with one large tree, unless a street tree is planted within 15 feet of the front
property line, then no tree is required.
b. All Other Yards. No requirements or restrictions on planting.
3. Substitution of Large Trees. Small trees may be substituted for large trees if the dimensions of the lot are such that the large
trees would not have room to grow to a full canopy without conflicting with buildings or each other. For the purposes of this
substitution, one large tree equals two small trees.
4. Ground Covers and Sod. Front yard areas of residential lots that are not covered by buildings, driveways, swimming pools, or
other hard surfaces shall be sodded or planted with permitted ground covers as set out in Appendix A, Plant Lists, unless they are
covered by woodlands, crops, or feedstock.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 7.203 Nonresidential, Mixed-Use, and Multi-Family Landscaping
A. Generally. Parking lot landscape areas are required on parcels proposed for development as follows:
1. Minimum Landscape Surface Ratio (LSR) Requirements. All landscape area plantings on a lot (including parking lot landscaping
and bufferyards) may be used to meet the minimum landscape surface ratio (LSR) requirements as set out in Table 3.301A.,
Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Development Standards (for nonresidential and mixed-uses), and open space ratio (OSR)
requirements as set out in Table 3.101B., Residential Development Standards in Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Districts (for multifamily
uses). Required street tree plantings may not be used to satisfy the minimum LSR or OSR requirements, as they are planted in
the right-of-way, and not on individual lots.
2. Planting Numbers and Locations, Generally. The minimum number and type of site and parking lot landscape area plants
required are set out in this Section. Minimum plant requirements may only be planted in the area specified in the requirement. For
example, if a specified number of trees are required per parking lot island, as required by subsection C. [B.], Parking Lot Landscaping,
of this Section, then those required plantings may only be planted in areas delineated in Figure 7.203A, Nonresidential, Mixed-Use,
and Multi-Family Landscape Areas, as “parking lot landscaping,” and may not be used to meet the minimum requirements for
bufferyards, or street tree plantings. The minimum requirements for these landscape area plantings are set out in subsection C. [B.],
Parking Lot Landscaping, of this Section (for parking lots), Section 7.201, Street Trees (for street trees), and Division 7.300,
Bufferyard Landscaping (for required bufferyards).
Figure 7.203A
Nonresidential, Mixed-Use, and Multi-Family Landscape Areas
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/438
B. Parking Lot Landscaping.
1. Generally. Parking lot landscaping is required within and around nonresidential and multi-family parking lots that contain more
than five parking spaces. This subsection does not apply to single-family detached or single-family attached uses.
2. Parking Lot Planting Locations. As illustrated in Figure 7.203B., Parking Lot Landscape Areas, or Figure 7.203D, Large Parking
Row Reduced Interior Islands, as an alternate plan, parking lot landscape areas are required as follows:
a. At the ends of parking rows, planted in endcap islands that are not less than nine feet wide and the length of the parking
row (i.e., if there is single row of 90-degree parking spaces, the length is 18 feet; if there is a double row of 90-degree parking
spaces, the length is 36 feet), with 10-foot curb radii on the side closest to the parking aisle.
b. In the middle of parking rows at intervals required by subsection C.3. [B.3.], below, planted in interior islands that are not
less than nine feet wide and the length of the parking space (i.e., if there is single row of 90-degree parking spaces, the length is
18 feet; if there is a double row of 90-degree parking spaces, the length is 36 feet), with five-foot curb radii on the side closest to
the parking aisle.
c. At the corners of parking lots, planted in corner islands, which is the area defined by the extension of the edges of
intersecting parking rows.
d. A three-foot landscape hedge along 25 percent of parking lot when it is adjacent to street right-of-way and access drives to
multi-tenant shopping centers. See Figure 7.203C., Illustrative Composition of Parking Lot Landscape Hedge.
Figure 7.203B
Parking Lot Landscape Areas
Figure 7.203C
Illustrative Composition of Parking Lot Landscape Hedge
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/438
3. Parking Lot Planting Requirements. Parking lot landscape islands shall be provided at an interval of one island for each 10
parking spaces, or fraction thereof, planted as follows:
a. Each interior and endcap island shall be planted with a minimum of:
i. One large tree per parking row; and
ii. Ground cover, which shall:
a. Consist of xeric shrubs, ornamental grasses, or perennials that are planted at intervals of not less than three
feet in a bed of mulch, and sod, which may only be used for a maximum of 25 percent of the ground cover area.
b. Not include concrete, asphalt, or other impervious surfaces, with the exception of decorative pavers or stamped,
dyed concrete which may be used only within the first foot of the parking island to allow persons to access their
vehicle without stepping on landscaping.
b. Each parking lot corner shall be planted with two large trees or five small trees and ground cover in conformance with
subsection C.3.a.ii. [B.3.a.ii.], of this Section.
4. Large Parking Row Planting Requirements.
a. In parking lots where parking rows have equal to or exceed 30 parking spaces, the interior planting islands (planted at
intervals of not less than one island for each 10 parking spaces) may be reduced to 16 square feet configured in a diamond
pattern, with the center point of the diamond located at the point where two (for a single parking row) or four parking spaces
meet (for double parking rows). See Figure 7.203D, Large Parking Row Reduced Interior Islands.
b. In these reduced parking islands, one small tree shall be planted with the remaining area being filled in with mulch or other
ground cover.
Figure 7.203D
Large Parking Row Reduced Planting Island
5. Substitution of Large Trees. Small trees may only be substituted for large trees if the dimensions of the lot are such that the large
trees would not have room to grow to a full canopy without conflicting with the building or overhead utilities. For the purposes of this
substitution, one large tree equals two small trees.
6. Protection of Planting Areas. Planting areas shall be protected by wheel stops and six-inch curbs per the specifications of the
City Engineer. Curbs may be punctuated to allow for stormwater flows into biological treatment areas, as applicable, pursuant to an
approved drainage plan, provided that the punctuations do not interfere with their protective function (see subsection D., Use of Island
for Low Impact Development, below).
7. Purpose and Maintenance. The primary purpose of planting trees in parking lots is to provide shade and reduce peak
temperatures throughout the parking lot. Secondary purposes are to improve air quality, reduce maintenance costs for improved hard
surfaces, support stormwater management, and improve overall appearance. To preserve the benefit of the primary purpose, trees
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/438
shall not be pruned in a manner that attempts to restrict the overall growth of the canopy, except in instances where large trees would
not have room to grow to a full canopy without conflicting with buildings or each other.
[C. Reserved.]
D. Use of Islands for Low Impact Development. Wherever possible, landscape areas may be used for low impact development (LID) to satisfy
stormwater management requirements. These landscape areas may have to exceed the minimum areas required by subsections B., and C.,
above, in order to meet ensure [sic] engineering best management practices (BMPs) requirements are met (see Section 8.302C., Low Impact
Development (LID).
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 7.300 Bufferyard Landscaping
Sec. 7.301 Bufferyards Classifications
A. Generally. The district bufferyards that are required by this UDC are based on the amount of screening (i.e., opacity) they provide.
Bufferyards are classified from less screening (Type A) to more screening (Type C).
B. Purposes of Bufferyards. Bufferyards are used to screen development from streets and abutting properties, to enhance the streetscape, to
improve compatibility of abutting uses, and to protect natural resources from impacts of nearby development.
C. Opacity and Width Standards.
1. Opacity Standards. The opacity of the bufferyard is a measure of the percentage of the view that is blocked by the bufferyard
from grade to a height of 35 feet. Opacity relates to planting density, plant forms, bufferyard widths, and the presence of structures
(e.g., fences and walls) or topography (e.g., natural slopes or constructed berms).
2. Width Standards. Comparable opacities can be achieved with bufferyards of different widths. However, in certain circumstances
(e.g., where noise, dust, runoff, or other non-visual impacts are to be mitigated by the bufferyard), the width of the bufferyard may be
as important or more important than its opacity. Where bufferyard widths are specified by limited or conditional use standards, Option
2, in subsection D., (with narrower widths) is not allowed unless a structure is specifically required as part of the limited or conditional
use standards.
D. Bufferyard Options. There are two bufferyards options. Landscape only bufferyards are the preferred option and use a higher density of
plant material to screen abutting properties. For properties more constrained by size, a second option provides a similar level of screening, but
allows a berm or fence to be used in conjunction with a smaller width of landscape strip and lower density plant material. Each option identifies
the width of the buffer and the numbers and types of plants required per 100 linear feet, or portion thereof. The minimum planting requirements
for each type and composition of bufferyard are set out in Table 7.301, Bufferyard Classifications, which is then combined with the district, street
and railroad, and parking lot buffer design standards set out in Section 7.302, Bufferyard Standards.
Table 7.301
Bufferyard Classifications
Type (Opacity) Width Required Plantings per 100 Linear Feet Height of Berm, Wall or
Fence1
Large Trees Small
Trees
Evergreen
Trees
Shrubs
Option 1: Landscape Only Bufferyard
Type A (8%) 5' 1 2 X 10 N/A
Type B (18%) 10' 2 2 1 12 N/A
Type C (40%) 15' 3 5 3 15 N/A
Option 2: Landscape with Berm, Wall, or Fence2
Type A (8%) 3' X X X 10 30" tall masonry wall
Type B (18%) 5' 1 1 X 15 3' tall masonry wall
Type C (40%) 10' 3 3 1 20 3' tall (average)
variable berm or 5' tall
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/438
fence
TABLE NOTES:
N/A - Not Applicable.
1. A berm, wall, or fence is not required for landscape only bufferyards.
2. Plant material, except large trees, must be installed on the outside of the wall or fence facing the street or abutting properties.
E. Illustrative Bufferyards. Set out in Figure 7.301, Illustrative Bufferyards, are the illustrative levels of opacity (i.e., screening) achieved by the
different types of bufferyards (e.g., Type A versus Type B, or landscape only versus landscaping with a berm, wall, or fence).
Figure 7.301
Illustrative Bufferyards
Landscape Only Bufferyard - Type A
Landscape Only Bufferyard - Type B
Landscape Only Bufferyard - Type C
Landscape with Berm, Wall, or Fence Bufferyard - Type A
Landscape with Berm, Wall, or Fence Bufferyard - Type B
Landscape with Berm, Wall, or Fence Bufferyard - Type C
F. Relationship to Other Bufferyard Requirements. Some limited or conditional uses may have different requirements for bufferyards, as
specified in Division 2.200, Limited and Conditional Use Standards. If bufferyards are required by another section of this UDC along property
boundaries that are also district boundaries, then the most restrictive bufferyard requirement is required.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/438
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 7.302 Required Bufferyards
A. Generally. Bufferyard standards for district boundaries, streets and railroads, and parking lots are set out in this Section using the
classifications set out in Section 7.301, Bufferyard Classifications.
B. District Boundary Bufferyards. Set out in Table 7.302A, District Bufferyard Standards, are the required bufferyards between zoning districts
that are not separated by a public street. The rows show the zoning of the parcel proposed for development and columns show the zoning of the
abutting land. Two letters are shown for each condition. The bufferyard required for the proposed use is listed first. The letter listed second is the
buffer that is required on the abutting property. Where “–” is found there is no bufferyard required.
Table 7.302A
District Bufferyard Standards
Zoning of Parcel
Proposed for
Development
Zoning of Abutting District
Agriculture
District
Residential
Districts
Nonresidential
Districts
Agriculture District –/– –/A –/B
Residential Districts A/– A/A A/B
Nonresidential Districts B/– B/A A/A
C. Street or Railroad Bufferyards. Set out in Table 7.302B, Bufferyard Requirements for Streets and Railroads, are the required bufferyards for
any development abutting an arterial, collector, or local street, or railroad right-of-way.
Table 7.302B
Bufferyard Requirements for Streets and Railroads
Zoning of Parcel
Proposed for
Development
Adjoining Street or Railroad Rights-of-Way
Arterial Collector Local Railroad
Agriculture District N/A1 N/A1 N/A1 N/A1
Residential Districts C B A C
Nonresidential Districts A A A C
TABLE NOTES:
N/A - Not Applicable.
1. For agricultural only, no buffer is required. However, residential subdivisions shall follow the same requirements as set out for residential districts.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
ARTICLE 8 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND TRAILS, AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Division 8.100 Streets
Sec. 8.101 Street Standards
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/438
A. Generally. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall be considered in their relations to existing and
planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public safety and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by the
streets.
B. Street Classifications. Streets shall be classified according to the following functional classifications (see the sections of 2030 Thoroughfare
Plan and Roadway Design Standards (i.e., functional classifications) in Chapter 3, Mobility, of the Cuero Comprehensive Plan):
1. Major Arterial (e.g., state road/U.S. Highway)
2. Minor Arterial;
3. Collector;
4. Local; and
5. Access/Service Roads.
C. Alleys. Alleys are not “streets,” but the functional classification “alley” is assigned to them.
D. Street Arrangement. The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall be as follows:
1. Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas;
2. Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City Council to meet a particular situation where
topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformity to existing streets impracticable;
3. Local streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged;
4. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the City Council may require marginal access
streets, reverse frontage, deep lots with rear service alleys, or treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection to residential
properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic;
5. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited;
6. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided;
7. Arterial street intersections shall be at 90-degree angles, plus or minus five degrees; and
8. Other street intersections shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles; no street shall intersect at less
than 90 degrees, plus or minus 15 degrees.
E. Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths.
1. Generally, widths of rights-of-way shall conform to those set out in Table 8.101, Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths.
2. Where additional right-of-way is needed to obtain vertical curve, grade, sight distance triangles, turn lanes, or medians, the
required right-of-way shall be adjusted to the extent necessary in accordance with local needs, as determined by the City Engineer.
See the sections of 2030 Thoroughfare Plan and Roadway Design Standards (i.e., functional classifications) in Chapter 3, Mobility, of
the Cuero Comprehensive Plan.
Table 8.101
Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths
Classification R.O.W. Width Pavement Width1
Primary Arterial
- undivided with turn lane 100 ft. 48 ft. with a 14 ft. center turn lane
- divided 120 ft. 48 ft. with 12 ft. center median
Minor Arterial 80 ft. 60 ft.
Collector
- with no turn lane 60 ft. 32 ft.
- with center turn lane 60 ft. 36 ft. with 12 ft. center turn lane
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/438
Local Streets
- standard 50 ft. 27 ft.
- alternate 50 ft. 32 ft.
Access/Service Roads 24 ft. 40 ft.
Alternate Cross-Sections for Bicycle
Lanes
See Figure 3.5, Alternate Cross-Sections for Bicycle
Facilities, in Chapter 3, Mobility, of the Cuero
Comprehensive Plan.
TABLE NOTES:
1. Measured from back of curb to back of curb.
3. The adjacent landowner shall maintain the right-of-way between the edge of pavement (if there is no curb) or the inside edge of
the curb for the length of the property owner's frontage and to the centerline of a recorded or proposed alley. It is the duty of the
adjacent landowner to keep streets and alleys, whether private or public, free of debris, weeds higher than 24 inches, filth, carrion and
impure, or unwholesome matter.
F. New Streets. New streets of like alignment shall bear the names of existing streets and shall be dedicated at equal or greater widths than
the existing streets. No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be
shown on the preliminary plat and be subject to the approval of the City Council (see Section 4.108, Naming and Numbering).
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 8.102 Access and Connectivity
A. Generally. In addition to the provisions set out in Section 8.101, Street Standards, the design and construction of all new streets shall
comply with the provisions of this Section.
B. Alleys. Alleys established after the effective date shall comply with the standards of this Section.
1. Use of Alleys. Alleys may be used only:
a. In residential development and/or districts, alleys shall be parallel, or approximately parallel to the frontage of the street.
b. In nonresidential and mixed-use development and/or districts, alleys shall be located in activity centers where it is
necessary to provide service access to buildings. However, the City Council may waive this requirement where other definite
and assured provision is made for service access, including off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and
adequate for the use proposed. Service alleys in nonresidential and industrial districts and developments shall be a minimum of
25 feet in width.
2. Alley Right-of-Way. The standards for right-of-way in an alley are as follows:
a. Nonresidential Districts and Developments. Alleys shall be a minimum of 25 feet in width.
b. Residential Districts and Developments. Alleys shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width.
c. Mixed-Use Developments. Alley right-of-way width shall comply with either subsection B.2.a. or B.2.b., above, depending
on whether the alley is serving a residential or nonresidential use.
3. Surfacing and Edging. The surfacing and edging of alleys shall be in accordance with the City standards. If the alley is not paved
in accordance to City standards, the proposed plat shall be accompanied by a covenant, condition, or restriction that garbage
collection shall be from the street only.
4. Connectivity.
a. Generally, alleys shall connect to public streets on both ends, and shall be dedicated to the City as public rights-of-way.
b. Dead-end alleys shall provide an adequate turnaround at the dead-end, as determined by the City Engineer and Fire
Department. The dead-end shall be developed as follows:
i. The length shall be shorter than 150 feet; and
ii. The buildings that take access from the alley are constructed with fire protection sprinklers.
C. Access and Connectivity.
1. Access.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/438
a. Subdivisions with 30 or more lots, or multi-family developments with 50 or more dwelling units, shall provide no less than
two access points to/from existing streets. Those access points shall be located as far apart as practical and consistent with
Division 5.200, Access Management and Circulation.
b. The street layout of a subdivision shall provide public street access to all building sites and parcels.
c. Street alignments within subdivisions shall utilize horizontal curves, islands, street offsets, intersections, or other methods
that allow adequate access and promote traffic calming.
2. Off-site Connectivity.
a. Wherever streets have been dedicated or platted on adjacent properties for extension into or through a proposed
subdivision, then those streets shall be incorporated into the street layout of the proposed subdivision.
b. Subdivision streets shall be extended to the boundaries of the parcel proposed for development in appropriate locations to
provide for future connections to other properties.
D. Dead-End Streets/Cul-de-Sacs. Cul-de-sacs are allowed only as provided in this subsection.
1. Design Type. Dead-end streets, when designed to be so permanently, shall culminate in a cul-de-sac per the standards of this
Section. Dead-end streets, when designed to be so temporarily, shall conform to subsection D.4., Temporary Turnarounds, of this
Section.
2. Maximum Length. Dead-end streets in the form of a cul-de-sac, when designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than
600 feet as measured from a point beginning at the intersection of the cul-de-sac street centerline with the projection of the
intersecting street's curb line, along the centerline of the cul-de-sac street to the cul-de-sac, and directly through the cul-de-sac to its
furthest point from the point of beginning.
3. Radius. The minimum radii of cul-de-sacs shall be at least:
a. Residential: 40 feet pavement; 50 feet right-of-way.
b. Nonresidential: 90 feet pavement; 100 feet right-of-way.
4. Temporary Turnarounds. Dead-end streets that are planned for extension to connect to future development shall terminate in a
temporary turnaround with a 50-foot radius, which allows for emergency vehicles to turn around without backing (“T” and “Y”-shaped
turnarounds are not allowed). The turnaround shall have an improved hard surface and a base that meets the requirements for a
public street. A gravel surface may be allowed if the temporary turnaround will be in use for less than 12 months and security is
provided to pave the turnaround if the anticipated connection is not made within 12 months.
E. Sight Distance Triangle Requirements.
1. Required Site Distance Triangle. Within the triangular area formed by the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets and a line
connecting points 25 feet on either side of such intersecting rights-of-way, including triangles formed from centerlines of driveways,
there shall be clear space and no obstruction to vision (see Figure 8.102, Sight Triangle Requirements).
Figure 8.102
Sight Triangle Requirements
2. Sight Distance Triangle to be Kept Free of Obstructions. No person shall place or maintain any structures, fences, landscaping,
or other objects within any sight distance triangle that obstructs or obscures site [sight] distance visibility by more than 25 percent of
the area between the ground and eight feet, except for the following:
a. Landscaping, structures, or fences that protrude no more than 30 inches above the adjacent roadway surface may be
permitted within the sight distance triangle.
b. Trees may be planted and maintained within the sight distance triangle if all branches are trimmed to maintain a clear vision
for a vertical height of eight feet above the roadway surface and the location of the trees planted, based on the tree species'
expected mature height and size, does not obstruct sight visibility by more than 25 percent of the site [sight] distance triangle
area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/438
[F.] D. Private Streets. Private streets may be developed if all of the following are demonstrated:
1. The private subdivision is a minimum of 10 acres.
2. The area being developed would not result in a concentration of private street subdivisions in one area of the City to the extent
that such development would dominate the neighborhood development pattern.
3. Access shall meet the City's right-of-way standards, shall be accessible to general traffic circulation, delivery of City services, and
emergency responders.
4. Setbacks from private streets shall be measured in the same manner as setbacks from public streets.
5. Private streets shall be constructed to the same standards as public streets.
6. A property owners' association shall be established in a form approved by the City at the time of final plat approval, which will:
a. Require all lot owners to be members;
b. Collect dues and assessments to maintain the private streets;
c. Keep an appropriate reserve fund to ensure periodic maintenance of the private streets; and
d. Require maintenance of the private streets, traffic signals, streetlights, and sidewalks.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 8.103 Thoroughfare Plan
A. Generally. Thoroughfare planning and future right-of-way protection is a priority for the City. The Thoroughfare Plan is located in the 2030
Thoroughfare Plan section of Chapter 3, Mobility, of the Cuero Comprehensive Plan, and it identifies desired alignments of arterial and collector
streets throughout the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ).
B. Effect. New arterial or collector streets, in addition to improvements to existing arterial and collector streets shall be consistent with the most
recently adopted Thoroughfare Plan.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 8.200 Sidewalks, Paths, and Trails
Sec. 8.201 Sidewalks
A. Generally. Concrete sidewalks are required along all public and private streets in the City. See the sections of 2030 Thoroughfare Plan and
Roadway Design Standards (i.e., functional classifications) in Chapter 3, Mobility, of the Cuero Comprehensive Plan.
B. Width.
1. Local and Collector Streets. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet along both sides of local and collector streets.
2. Arterial Streets. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet along both sides of arterial streets.
C. Location of Sidewalks.
1. Sidewalks shall be provided between the right-of-way line and the edge of pavement. Generally, the outer edge of the sidewalk
shall abut or be no more than one foot from private property lines.
2. Sidewalks may meander to protect the root systems of mature trees, provided that no sidewalk is located closer than three feet
to the back of curb (or edge of pavement if no curb is present). This arrangement shall not reduce the right-of-way width requirement.
3. Sidewalks shall also be installed in pedestrian access easements. The pedestrian access easement shall be a minimum of 10
feet.
D. Completion of Sidewalk Networks. Adequate provision shall be made to ensure the timely completion of the sidewalk network associated
with all parcel[s] proposed for development.
E. Modification of Sidewalk Requirements. Sidewalk requirements may be altered or waived if a sidewalk or trail plan that provides equal or
greater pedestrian circulation is submitted to and approved at the time of a preliminary plat. These trade-offs may be permitted if better
pedestrian and bicycle access and connectivity is provided through the use of off-street trails or multi-use pathways that connect to sidewalks or
other off-street trails or multi-use pathways on the perimeter of the parcel proposed for development.
F. Mid-Block Crossings and Cul-de-sacs.
1. Pedestrian access easements and sidewalks shall be located at mid-block crossings when the City block exceeds 800 feet in
length, and in cul-de-sacs, when connections to other streets, cul-de-sacs, and off-street trails are within 150 feet, measured from the
shortest distance between the two points.
2. The width of the pedestrian access easement shall be at least 10 feet and the width of the sidewalk connection shall be a
minimum of five feet (see Figure 8.201, Pedestrian Pathways in Residential Cul-de-sacs).
3. Connections to off-street trails may be constructed of asphalt if the trail that is being connected to is constructed of asphalt.
Figure 8.201
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/438
Pedestrian Pathways in Residential Cul-de-Sacs
G. Existing Sidewalks.
1. It is the duty and obligation of all owners, occupants, and users of real property abutting upon streets within the City, at their own
cost and expense, to:
a. Keep and maintain the sidewalks (and paving laid thereon) bordering their property at level at curb grade, free of
demolition, depressions, excavations, elevations, inequalities, obstacles, obstructions, or encroachments, natural or artificial,
above or below ground level, or which overlap, impinge upon, or appropriate any part of the sidewalk area or the space up to
eight feet above it;
b. Allow no oils, greases, ice, snow, or water to collect or remain thereon; and
c. Generally, in every manner, to keep the sidewalks in a safe, adequate, and non-defective condition so that they are easily
accessible to and may be freely and safely used by the public for travel by foot.
2. That where and when, by reason of a violation of any of the above provisions, injury or damage is occasioned to or inflicted upon
any person, whether on the sidewalk or in the street, primary liability for all the injury or damage shall rest upon the owner, occupant,
and user of the property abutting upon the defective sidewalk.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, or corporation to construct, demolish, reconstruct, or repair any sidewalk,
setback, driveway, curb, gutter, or work incident thereto in the streets and alleys of the City without first obtaining a permit for the work
from the Building Official, applications for which permits shall be made on forms furnished by the City.
4. No permit issued under this Subsection or any construction to be done thereunder, shall be assigned, transferred, or sublet but
the permittee shall remain in personal charge of all work done thereunder.
5. The City Manager, Building Official, or City Engineer designated by the City Manager shall furnish information establishing lines
and grades for the construction, reconstruction, or repair of any improvement covered by this Subsection. All construction shall be in
accordance with said lines and grades and subject to approval of the City Manager, Building Official, or designated official. Stakes
shall be set by or at the expense of the property owner.
6. No materials shall be used in any construction mentioned in this Article until the same has been inspected and approved by the
Building Official, and any material which is not approved by the Building Official shall be removed from the streets and sidewalks at
the expense of the property owner. No concrete mixture shall be poured until forms and excavations have been inspected and
approved by the Building Official or authorized representative.
7. No more than one-third of the width of the street shall be occupied by materials, equipment, or tools, and barricades shall be
placed around the equipment so as to leave at least two-thirds of the street open for traffic, which barricades and street obstructions
shall be supplied with lights at nighttime so that the same will serve as protection to the public as a result of the obstruction in the
streets.
H. Specifications for Materials and Equipment.
1. Cement. Cement shall be Portland cement meeting the current standard tests for commercial cement.
2. Water. Water for concrete shall be clean and free from injurious amounts of oil, acid, alkali, organic matter, or other deleterious
substances. In general, City water will be required
3. Fine Aggregate. Fine aggregate shall be clean, sharp natural sand, graded from coarse to fine (using laboratory sieves with
square openings), as set out in Table 8.201A, Aggregate Limits:
Table 8.201A
Final Aggregate Limits
Sieve Size Total Passing
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/438
(Percentage by Weight)
3/8 inch 100
No. 4 95-100
No. 16 45 to 80
No. 50 5 to 30
No. 100 0 to 8
No. 200 0 to 3
TABLE NOTES:
Not more than two percent of clay or loam by volume shall show at the end of one hour's settlement of the water in which a sample of
the sand has been thoroughly washed. Sand shall contain no more than one-half percent by weight of organic or other deleterious
matter.
4. Coarse Aggregate. Coarse aggregate shall consist of clean, hard, tough gravel or broken stone, and shall contain no more than
one-half percent by weight of soft, friable, thin, elongated or laminated pieces, and alkali, organic, or other deleterious matter. Material
for coarse aggregate shall be graded from coarse to fine within the following limits (using laboratory sieves with square openings), as
set out in Table 8.201B, Coarse Aggregate Limits: Pit-Run Materials. Pit-run materials may be used if they meet the requirements of
this section.
Table 8.201B
Coarse Aggregate Limits
Sieve Size
Total Passing
(Percentage by Weight)
2 inch 100
1-1/2 inch 95-100
3/4 inch 35 to 70
3/8 inch 10 to 30
No. 4 0 to 5
5. Pit-Run Materials. Pit-run materials may be used if they meet the requirements of this Section.
6. Measurement of Materials. Materials shall be measured in accurate measuring boxes, buckets, or wheelbarrows in a manner
that the quantities can be closely controlled during the progress of the work. Shovel measurement will not be permitted.
7. Concrete Quality. It is the intent of this Section to secure for every part of the work, concrete of homogeneous structure which,
when hardened, will have the required strength and resistance to weathering. To this end, the strengths of concrete will be as follows:
a. 2000 pounds per square inch for curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and residential driveways.
b. 300 [sic] pounds per square inch for setbacks and commercial driveways.
c. These strengths to be obtained in 28 days by tests on 6-inch by 12-inch cylinders. The tests shall be made at the expense
of the City, except that the contractor shall furnish the concrete.
8. Prior Test Records. In the event that the contractor furnishes reliable test records of concrete made with materials from the same
sources and of the same quality and mixed in the same proportions in connection with current work, all or a part of the strength tests
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/438
specified herein may be waived by the City Manager.
9. Workability of Concrete. The concrete shall be of the consistency and composition that it can be worked readily into the corners
and angles of the forms and around the reinforcement without permitting the materials to segregate or free water to collect on the
surface. The contractor shall adjust the proportions of cement and aggregate as may be necessary to produce a mixture which will be
easily placeable at all times, due consideration being given to the methods of placing and compacting used on the work.
10. Slump. The slump as measured by a standard slip cone shall in no case exceed six inches.
11. Mixing Equipment. The mixing equipment shall be capable of combining the aggregates, cement, and water within the specified
time into a thoroughly mixed and uniform mass, and of discharging the mixture without segregation.
a. Machine Mixing. The mixing of concrete shall be done in a batch mixer of approved type which will insure a uniform
distribution of the material throughout the mass. The equipment at the mixing plant shall be so constructed that all materials,
including the water, entering the drum can be accurately proportioned and be under control. The entire batch shall be
discharged before recharging. The volume of the mixed material per batch shall not exceed the manufacturer's rated capacity of
the mixer. The mixing period shall be not less than one minute and shall be measured from the time when all of the solid
materials are in the mixer drum, provided that all of the mixing water shall be introduced before one-fourth of the mixing time has
elapsed.
b. Truck Mixing. Truck mixers shall be of the revolving drum type, watertight, and so constructed that the concrete can be
mixed to insure a uniform distribution of materials throughout the mass. Except as subsequently provided, the truck mixer shall
be equipped with a tank for carrying mixing water. Only the prescribed amount of water shall be placed in the tank unless the
tank is equipped with a device by which the quantity of water added can be readily verified. The mixing water may be added
directly to the batch, in which case a tank shall not be required. The maximum size of batch in truck mixers shall be in
accordance with the specified rating of the mixer.
c. Hand Mixing. Hand mixing of concrete will not be allowed.
12. Re-tempering. The re-tempering of concrete or mortar which has partially hardened; that is, mixing with or without additional
cement, aggregate, or water, will not be permitted.
13. Protection.
a. All concrete shall be protected so that the temperature at the surface will not fall below 40° F or that there will be no loss of
moisture from the surface for 24 hours after the concrete is poured.
b. Protection against loss of moisture from the surface of the concrete shall be accomplished by keeping the surface
continuously wet for one day. This may be done by any one of the following methods:
i. The surface of slab protected by ponding;
ii. Covering concrete with burlap or cotton mats kept continuously wet;
iii. Covering concrete with paper of suitable type;
iv. Covering concrete with one-inch layer of earth or sand kept wet; or
v. Continuous sprinkling.
14. Field Tests of Concrete.
a. During the progress of construction, the City Manager may have tests made to determine whether the concrete as being
produced complies with the standards of quality specified. The contractor shall cooperate in the making of the tests to the extent
of allowing free access to the work for the selection of samples and storage of specimens, and in affording protection to the
specimens against injury or loss through his operations.
b. Three cylinders will generally be made for each class of concrete used in any one day's operation.
c. Samples of concrete for test specimens shall be taken at the mixer, or in the case of ready-mixed concrete, from the
transportation vehicle during discharge. When, in the opinion of the City Manager, it is desirable to take samples elsewhere, they
shall be taken as directed by him.
15. Failure to Meet Requirements. Should the strengths shown by the test specimens fall below the values required, the City
Manager shall have the right to require changes in proportions on future work or shall have the right to require the removal and
replacement of those sections which failed to develop the required strength.
16. Foundation and Preparation of Sub-Grade.
a. The foundation shall consist of firm, hard soil from which all vegetable matter and other loose material have been removed.
b. All soft and spongy places must be dug out and the resulting holes filled with solid materials, thoroughly tamped.
Exceptionally hard, compacted spots in the sub-grade must be loosened and tamped to provide a uniform bearing.
c. If, in the opinion of the City Manager, the soil in the foundation is of a character that it will swell or shrink with changes in its
moisture content to an extent that the concrete may be damaged, the soil shall be excavated four inches below sub-grade and
refilled with sand.
d. Material for fills shall be placed and tamped in six-inch layers. The top of all fills shall extend at least one foot beyond the
edges of the walk or other structure, and the slopes of fills shall be at least two feet horizontal to one foot vertical to prevent
undue erosion.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/438
17. Forms.
a. Forms shall conform to the shape, lines, grades, and dimensions of the concrete.
b. Lumber used in forms for exposed surfaces shall be dressed to a uniform thickness, and shall be free from loose knots or
other defects. Joints in forms shall be horizontal or vertical where appearance of the finished surface is of importance. For
unexposed surfaces and rough work, undressed lumber may be used. Lumber once used in forms shall have nails withdrawn,
and surfaces to be in contact with concrete thoroughly cleansed before being used again.
c. Forms shall be sufficiently tight to prevent leakage of mortar. They shall be properly braced or tied together so as to
maintain the desired position and shape during and after placing concrete.
d. The inside of metal forms shall be coated with non-staining mineral oil or other approved material, or in case of wood forms
they shall be thoroughly wetted.
e. The removal of forms shall not be started until the concrete has attained the strength necessary to support its own weight
and any construction live loads.
18. Depositing Concrete.
a. Before beginning placement of concrete hardened concrete and foreign materials shall be removed from the inner surface
of the mixing and conveying equipment.
b. Water shall be removed from the space to be occupied by the concrete before concrete is deposited, unless otherwise
directed by the City Manager. Any flow of water into an excavation shall be diverted through proper side drains to a sump, or be
removed by other approved methods which will avoid washing the freshly deposited concrete.
c. Concrete shall be handled from the mixer, or in the case of ready-mixed concrete from the transporting vehicle, to the place
of final deposit as rapidly as practicable by methods which shall prevent the separation or loss of the ingredients. Under no
circumstances shall concrete that has partially hardened be deposited in the forms as nearly as practicable in its final position to
avoid re-handling. It shall be deposited so as to maintain, until the completion of the unit, a plastic surface approximately
horizontal.
d. Concrete, regardless of the type of transporting vehicle, shall have, when deposited in the forms, the quality required.
e. Concrete, during and immediately after depositing, shall be thoroughly spaded, rodded, and compacted.
f. Accumulation of water on the surface of the concrete due to water gain, segregation, or other causes during placement and
compacting shall be prevented as far as possible by adjustments in the mixture. Provision shall be made for the removal of the
water as may accumulate so that under no circumstances will concrete be placed in the accumulations.
g. Concrete shall be deposited continuously, or in layers of the thickness that no concrete will be deposited on concrete which
has hardened sufficiently to cause the formation of seams and planes of weakness within the section.
h. Before depositing new concrete on or against concrete which has hardened, the forms shall be re-tightened. The surface of
the hardened concrete shall be roughened as required by the City Manager in a manner that will not leave loosened particles of
aggregate or damaged concrete at the surface. It shall be thoroughly cleaned of foreign matter and laitance, and saturated with
water. To insure an excess of mortar at the juncture of the hardened and the newly deposited concrete, the cleaned and
saturated surfaces, including vertical and inclined surfaces, shall first be thoroughly covered with a coating of mortar or neat
cement ground against which the new concrete shall be placed before the ground has attained its initial set.
i. Sidewalks, driveways, setbacks, and all other flat work are to be of one-course concrete construction.
19. Sidewalks.
a. Sidewalks shall be of concrete and have a minimum thickness of four inches. In the residential portions of the City,
sidewalks shall be four feet in width. In case greater widths are desired, special authorization shall be secured from the City
Engineer. In nonresidential, mixed-use, and multi-family districts, the walks shall occupy the entire width from property line to
curb. The walk shall be sloped 1/4 inch in one foot above the curb.
b. An entrance sidewalk for a residence in a residential area may vary from the four-foot standard sidewalk width if the
requirements of the particular location are such as to warrant a narrower or a wider walk; however, no entrance walk shall be
less than three feet nor more than six feet in width.
c. Sidewalks on grades up to and including three percent shall be given a smooth float finish, and on grades over three
percent shall be given a brush finish. Immediately after the concrete is placed it shall be tamped and then struck off with a
template. The surface shall then be “floated” or “darbied” and dusted. This dry dust, consisting of one part Portland cement to
one and one-half parts sand, must be sprinkled on the wet concrete not more than 20 minutes after the concrete is placed; and
not more than 10 minutes after the first coat of dust is applied, the work is to be struck off with a straight edge or darby and the
second coat applied. As soon as the concrete has become firm, it shall be floated with a wood float and then, be troweled with a
steel trowel to a uniform, smooth surface. Following this the walk shall be edged and grooved.
d. To obtain a suitable brush finish a fine-haired brush not less than four inches in width shall be used. The brush is to be
swept lightly [over] the surface of the concrete with a sweeping, circular motion. The entire surface shall be brushed until a
uniform appearance is obtained, care being taken that the edges and jointer tool marks are not obliterated.
e. To obtain a suitable smooth float finish, the concrete as soon as it has become firm, shall be floated with a wood float to a
uniform smooth surface. Following this the walk shall be edged and grooved. The walk shall then be floated transversely or
longitudinally, care being taken that the edger and jointer tool marks are not obliterated.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/438
f. That portion of the sidewalk in the driveway shall be placed as driveway, but finished as sidewalk.
g. The edger shall be of steel three inches wide with a one-quarter inch radius and shall be used on the edges against the
forms, expansion joints and old work in order to give the work a finished appearance. The spacing of the jointer marks shall not
exceed five feet and shall conform to the jointer marks in the curb. The jointer shall leave a mark three-sixteenth of an inch in
width and three-eighths of an inch in depth. The marks formed by the edger and the jointer shall be on a true line. The marks left
by these tools on the flat surface of the walk shall be troweled out.
20. Special Sidewalks. Sidewalk surfaces constructed of materials other than concrete may be installed only on written approval of
the City Engineer. Request for the approval shall be made by the owner in writing with a sketch indicating the work to be done. Any
sidewalk surface constructed of a material other than concrete shall be laid on a four-inch concrete base and shall be constructed so
that it will form an integral part with the base. Approval for a special sidewalk will include specifications for the construction of the type
of sidewalk to be installed.
21. Curb and Gutter.
a. Separate gutter, where curbs are in place or combined curb and gutter shall be constructed in accordance with the
standards shown on the attached plans. Construction of curb without gutter will not be permitted. The radius of the curb return at
a street intersection will be designated by the City Engineer.
b. In not more than one hour after the concrete has been placed, the curb form shall be removed and a thin coating not over
one-quarter inch thick of finish mortar, composed of one part cement to two parts fine aggregate, shall be worked into the
exposed faces of the curb and gutter by means of a trowel and “mule.” Curb and gutter shall be finished true to line and grade
with the aid of a straight edge, steel trowel, steel “gooseneck” and fine-haired brush. The straight edge is to be used on the face
of the curb and in the gutter. The curb and gutter is to be worked with a steel trowel and “gooseneck” to give the work the
appearance of a trowel finish. It is to be edged and jointed in the same manner as specified for sidewalk, and after the work has
become firm it is to be brushed lightly longitudinally with a final crosswise brushing.
c. Curbs and gutters constructed of material other than concrete may be installed only with written approval of the City
Engineer. Request for the approval shall be made by the owner in writing with a sketch indicating the work to be done. Approval
for the curbs will include specifications for the construction of the type of curb to be installed.
22. Driveways.
a. Driveways shall be classified as residential, light commercial, and heavy commercial, and shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards indicated on the attached plans.
b. Driveway flat work shall be of one-course construction and given a smooth wood float finish.
c. Driveways curbs shall be given the finish specified for curb and gutter.
d. Driveways shall be marked in rectangular squares not over five feet wide by cutting through the finished surface as
specified for sidewalks.
23. Residential Driveways.
a. A residential driveway shall include any driveway leading into residential or other private property where no heavy wheel
loads may be expected.
b. The minimum width shall be 10 feet.
c. The curb return shall have a minimum radius of 2 feet, 6 inches.
d. Residential driveways shall be of concrete five inches thick including the sidewalk and gutter section.
24. Commercial Driveways.
a. All driveways into places of business which serve or are served by automobile traffic shall be classified as light commercial
driveways. All driveways which shall be subject to other types of commercial use, including (but without limitation) gas stations
and warehouses, shall be classified as heavy commercial driveways. Special permission must be obtained from the City
Engineer before a light commercial or heavy commercial driveway may be built. Request for the approval shall be made by the
owner in writing with a sketch indicating the location and dimensions of the commercial driveway.
b. Light commercial driveways, including the sidewalk and gutter sections, shall be of plain concrete five inches thick. Any
sidewalk which is free from cracks on the proper grade and in good condition may remain in place when a light commercial
driveway leading thereto is installed, but if any the sidewalk shall become dangerous to the public it shall be removed and
replaced by the property owner with concrete of the required thickness. Heavy commercial driveways, including the sidewalk
and gutter sections, shall be of reinforced concrete five inches thick, and where a sidewalk exists within the limits of the
driveway, the sidewalk shall be replaced with reinforced concrete five inches thick.
c. Three-eighths inch round deformed bars of reinforcing steel on 18-inch centers both ways shall be placed in heavy
commercial driveways two inches from the finished surface, and shall be securely tied at each intersection. Wire mesh
consisting of six gauge wire on six-inch centers, both ways, or an approved equal, may be used as an alternate to bars of
reinforcing steel.
d. Metal reinforcement shall be accurately positioned and secured against displacement by using annealed iron wire ties or
suitable clips at intersections, and shall be supported by concrete or metal supports, spacers or metal hangers.
e. The reinforcing steel shall be placed so as to have one bar three inches from and parallel to the outside edges of the
driveway slab and adjacent to expansion joints. All splices in the steel shall be lapped at least 40 times the diameter of the steel.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/438
Where wire mesh is used, the outside wire shall be not more than one and one-half inch from the outside edge of the concrete.
f. The curb returns shall have a radius of not more than the distance from the front edge of the sidewalk to the face of the curb
and not less than two feet six inches.
g. In case a driveway, due to development of the abutting property, has become obsolete and of no further use to the
property, the owner may be required by the City Council to remove the driveway and replace it with a standard curb and gutter
and, where necessary, a sidewalk, all at his own expense.
25. Setbacks.
a. A setback is that additional area formed by setting the curb back from the regular curb alignment toward the property line to
obtain a more convenient parking space in the street abutting a commercial establishment.
b. In no case shall a setback be constructed where the additional depth obtained is less than eight feet.
c. A setback may be installed only on written approval of the City Manager. Request for the approval shall be made by the
owner in writing accompanied by a sketch indicating the work to be done.
d. The property owner shall be required to maintain the setback area in a clean, presentable condition at his own expense. In
case the setback area is not maintained properly the owner may be required by the City Council to remove the setback within a
reasonable length of time and replace it with a standard curb and gutter and where necessary, a sidewalk, all at his own
expense.
e. In case a setback, due to development of the abutting property, has become obsolete and of not further use to the property,
the owner may be required by the City Council to remove the setback and replace it with a standard curb and gutter, and where
necessary, a sidewalk, all at his own expense.
f. The setback shall be of plain concrete five inches thick, and shall be given a smooth wood float finish and be marked in
rectangular squares as specified for sidewalks. Setback curbs shall be given the finish specified for curb and gutter.
26. Expansion and Contraction Joints.
a. Transverse expansion joints one-half inches in thickness and to the full depth and width of the work shall be spaced not
over 25 feet apart in curb gutters, driveways, setbacks, and sidewalks. These joints shall be placed on dividing lines between
lots where practicable. A one-half inch expansion joint shall be installed where a sidewalk intersects, joins or abuts a stormwater
inlet or other structure, another walk or a curb. Where the sidewalk occupies the entire space between the curb and sidewalk
and between the sidewalk and building or wall.
b. Expansion joint material at least one-half inches in thickness shall be placed in a concrete driveway where the driveway
slab or curb abuts the pavement, gutter, curb, and sidewalk, as indicated on the attached standard plan. Expansion joint
material shall be neatly trimmed to the surface of the finished work.
c. The expansion joint material used shall completely fill the space required.
d. Scrap pieces of joint material that cannot readily be assembled without open seams shall not be used.
27. Repair Work.
a. Repair work shall comply with the provisions of this Section except that sections of structures being replaced shall in
general conform as nearly as possible in dimensions, shape, and appearance with the structure in place.
b. Sections of sidewalks, driveways, curbs, and gutters to be repaired shall be cut out and replaced to the jointer marks.
c. The contractor shall be required to backfill his work properly to the full depth of the structure. He shall be required to
remove from the site all surplus excavated material and debris and put the work into a neat and presentable condition.
d. In case the surplus excavated material on the site is not sufficient to backfill the structure to its full required depth, the
contractor shall be required to obtain the additional material and backfill the structure properly as indicated on the attached
standard plans, which are made a part of this Article.
Editor's note–The standard plans referred to in subsection d. are not printed herein.
I. General Penalty.
1. Any person who violates any provision of this Article for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not to exceed:
a. $2,000 in all cases arising under municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning, and public health and sanitation other
than vegetation and litter violations;
b. $500 in all other cases provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or
a similar offense under the laws of the state.
2. If the maximum penalty provided by this Article for any such offense is greater than the maximum penalty provided for the same
or a similar offense under the laws of the state, then the maximum penalty for violation as provided by state statute shall be the
maximum penalty under this Article. Each day any violation of this Article or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
3. Statutory reference: Maximum fine for general violations, see Tex. Local. Government Code Section 54.001.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/438
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 8.202 Pedestrian and Bicycle Improvement Opportunities Implementation
A. Generally. Changing conditions call for increased attention to the City's bicycle and pedestrian (i.e., sidewalk) system. In order to address
broken or fragmentation of this system, the City adopted a Pedestrian and Bicyclist Improvement Opportunities map in the Cuero
Comprehensive Plan. The Pedestrian and Bicyclist Improvement Opportunities map illustrates priority areas based on their proximity to high
traffic pedestrian areas such as schools, parks, downtown, employment and commercial services, and connections to residential development as
well as lays out routes for on-street bicycle lanes and off-street trails.
B. Sidewalks.
1. Areas of Importance. Areas of importance include those within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the following facilities:
a. Alexander Park;
b. Duale Park;
c. Hunt Elementary School;
d. French Elementary School;
e. St. Michael Elementary School;
f. Cuero Public Library;
g. Cuero Intermediate School;
h. Cuero Junior High School;
i. Cuero High School;
j. Cuero Municipal Park; and
k. Cuero Municipal Airport.
2. Requirements. In the areas set out in subsection B.1., of this Section, sidewalks shall be constructed in conformance with
Section 8.201, Sidewalks, for parcels proposed for development for any new development, redevelopment, or substantial
improvement. See the sections of 2030 Thoroughfare Plan and Roadway Design Standards (i.e., functional classifications) in Chapter
3, Mobility, of the Cuero Comprehensive Plan.
C. On-Street Bicycle Lanes. Several city-wide on-street bicycle lanes have been set out on the Pedestrian and Bicyclist Improvement
Opportunities map in the Cuero Comprehensive Plan. As new site plans and plats are approved for new parcels proposed for development,
redevelopment, or substantial improvement, these on-street bicycle lanes shall be designated.
D. Off-Street Trails. Conceptual off-street trails have been set out on the Pedestrian and Bicyclist Improvement Opportunities map in the Cuero
Comprehensive Plan. As such, all parcels proposed for development shall comply with the following:
1. A 25-foot access easement and an eight-foot-wide off-street trail shall be designed, constructed, and marked according to the
most current AASHTO requirements.
2. Where a off-street trail crosses a public or private street, the street shall be signed and painted designated such crossing for the
protection of trail users.
3. Maintenance responsibilities shall be established at the time of a preliminary plat.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 8.300 Infrastructure
Sec. 8.301 General Standards for All Infrastructure Improvement
A. Generally. The City's public health, safety, and welfare is protected and advanced by safe, reliable, and sustainable water supply and safe
and effective treatment of effluent. All utilities shall be constructed and installed at the owner and/or developer's expense and meet the
requirements of this UDC, state regulations, and with current official standards of the City.
1. Connection Required. All new parcels proposed for development that are within the City's utility service area shall be connected
to the City's potable water and sanitary sewer lines or other central community sewer system. Water and/or sewer utilities are subject
to payment of water and sewer plant fees in effect at the time of issuance of the building permit or connection to the utility if no permit
is required.
2. Location. All new development shall locate utilities underground.
B. Water Supply and Fire Protection.
1. Generally. Water supply for new parcels proposed for development shall be sufficient to provide for the development's potable
water demand, irrigation needs, and fire protection needs. Water shall be supplied using fire-rated lines that are acceptable to the
City's Fire Department, and installed to the specifications of the City Engineer.
2. Capacity. Applicants for approval of new parcels proposed for development, or changes to existing development that the Building
Official finds are likely to involve material additional water demand, shall submit certification from the City Engineer that capacity is
available to serve the proposed development.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/438
3. Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be provided and spaced to the specifications of the Fire Department and the most recently
adopted Fire Code.
C. Sanitary Sewers.
1. Generally. Sanitary sewer service for new parcels proposed for development shall be sufficient to provide for the development's
demand for such service. Sanitary sewer lines shall be installed to the specifications of the City Engineer.
2. Capacity. Applicants for approval of a new parcel proposed for development, or changes to existing development that the
Building Official finds are likely to involve material additions to the sanitary sewer demand, shall submit certification from the City
Engineer that capacity is available to serve the proposed development.
D. Gas Utility. The developer shall be responsible for providing gas for the subdivision from the nearest gas system available, at the
developer's expense in accordance with an agreement entered into with the Building Official and installed to the specifications of the City
Engineer.
E. Electric Utility. The developer shall be responsible for providing electrical connection from the nearest electrical system available, at the
developer's expense in accordance with an agreement entered into with the Building Official and installed to the specifications of the City
Engineer. The point of service for the electric utility shall be near the property line of the premises to be served.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 8.302 Stormwater Management, Drainage, and Low Impact Development
A. Stormwater Management.
1. Generally. In addition to the provision for drainage to move stormwater safely through the City and avoid flooding damage or
safety risks, there is a need to clean stormwater to maintain the health of the waterbodies and watercourses in the community by
reducing or eliminating pollutants before they reach them. There are three strategies that may be applied as part of the stormwater
treatment process, including avoidance, minimization, and mitigation. For the most part, avoidance strategies are built into this UDC
as are a number of minimization strategies. The UDC is based on making maximum use of avoidance and, then, minimization.
2. Mitigation. Mitigation is required prior to discharging stormwater into streams with a defined watercourse or channel, except
where community stormwater management facilities intended to serve the area of the development exist downstream. The extent to
which the mitigation facilities are needed depends on the degree to which the avoidance and minimization techniques are used. In
addition to calculating the reduced size of the detention facilities, the extent of the cleaning capacity shall be calculated. The following
are best management techniques:
a. Retention with Vegetation. The preferred stormwater best management practice is initial retention and infiltration of runoff in
depressed landscape or natural areas, including low impact development (see subsection C., Low Impact Development, below).
These areas should be shallow and vegetated with natural vegetation that can tolerate temporary ponding of water. All such
facilities shall be designed to hold a three-inch storm. These, in conjunction with vegetative swales, if properly designed, may
eliminate or sharply reduce the need for a settlement basin.
b. Wet Basin. Wet basins are most effective in cleaning stormwater. The basin shall be at least a two-part basin, with an initial
pool for settlement of solids that has a cleanout access point. The second part is the detention basin where water is detained for
additional treatment. All wet basins shall be designed with wetland buffers on the safety ledges, at the area that separates the
settlement pool from the main basin, outlet, and inlet. The water retained in the basin between flow events is actively cleaned so
that when stormwater comes in, the cleaner water is pushed out. Where feasible, these basins shall be used.
c. Dry Basin. These basins are designed to drain within 24 hours for which water quality treatment is negligible. They may
require use in conjunction with avoidance techniques that address the majority of the water quality treatment or a combination of
minimization and mitigation techniques.
B. Drainage.
1. Generally. Drainage systems shall be designed according to the standards of this Section, any applicable drainage plan, and per
the specifications of the City Engineer.
2. Adequate Rights-of-Way Required. Whenever any waterbody, watercourse, or surface drainage channel is located in an area
that is being subdivided, the subdivider shall dedicate adequate rights-of-way that are sufficient to provide for the drainage course and
access for the purposes of cleaning, widening, deepening, sloping, improving, or protecting the watercourse and for drainage
maintenance.
3. Separate Easement Required. Drainage easement or right-of-way shall not be considered a part of street right-of-way.
4. Prohibited Encroachment. Lots created along a drainage channel shall not encroach upon or into a drainage easement.
5. Required Review and Approval. All design features for stormwater drainage in a development shall be subject to the approval of
the City Engineer. Should there be site-specific conditions that warrant or demand deviation from the above criteria, these
considerations may be reviewed by the City Engineer. Such a request for deviation shall be made in writing with supporting
documentation. Approval of any deviation from these specifications shall be made in writing by the City Engineer. Cost alone shall not
be sufficient grounds for approval of a deviation. The Building Official shall be notified in writing of any approved deviations from the
specifications contained in this subsection.
6. Improvement Standards.
a. Surface Drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary closed drainage systems, pipes, culverts,
intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, and other drainage improvements shall be provided for the proper drainage of all
surface water. Storm catchbasins shall be located such that a maximum of 450 linear feet drains into two basins.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/438
b. Runoff Reduction Requirement: Drainage systems shall include a means of retention/detention to provide a 10 percent
reduction in runoff from pre-construction conditions. Requests for a lower percentage reduction must be approved in writing by
the City Engineer or appointee designated by the City Manager.
c. Design Specification: Subsurface storm drains shall be of reinforced concrete, or an approved equal, and a minimum of 15
inches or greater in diameter, as determined by the City Engineer.
d. Requirements for Storms:
i. Rainfalls from two-year frequency shall carry storm runoff without overflowing the curbs.
ii. Rainfalls from two- to five-year frequency shall carry storm runoff into storm sewers, culverts, or bridges.
iii. Rainfalls from 50-year frequency shall carry storm runoff into culverts and bridges.
7. Stormwater Management/Drainage Report. Any owner, developer, subdivider, or their agent who apply to subdivide, develop,
improve, or build any residential or nonresidential development or subdivision must, in addition to any other requirement of law or
ordinance, submit a stormwater management/drainage plan designed by a registered engineer in the state of Texas, including the
following.
a. Subdivision and site plan applications shall be accompanied by a stormwater management/drainage report, which shall
include, at a minimum, the following information:
i. A cover sheet with the name of the subdivision and the contact information for the engineering firm that prepared the
stormwater management/drainage report;
ii. A summary sheet that shows:
a. Project location;
b. Existing/proposed conditions;
c. Location with respect to areas of special flood hazard;
d. Existing and proposed runoff estimations;
e. Storm drainage detention estimations;
f. Soil data information; and
g. Direction of flow.
iii. A drainage area map that shows:
a. Delineation of all contributing areas;
b. Contours;
c. Spot elevations;
d. Direction of flow;
e. Right-of-way/property lines and dimensions; and
f. Existing and proposed storm sewer system, including outfall.
iv. A calculations sheet that shows:
a. Time concentration estimates;
b. Runoff coefficient assumptions; and
c. Storage volume calculations.
b. Stormwater management/drainage facilities shall be provided and constructed at the expense of the applicant pursuant to
City stormwater management policy and as specified by the City Engineer. The applicant shall be solely responsible for the
design and installation of drainage facilities so as to prevent flooding or like damage to any abutting property.
8. Environmental Safety. Subdivision and site plan applications must be accompanied by a stormwater management plan for the
development construction phase, to include silt fencing, hay bales, or other proven practices of runoff mitigation measures.
C. Low Impact Development (LID).
1. Allowed LID Techniques. The following are techniques that can be used to minimize the impact of impervious surfaces by
reducing connected impervious surfaces to a minimum, thereby reducing the area and cost of mitigation techniques:
a. Water Gardens. Convey drainage from rooftops or drives to water gardens. The water garden shall be landscaped with
natural vegetation that includes unmowed ground covers and woody plants that can tolerate periodic inundation. When
conveying the roof runoff to open spaces with natural vegetation, care must be taken to assure sheet flow, not channelized flow,
to prevent erosion.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/438
b. Rain Barrels or Cisterns. Rain barrels or cisterns can be designed into the buildings or yards so that roof runoff is directed
to these storage facilities and used for beneficial purposes such as lawn watering, vehicle washing, or other nonpotable
purposes. A variety of commercial products are available for this purpose. Their installation must be partly assured by the
subdivider's surety.
c. Pervious Pavements. Residential driveways and nonresidential and mixed-use parking spaces (not access or parking
aisles, nor ADA parking spaces, or loading areas) may be constructed from pervious concrete to provide infiltration of runoff.
Pervious concrete or asphalt is recommended for minor roads or heavily used parking areas. Concrete or other containment
structures that hold gravel or turf are recommended for driveways or low use parking areas.
d. Vegetated Swales. These shall be used unless the subdivider can show they are impractical or that the slopes would result
in erosion.
e. Swale Blocks. The swale block is installed at intervals along a vegetated swale to allow the water to build up into a series of
pools, slowing water flow and allowing the vegetation to assist in cleaning the water and settling out solids. The blocks shall be
slotted to allow them to drain down and have a notch to permit maximum flows during the 50-year storm without overflowing the
swale. Their use slows flows and decreases pollutant loading and the detention facilities shall be sized to account for the
reduction in flows.
f. Curb and Gutter. Curb and gutter systems and their associated storm sewer system are undesirable because they greatly
increase peak discharge rate and prevent infiltration or treatment of stormwater. Curb and gutter systems shall be used only
where needed to contain parking, when swales cannot safely convey the volume and peak discharge rate of stormwater without
erosion, or where curbs are needed to contain parking on streets. When roads transverse open space areas, curbs shall be
removed. Streets can be narrowed and parking provided in bays, allowing parking to be prohibited. This eliminates the need for
curbs.
g. Curbs without Storm Sewers. Where curbs are required for parking containment, they should be designed with slots or
discharge sections to convey the stormwater to swales.
h. Green Roofs. The use of green roofs, roofs that have been planted in vegetation, shall be strongly encouraged for buildings
with roof areas in excess of 40,000 square feet. These provide both stormwater storage and cleaning of the water.
2. Requirements. Low impact development strategies may be used as part of an overall stormwater management program for a
parcel proposed for development. Use of such strategies, including integration into landscape areas and on-lot open spaces, shall be
designed and incorporated into the overall stormwater management/drainage report (set out in subsection B., above) and as
applicable, a landscape plan (set out in Section 7.102, Landscape Plan Approval).
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
ARTICLE 9 SIGNS*
Division 9.100 General Regulations
Sec. 9.101 Purpose, Intent, Authority, and Applicability
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Article to provide uniform sign standards which promote a positive City image reflecting order, harmony,
and pride, thereby strengthening the economic stability of the City's business, cultural, and residential areas.
B. Intent. It is the intent of this Article to provide comprehensive regulation of signs, including the erection, alteration, and maintenance of all
types of billboards, signs, bills, and posters within the City limits, in order to protect and enhance the health, safety, and welfare of the general
public, and provide such comprehensive regulations in a manner which will be compatible with all applicable City ordinances.
C. Authority. The City Council finds that:
1. The City has the authority to regulate signs under the United States Constitution, the Constitution of the State of Texas, and the
City of Cuero Home Rule Charter;
2. This Article advances important and substantial governmental interests;
3. The regulations set out in this Article are unrelated to the suppression of constitutionally protected free expression and do not
involve the content of protected messages that may be displayed on signs;
4. The incidental restriction on the freedom of speech is no greater than is essential to the furtherance of the interests protected by
this Article; and
5. Certain types of speech are not protected by the First Amendment due to the harm that they cause to individuals or the
community, and speech that is harmful and accessible to minors may be prohibited.
D. Applicability.
1. Generally. All construction, relocation, enlargement, alteration, and modification of signs within the City shall conform to the
requirements of this Article and all state and federal regulations concerning signs and advertising, and applicable building codes as
adopted by the City in Chapter 150, Building Regulations, [Article 4.02] of the Cuero Code of Ordinances, as may be amended from
time to time.
2. Signs Permitted Before Effective Date.
a. The provisions of this Article shall not apply to on-premise signs in existence on April 6, 1995, except in the following
circumstances:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/438
i. Signs for premises where a change in occupancy occurs after such date.
ii. Such signs shall be reconstructed in conformance with the requirements of this Article, or shall be removed.
b. If a permit for a sign has been issued in accordance with all City ordinances in effect prior to the effective date of this UDC,
and provided that construction is begun within six months of the effective date of this UDC and diligently pursued to completion,
said sign may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the permit has been issued, subject
thereafter, if applicable, to the provisions of this UDC regarding nonconforming signs.
3. Relationship to Other Regulations. These regulations recognize that there are other regulations that pertain to signage (e.g.,
Chapter 216, Regulation of Signs by Municipalities, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, as amended from time to time). Where any
provision of this Article covers the same subject matter as other regulations, the more restrictive regulation shall apply.
4. Nonconforming Signs. See Section 12.104, Nonconforming Signs.
E. Sign Permit Required. Unless exempted in Subsection F., Signs that Do Not Require a Sign Permit, of this Section, approval of a sign shall
be by sign permit, which may be issued simultaneously with a separate building permit (see also Section 14.304D, Sign Permits).
F. Signs that Do Not Require a Sign Permit.
1. Address Signs. Address signs on the facade of the residential or nonresidential building, as long as they do not exceed more
than 14 inches in height.
2. Carried Signs. Signs that are being carried by people (however, such signs are not exempt if they are set down or propped up
against objects).
3. Construction Signs. Signs located on residential lots shall not exceed six square feet in area, provided the sign is confined to the
site of construction, there is only one sign per street front of the property under construction, and the sign is not illuminated.
4. Decorative Signs. Clearly incidental, customary and commonly associated with a holiday, provided that such signs shall be
displayed for a period of not more than 60 consecutive days nor more than 60 total days in any one year.
5. Holiday Decorations. Holiday decorations that are displayed for not more than two months per year.
6. Integral Signs. Signs for public assembly facilities that are etched into stone, concrete, or another building material, or made of
bronze, aluminum, or other permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the structure to which they are attached,
provided the sign does not exceed six square feet.
7. Interior Signs. Signs that are not visible from residential lots, abutting property, or public rights-of-way.
8. Official and Legal Notice. Official and legal notice signs that are issued by any court, public body, person, or officer in
performance of a public duty, or in giving any legal notice, including signs that are required to be posted to give notice of pending
action pursuant to this UDC.
9. Official Flags. One duly adopted official flag of each the nation, state, county, or City, illuminated or non-illuminated, may be flown
on a property provided the flag is affixed to a permanent flagpole or flagpoles that are mounted to a building (either temporary or
permanent), and provided the flag does not encroach across property boundaries. The maximum allowable square footage of the flag
is to be determined by the maximum building height permitted and the size of the flagpole in the designated zoning district.
10. Signs with De Minimus Area. Signs that are affixed to a building or structure (even if wall signs are not permitted in the district
or for the use), which do not exceed one square foot in sign area, provided that only one such sign is present on each elevation that is
visible from public rights-of-way or neighboring property; and signs that are less than three-fourths of a square foot in area that are
affixed to machines, equipment, fences, gates, walls, gasoline pumps, public telephones, or utility cabinets.
11. Traffic-Control Signs. Traffic-control signs and other signs related to public safety that the City or another jurisdiction installs or
requires a developer to install.
12. Unofficial Flags. Up to a maximum of three unofficial flags may be flown on a property provided the flag(s) are attached to a
permanent flagpole or a flagpole that is mounted to the building (temporary or permanent), and provided the flag(s) do not encroach
across property boundaries. The maximum allowable square footage of the flag is to be determined by the maximum building height
permitted and the size of the flagpole in the designated zoning district.
13. Way-finding Signs. Signs located throughout a property for the individual, sole purpose of directing traffic flow or indicating the
locations of buildings or departments and services within the development, provided such signs do not exceed six square feet in sign
area or a maximum height of five feet. Way-finding signs may be illuminated or non-illuminated and must observe the applicable
setbacks and the provisions of Section 8.102E., Sight Distance Triangle Requirements.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 9.102 Prohibited Signs and Design Elements
A. Generally. This Section identifies signs and sign elements that are not allowed anywhere in the City.
B. Prohibited Signs.
1. Mobile, portable, or wheeled signs.
2. Posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, strings of light bulbs, spinners or other moving devices.
3. Any sign in danger of falling or which is otherwise unsafe. Such signs shall be immediately repaired or removed, upon notice for
such action by the Building Official to the owner or occupant of the premises on which the sign is located.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/438
4. Off-premise signs, including billboard signs. There shall be no new construction or placement of any off-premises sign within the
City limits except: A noncommercial message may be placed on any off-premises sign and displayed for no more than 30 days in any
six-month period. A noncommercial message is a message other than that considered to be commercial advertising for a business.
5. Pre-existing, nonconforming billboard signs cannot be converted to an electronic changeable message (digital) billboard format.
6. Relocation of pre-existing, nonconforming billboard signs is prohibited unless it is required by construction of a project using
public funding provided that such relocation is restricted to a limited period of time.
7. Signs erected or maintained on trees, or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features.
8. Signs placed on parked vehicles or trailers for the purpose of advertising a product or business located on the same or abutting
property, excepting an identification sign that is affixed to a vehicle regularly operated in the pursuance of day-to-day business or
activity of an enterprise.
9. Signs placed, inscribed or supported upon a roof or upon any structure that extends above the roof line of any building.
10. Inflatable images.
11. Signs containing flashing, moving, intermittent, or running lights or which imitate traffic-control devices (in size, color, lettering,
or design), provided however, that electronic changeable copy signs shall be permitted per this Division.
12. Signs that employ any part or element which revolves, rotates, whirls, spins or otherwise makes use of motion to attract
attention.
13. Beacons or searchlights.
14. High intensity strobe lights.
15. Signs with more than two sign faces.
16. Signs on public property. Any signs found upon any public property may be removed by the City.
17. Tree-cutting or similar clearing of vegetation on public rights-of-way to provide better view of off-premises signs is prohibited.
C. Prohibited Sign Materials. Paper and cloth signs are not suitable and shall not be used for exterior use (except high quality, weatherresistant
cloth for awnings). Wood signs must be sealed and maintained to keep moisture from deteriorating the sign. Signs may not be
constructed of plywood or particle board, by simply painting letters on wood, or using “sticker” letters. Commercial grade vinyl letters applied onto
glass are permissible.
D. Prohibited Design Elements.
1. The following elements shall not be used as an element of signs or sign structures, whether temporary or permanent:
a. Sound, smoke, or odor emitters;
b. Awnings that are backlit and/or made of plastic or vinyl;
c. Stacked products (e.g., tires, soft drink cases, bagged soil or mulch);
d. Unfinished wood support structures, except that stake signs may use unfinished stakes.
e. Street or other furniture items (bus shelters, park benches, transit stations, trash receptacles, directional kiosks, etc.).
2. The following elements shall not be used as an element of signs or sign structures, whether temporary or permanent, which are
visible from public rights-of-way:
a. Flags, banners, or comparable elements that are designed to move in the wind, but only when such elements are attached
to another sign type (e.g., flags may be attached to flagpoles, but may not be attached to monument signs).
b. Revolving, rotating, whirling, spinning, or other moving parts to attract attention.
c. Bare light bulbs, except on holiday displays which are exempted from regulation by Section 9.101F, Signs that Do Not
Require a Permit, or those used in the restoration or reproduction of nostalgic historical displays of a past era.
d. Flashing lights, except on holiday displays which are exempted from regulation by Section 9.101F, Signs that Do Not
Require a Permit.
e. Motor vehicles, unless:
i. The vehicles are functional, used as motor vehicles, and have current registration and tags; and
ii. The display of signage is incidental to the motor vehicle use.
f. Semi-trailers, shipping containers, or portable storage units, unless:
i. The trailers, containers, or portable storage units are functional, used for their primary storage purpose, and, if subject
to registration, have current registration and tags;
ii. The display of signage is incidental to the use for temporary storage, pickup, or delivery; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/438
iii. The semi-trailer is parked in a designated loading area or on a construction site at which it is being used for deliveries
or storage.
E. Prohibited Content.
1. The following content is prohibited without reference to the viewpoint of the individual speaker:
a. Text or graphics of an indecent or immoral nature and harmful to minors;
b. Text or graphics that advertise unlawful activity;
c. Text or graphics that are obscene, fighting words, defamation, incitement to imminent lawless action, or true threats; or
d. Text or graphics that present a clear and present danger due to their potential confusion with traffic-control signs or signs
that provide public safety information (for example, signs that use the words “Stop,” “Yield,” “Caution,” or “Danger,” or
comparable words, phrases, symbols, or characters in such a manner as to imply a safety hazard that does not exist).
2. The narrow classifications of content that are prohibited by this subsection are either not protected by the United States or Texas
Constitutions, or are offered limited protection that is outweighed by the substantial governmental interests in protecting the public
safety and welfare. It is the intent of the City Council that each paragraph of this subsection be individually severable in the event that
a court of competent jurisdiction is to hold one or more of them to be inconsistent with the United States or Texas Constitutions.
F. Abatement of Prohibited Signs.
1. All signs, sign structures, and supports placed upon or projecting across public property, or right-of-way, as of April 6, 1995, shall
be removed in accordance with the following:
a. Those which present a danger to persons or property because of their condition may be removed immediately by the City
Manager, and stored at the owner's expense.
b. Those which may present a visual obstruction to traffic, as determined by the City Engineer or such engineer's
representative, may be removed immediately by the City Manager, and stored at the owner's expense.
c. All other such signs which become abandoned signs after such date shall be removed by the owner or user thereof within
30 days after written notice to remove is given by the City Manager. The City Manager may cause the removal of any such sign
remaining after such time, to be stored at the owner's expense.
2. Any sign constructed, installed, or erected after April 6, 1995, which becomes in violation of a restriction contained herein shall
be made to conform to such restriction within six months after it becomes in violation, or such sign shall be removed. The City
Manager may cause the removal of any such sign remaining after such time, to be stored at the owner's expense.
3. Any sign which presents a danger to persons or property because of its condition may be removed by the City Manager and
stored at the owner's expense.
4. All signs shall be maintained in good condition in terms of structure and appearance. No sign owner or user shall allow the copy
or face of a sign to become torn, cracked, or otherwise dilapidated. Upon the second or subsequent conviction of the owner or user of
a sign for violation of this provision in the municipal court, the court may order the removal of such sign by the City Manager.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2017-09, sec. 2, adopted 4/11/17)
Sec. 9.103 Sign Measurements
A. Generally. The area of signs that are permitted in Division 9.200, Permanent and Temporary Signs, shall be measured as follows:
1. The total area of all signs permitted on a lot shall include the area of all sign faces visible from public right-of-way, including signs
placed on windows or doors, but shall not include directional signs that are less than three square feet in area.
2. The frontage of a nonresidential or mixed-use building is equal to the number of linear feet of the facade facing the principal
street or containing the main entrance, as determined by the Building Official.
3. The frontage of an undeveloped lot is the dimension of the lot abutting the principal street.
B. Sign Area.
1. Generally. The area of a sign shall be measured by a perimeter enclosing the outer limits of text or graphics, together with any
frame that differentiates the sign from the background, but excluding the supports on which the sign is placed. Channel letters or other
sign elements placed on a wall without a frame or background shall include the area that encloses all lettering, including the space
between letters, words, and other sign elements (see Figure 9.103A, Sign Area, Generally, for area enclosed by red line).
Figure 9.103A
Sign Area, Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/438
Note: The areas of these sign types is calculated as A x B, or in the case of a round sign, as the area measured by the radii of the sign.
2. Double-Faced Signs. For double-faced signs, one display face is measured in computing sign area when the sign faces are
parallel, or where the interior angle is 60 degrees or less, provided that the signs are mounted on the same sign base. If the two faces
are of unequal area, the area of the sign is that of the larger face.
C. Clearance. Clearance is the distance measured between the bottom of a sign and the nearest point on the ground surface beneath it.
D. Sign Height. Sign height shall be computed as the vertical distance from either:
1. The finished grade at the base of the sign; or
2. The centerline of the nearest road to which the sign is oriented and on which the lot has frontage, to the highest component of
the sign, as determined by the Building Official. For purposes of determining sign height, finished grade shall be the grade after
construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 9.104 Sign Maintenance and Removal
A. Generally. Signs and the ground area around signs shall be maintained as provided in this Section. These regulations apply to all signs,
temporary or permanent, attached or detached, unless otherwise specifically provided herein. Signs that do not have a permit, or are not
maintained as set out in subsection B., below, are subject to the provisions set out in subsections C. or D., below.
B. Required Maintenance.
1. Code Compliance. All signs shall be constructed and installed in accordance with applicable provisions of this UDC, as well as
any other applicable ordinance adopted by the City.
2. Message. Signs shall display a message. Signs that do not display a message shall be removed in accordance with subsection
D. [E.], below.
3. Sign Face and Structure. The materials of the sign face and structure shall be maintained in a good condition (e.g., not broken,
cracked, chipped, torn, discolored, unlevel, or otherwise excessively weathered).
4. Ground Area. The ground area around any freestanding (detached) sign shall be kept free and clean of weeds, trash, or other
debris.
C. Violations. Any sign constructed, installed, or erected after April 6, 1995, which becomes in violation of a restriction contained in this Article
shall be made to conform to such restriction within 30 days after it becomes in violation.
D. Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall
be fined any sum not to exceed $1,000 as provided. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
E. Removal.
1. Sign Removal Without Compensation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/438
a. As set out in Section 216.003, Municipal Regulation, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, the City Manager may require the
relocation, reconstruction, or removal of any freestanding on-premise sign without compensation not sooner than the first
anniversary date the business, person, or activity that the sign or sign structure identifies or advertises ceases to operate on the
premises on which the sign or sign structure is located.
b. If the premises containing the sign or sign structure is leased, the City Manager may not require the relocation,
reconstruction, or removal until the second anniversary after the date the most recent tenant ceases to operate on the premises.
c. The date to which the City starts the one-year or two-year timeframe is from the sooner of the following:
i. The date the City sends a letter by U.S. certified mail requiring the property owner to relocate, reconstruct, or
otherwise remove the sign or sign structure; or
ii. The date the City is able to determine that operations have ceased through any other means.
2. Sign Removal With Compensation. The City may require the relocation, reconstruction, or removal of any on-premise sign with
compensation as set out in Chapter 216, Regulations of Signs by Municipalities, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 9.200 Permanent and Temporary Signs
Sec. 9.201 Residential District Signs
A. Generally.
1. This Section only applies to multi-family uses, manufactured home parks or subdivisions, recreational vehicle parks, and/or
entrance monuments for subdivisions with a property owners' association.
2. Permanent signs located within the residential districts, or multi-family uses in nonresidential districts, require the approval of a
sign permit as set out in Section 14.304D., Sign Permits, and shall comply with the standards of this Section.
B. Standards.
1. Subdivision Entrance Signs.
a. A residential subdivision containing more than 10 dwelling units may be permitted one freestanding monument sign at each
entrance to the subdivision provided that:
i. Such sign does not exceed 50 square feet in area, does not exceed six feet in height, is located at least 10 feet from
any street right-of-way or property line, and is at least 25 feet from any dwelling unit.
ii. Such sign is maintained by a property owners' association.
b. In lieu of a standard two-sided monument sign, a qualifying residential subdivision which has decorative entrance walls
may be permitted one sign, not exceeding 25 feet in area, mounted on the decorative wall on each side of the main entrance to
the subdivision.
2. Commercial Uses of the Home Signs. Approved home occupation and child-care facilities may be permitted one sign, which may
be either a wall or monument sign, provided that such sign shall not exceed a maximum of four square feet in area and six feet in
height, and shall be located at least 10 feet from any street right-of-way and 25 feet from any side lot line.
3. Nonresidential Use Signs. Public schools and other nonresidential limited and conditionally permitted uses are allowed:
a. One wall sign which shall not exceed one-half square foot in area for each lineal foot of the building wall or facade which
faces the principal street or contains the main entrance as determined by the Building Official; and
b. One monument sign which shall not exceed 25 square feet in area and six feet in height. Such signs shall be located at
least 10 feet from any street right-of-way and 25 feet from any residentially used or zoned property line. Such signs may be a
changeable copy sign provided that they comply with all of the requirements for changeable copy signs as set forth in Section
9.203, Changeable Copy Signs.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 9.202 Nonresidential and Mixed-Use District Permanent Signs
A. Generally. Permanent signs located within the nonresidential and mixed-use districts require the approval of a sign permit as set out in
Section 14.304D., Sign Permits, and shall comply with the standards of this Section.
B. Sign Area Limitations. The total area of all signs shall not exceed the number of square feet indicated in the following formulas:
1. Total Signage Area.
a. The aggregate area of all permanent signs for each use, parcel, building, or land under common ownership of record or
control shall not exceed one and one-half square feet for each lineal foot of lot frontage, subject to the following:
i. A minimum combined area of 85 square feet shall be allowed for all lots regardless of frontage.
ii. For lots with spaces for more than one business or activity, in which at least 50 percent of the business or activity
spaces are occupied as of April 6, 1995, such area restriction shall not apply to signs other than freestanding signs used
on such lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/438
b. Buildings or parcels having frontage or a facade facing a second street, may increase the permitted total aggregate sign
area allowed for permanent signs in subsection B.1.a., of this Section, by 25 percent.
2. Multi-Tenant, Multi-Unit, and Multi-Building Uses. Calculating allowable sign area per each unit or building shall be as follows:
a. New Development.
i. For parcels proposed for development, the developer shall prepare and submit as part of the site plan, an overall sign
program that specifies the amount of sign area that is reserved for signing the overall development (i.e., freestanding
monument signs along frontages, on-site directional signage, etc.). As part of the sign program, the developer has to
specify the amount of sign area to be allocated to each unit or building (if any) used in signs for the overall development
(e.g., individual placards on freestanding monument signs at the entrance to the development).
ii. The remaining sign area not reserved for the entire development shall be divided and allocated proportionally
between each unit or building (as applicable) based on the lineal frontage of the building which constitutes the main
access to each unit or building.
b. Existing Development.
i. In existing development (e.g., shopping centers) where the sign area was calculated based on the overall lineal
frontage of the property, the existing sign area for each unit of the building shall remain proportionally the same as the
amount of signage that was originally allocated to that individual unit or building.
ii. In existing development where a new tenant takes occupancy in a unit or building in which the original allocation of
sign area is not able to be determined, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a variance allowing that individual unit
or building a maximum sign area equal to the proportional sign area allowed for individual units or buildings as set out in
subsection B.2.a., New Development, above. This allowance can occur even if the additional sign area causes the sign
area for the overall development to exceed its maximum allowable sign area.
iii. For existing development which is further divided into smaller units or tenant spaces, the maximum allowable sign
area for each subdivided unit or tenant space shall remain as calculated in subsection B.2.b.i or B.2.b.ii., above.
C. Permanent Signs. Total permanent sign area may be allocated to any or all of the following sign types subject to the following restrictions
and requirements:
1. Wall Signs. In all nonresidential or mixed-use districts, wall signs shall comply with the following:
a. One wall sign shall be permitted for each building, or one per each business or activity in a mixed-use, multi-tenant, multiunit,
or multi-building development.
b. Wall signs shall not project more than 18 inches in front of the building wall nor beyond any building corner.
c. Wall signs shall not extend above the height of the building.
2. Marquee Signs. Only in the C-2 district, marquee signs shall comply with the following:
a. One marquee sign shall be permitted for each building, or one per each business or activity in a mixed-use, multi-tenant,
multi-unit, or multi-building development.
b. The marquee sign shall:
i. Be limited to 20 square feet per sign face, up to three sign faces.
ii. Have a minimum of eight-foot clearance above grade.
iii. Not be allowed on a side of a building that faces a residential district.
3. Projecting Signs. Only in the C-2 district, projecting signs shall comply with the following:
a. One projecting sign shall be permitted for each building, or one per each business or activity in a mixed-use, multi-tenant,
multi-unit, or multi-building development.
b. Projecting signs shall not extend above the fascia, and the vertical dimension including fascia shall not exceed four feet.
4. Window Signs. In all nonresidential or mixed-use districts, window signs shall comply with the following:
a. Window signs shall not obscure more than 25 percent of the glazed surface of any window.
b. No more than 10 square feet of any window sign may be directly illuminated with internal or neon lighting or otherwise
projected so as to create an illuminated image.
5. Freestanding Pole or Pylon Signs. In all nonresidential or mixed-use districts, except the C-2 district, freestanding pole or pylon
signs shall comply with the following:
a. Only one sign shall be allowed on each lot which fronts the right-of-way of only one public street. For lots fronting on more
than one public street, the allowable sign area in Subsection 5.b, below, may be divided between two freestanding pole or pylon
signs oriented toward different streets.
b. The maximum area of such sign or signs shall be one-half of the combined sign area allowed for the lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/438
c. For corner lots fronting on two intersecting streets, one freestanding pole or pylon sign may be located at the corner of such
a lot, subject to setback requirements in Subsection 5.e, below. All other freestanding pole or pylon signs shall be located within
the middle two quarters of the front lot width.
d. The maximum height of a freestanding pole or pylon sign shall vary directly with the setback of the sign, according to the
following formula: maximum height = setback + five feet to an absolute maximum height of 30 feet.
e. The minimum setback for on-premise signs shall be 10 feet; provided that directional signs not more than three feet in
height may be placed within such setback, and shall not be counted against the allowable combined sign area.
6. Freestanding Monument Signs. In all nonresidential or mixed-use districts, except the C-2 district, freestanding monument signs
shall comply with the following:
a. Location.
i. Freestanding monument signs shall only be placed between the property line and the applicable building or parking
setback area (i.e., behind street bufferyards).
ii. Freestanding monument signs shall not be located closer than five feet from the lot line of another nonresidential or
mixed-use lot, nor within 50 feet of another nonresidential or mixed-use freestanding monument sign, nor within 25 feet
from a lot used for residential purposes. These separation requirements shall not preclude each nonresidential or mixeduse
property owner from having at least one sign, provided however, that any sign not meeting the separation distance
requirements of this subsection, shall have the sign located as far away from the existing sign on the abutting property as
practically possible.
b. Design.
i. All freestanding monument signs shall be located on a sign base constructed of concrete at least six inches thick, but
less than 18 inches in height.
ii. All freestanding monument signs serving buildings with a combined square footage of 15,000 square feet or greater
shall be designed using the same building materials as used on the principal building on the property for which it
advertises.
iii. Sign face maximum, as set out below, are per sign face if configured on a single back-to-back freestanding sign.
iv. No freestanding monument sign shall contain more than two sign faces.
v. No portion of the sign face may extend past the sign base.
c. Maximum size. Not including the square footage of buildings on outparcels, such signs shall not exceed:
i. Buildings with combined square footage less than 15,000 square feet: 36 square feet in sign area per sign face and
not to exceed four feet in height.
ii. Buildings with combined square footage 15,000 square feet to less than 60,000 square feet: 64 square feet in sign
area per sign face and not to exceed 8 feet in height.
iii. Buildings with a combined square footage greater than 60,000 square feet: 80 square feet in sign area per sign face
and not to exceed 10 feet in height.
d. Landscaping.
i. Landscaping comprised of grass, flowers, shrubs, or small trees, shall be installed and maintained around the
perimeter of each freestanding monument sign in an area equal to the area of the sign face, provided however, that the
maximum amount of landscaping required around the base of any sign shall not exceed 100 square feet (see Section
7.104, Selection of Plant Material).
ii. Landscaping installed around a freestanding monument sign can be counted towards meeting minimum planting
requirements as long as it complies with the provisions of Article 7, Landscaping, Buffering, and Tree Protection.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 9.203 Changeable Copy Signs
A. Generally. Manual and electronic changeable copy signs may be incorporated into signage as set out in this Section.
B. All Changeable Copy Signs.
1. Required Enclosure. Manual and electronic changeable copy signs are only permitted on monument signs or marquee signs
which enclose the changeable copy message component on all sides with a finish of brick, stone, stucco, powder coated (or
comparably finished) metal, or other approved material sign face that extends not less than six inches from the message display in all
directions. Gaps between the changeable copy component of the sign and the finish of the sign structure is permitted to
accommodate locks and hinges for a cover for the changeable copy area, but only to the extent necessary for such locks and hinges
to operate.
2. Maximum Number. Only one manual or electronic changeable copy component of a sign is allowed per lot.
3. Maximum Changeable Copy Sign Face. Manual and electronic changeable copy components of overall signs, including their
frames, shall make up not more than 50 percent of the allowable sign area on a monument sign and 75 percent on a marquee sign.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/438
The balance of the sign area shall utilize permanently affixed letters or symbols (see Figure 9.203, Example Changeable Copy Sign
Areas).
Figure 9.203
Example Changeable Copy Sign Area
Manual Changeable Copy Sign
Electronic Changeable Copy Sign
C. Manual Changeable Copy Signs. In addition to the standards that apply to all changeable copy signs (as set out in subsection B., All
Changeable Copy Signs, of this Section), manual changeable copy signs shall comply with the following:
1. Quality of Lettering. Lettering shall be of a single style and shall be of uniform color and size.
2. Internal Illumination. Manual changeable copy signs shall not be internally lit unless:
a. They use opaque inserts with translucent letters, numbers, or symbols;
b. Blank opaque inserts that are the same color as the opaque portions of the letters, numbers, and symbols are used over all
areas of the sign where copy is not present; and
c. The opaque portion of the letters, numbers, and symbols is the same color.
D. Electronic Changeable Copy Signs. In addition to the standards that apply to all changeable copy signs (as set out in subsection B., All
Changeable Copy Signs, of this Section), electronic changeable copy signs shall comply with the following:
1. Display Standards. Electronic message displays shall:
a. Contain a static message that may only be monochrome, variable shades, or full color.
b. Contain a default design that will freeze the sign in one position with no more illumination than 0.3 footcandles above
ambient light if a malfunction occurs.
c. Display messages for a period of not less than eight seconds and the change sequence must be accomplished within an
interval of two seconds or less.
d. Not use transitions or frame effects between messages.
e. Not include animation, video, audio, pyrotechnic, or bluecasting (bluetooth advertising) components.
2. Hours of Operation.
a. Electronic message displays shall be turned off each day by the later of 11:00 PM or upon closing of the associated land
use (signs may be turned back on at 5:00 AM).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/438
b. When located within 200 feet of a residential use or district, electronic message displays shall be turned off each day by no
later than 9:00 PM and may be turned back on no earlier than 7:00 AM.
3. Lighting. Electronic display messages shall:
a. Not exceed 0.3 footcandles above ambient light when measured from a specified distance. This measurement calculates
the illumination of the sign and incorporates a scientific formula to ensure consistency of the measurement when applied to
electronic display messages of all varying sizes and resolutions. The instrument to measure the illuminance of electronic
message centers shall be an illuminance meter more commonly referred to as a lux or footcandle meter. The illuminance meter
must have the ability to provide a reading up to two decimal places and must be set to read footcandles. The method to
calculate the appropriate distance from which the illuminance shall be measured is the square root of the area of the electronic
message display component times 100.
b. Be equipped with a sensor or other device that automatically determines the ambient illumination and is programmed to
automatically dim according to ambient light conditions, or that can be adjusted to comply with a maximum illumination of 0.3
footcandle over ambient light conditions.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 9.204 Temporary Signs
A. Generally. Temporary signs are permitted subject to the standards of this Section and require the approval of a temporary sign permit as set
out in Section 14.304D, Sign Permits, unless otherwise specified.
B. Residential Districts. Garage sale signs are permitted without a sign permit as long as the garage sale[s] are in conformance with Chapter
101, Garage Sales, [Article 5.02] of the Cuero Code of Ordinances.
C. Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Districts. Each nonresidential or mixed-use property is allowed one temporary sign (e.g., a banner) that may
be displayed for a period of not more than 30 days every six months for grand openings or other temporary, short-term promotional
advertisements, provided that:
1. The temporary signage is limited to one per building;
2. There is only one banner per principal building;
3. It is not a sign or design element that is prohibited by Section 9.102, Prohibited Signs and Design Elements;
4. The sign area on the temporary sign is not more than 10 percent larger than the sign area allowed for a similar type permanent
sign as set out in Section 9.202, Nonresidential and Mixed-Use District Permanent Signs.
D. Enforcement. Temporary signs that are installed improperly or illegally will be removed by the City and the violators will be notified of such
violation. If it is determined that the sign cannot be easily removed, the Building Official, or a designee, will notify the offender of their temporary
sign violation. Offenders will have two business days to remove the sign. If the sign is not removed within this time period they are subject to
enforcement actions as set out in Article 15, Enforcement and Legal Status.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
PART 4
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
ARTICLE 10 BUILDING DESIGN STANDARDS
Division 10.100 Residential Design Standards
Sec. 10.101 Single-Family and Duplex Standards
A. Generally. The placement of a principal building in a perpendicular or sideways orientation on an interior lot or through lot is prohibited. See
Figure 10.101, Building Placement.
B. Standards.
1. All single-family detached and single-family attached residences shall be designed such that a primary entrance and windows
face the street right-of-way, unless the principal building is not visible from the public rights-of-way.
2. There shall be a maximum of one principal building per single-[family] and duplex residential lot, subject to the provisions of
Section 11.102, Accessory Dwelling Units, as applicable.
Figure 10.101
Building Placement
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/438
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 10.102 Multi-Family Design Standards
A. Generally. All multi-family developments shall meet the standards of this Section. See Figure 10.102, Illustrative Application of Multi-Family
Design Standards.
B. Building Walls.
1. Not less than 25 percent of each building wall, exclusive of windows and door openings, shall be finished with masonry
construction, such as brick, stone, or simulated stone.
2. Siding shall be wood or cement fiberboard. Siding shall be traditional profiles such as four-inch to eight-inch horizontal beveled
or shake. Siding surfaces may not cover more than 75 percent of any wall surface and may not extend to the ground level.
3. Stucco and exterior insulated finishing systems (EIFS) are permitted as an accent material only. If used, stucco and EIFS shall
be detailed to look like traditional wall cornices, soffits, window trim, and similar features. EIFS may be installed only above the floor
level of the second story.
C. Building Elements.
1. Awnings, where installed, shall be constructed with fabric or metal coverings. Plastic coverings are prohibited.
2. Elements such as eaves, rakes, cornice lines, or frieze boards shall be used to contribute to the visual interest of the building.
3. Columns, cornices, and similar elements shall be natural or simulated natural elements such as wood, composite material,
architectural metal, or stone.
4. Balcony and railing materials may be different than the materials used on exterior walls.
D. Roofs.
1. Sloped roofs shall be covered with quality materials, comparable to slate, concrete tile, dimensional shingles, metal shingles, or
architectural metal seam roofing.
2. No rooftop mechanical equipment or window/wall mounted air conditioning units shall be visible from the public rights-of-way.
3. Monolithic roof structures that cover more than 4,000 square feet shall include changes in direction, or treatments which break
up the appearance of mass. Such treatments may include elements such as dormers, towers, or chimneys.
E. Stairs. Stairs that provide primary access to units on upper floors shall be covered.
Figure 10.102
Illustrative Application of Multi-Family Design Standards
Allowed
Not Allowed
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/438
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 10.103 Manufactured Home Unit Standards
A. Generally. Manufactured homes shall comply with the following, in addition to those standards that may be applicable in Section 4.203,
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision, and in Section 12.107, Nonconforming Manufactured Homes.
B. Notification. All manufactured housing installations shall be reported by the owner or installer to the Texas Department of Labor and
Standards as provided by the Statute and Rules and to the Building Official. The Building Official shall inspect all the installations and shall
cooperate with the Texas Department of Labor and Standards in the enforcement of this Section and of said state statute and rules.
C. Improvements. Individual lots shall be improved and connected to utilities as follows:
1. Permanent Foundations and Tie-Downs. All manufactured homes shall be mounted on a concrete permanent foundation pad.
Each foundation pad provides anchors and tie-downs such as cast-in-place concrete “dead men,” embedded eyelets, runway screw
augers, arrowhead anchors, or other devices which secure and stabilize the unit. Such devices are placed at least at each corner of
each manufactured home.
2. Utilities. All units are served with public utilities, which are installed underground. All electrical service equipment is mounted on
the structure to which service is provided.
D. Unit Specifications. All manufactured homes shall meet the following specifications:
1. Wind Zone. The unit shall be designed to meet state Wind Zone I standards.
2. Required Elevation. The average elevation of a manufactured home frame above ground level, measured at 90 degrees to the
frame, does not exceed four feet from the top of the foundation pad.
3. Roofing.
a. The roof is pitched, with a minimum vertical rise of 2.5 feet for every 12 feet of horizontal run.
b. The roof has eaves that project a minimum of 12 inches from the exterior wall.
4. Transportation Apparatus. The wheels, axles, tongue, towing apparatus, and transporting lights are removed prior to occupancy
of the unit.
E. Skirting. The vacant space between the finished grade of the property on which each manufactured home is located and the exterior edges
of the finished floor of each unit is skirted as follows:
1. Installation. Skirting is installed on a concrete footing so there is no visible gap between the finished floor and the ground.
2. Materials. The material used for skirting is rock, brick, manufactured vinyl or concrete masonry construction. All skirting materials
are compatible in appearance with the manufactured home and allow for adequate ventilation and drainage.
3. Design. The skirting must be a continuous, complete, opaque, and rigid surface that lends permanency to the appearance of the
unit and totally screens the crawl space under the unit.
F. Unit Inspection. When a unit is to be conveyed to a new owner or leased to a new occupant, it shall be inspected by the City. All units that
do not comply with standards for manufactured housing shall be given a complete interior and exterior inspection focusing on habitability and
safety. If the unit is deemed unfit, the City may require improvements or replacement with a newer unit certified by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 10.200 Nonresidential and Mixed-Use Design Standards
Sec. 10.201 Building Form and Design
A. Generally. The form and design of nonresidential and mixed-use buildings shall comply with the standards set out in this Section.
B. 360-Degree Architecture. No particular architectural style is mandated, however, the architectural style of the front facade shall be
expressed on all sides of the building.
C. Building Walls. All exterior building elevations that face public streets, customer parking areas, or areas of residential use or districts shall
be designed so that there are no areas of blank wall that are more than 30 feet in horizontal direction or 16 feet in vertical direction. Complying
with this requirement can be accomplished through the use of:
1. Windows;
2. Doors;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/438
3. Awnings;
4. Changes in both finish materials and colors (a change in color alone is insufficient to meet this requirement);
5. Decorative cornices;
6. Murals or graphics;
7. Sconce lighting;
8. Towers;
9. Pilasters or columns;
10. Arcades;
11. At least three feet of horizontal or vertical offset in the building wall; and
12. Comparable elements or design techniques that create an obvious and significant pattern of light and shadow on the building
wall.
D. Building Form.
1. Buildings that cover more than 16,000 square feet, but less than 30,000 square feet in floor area, shall have moderate changes
in height or roof line, which can be accomplished by one or more of the following techniques:
a. Dormers with ridge lines that are three or more feet below the ridge line of the roof;
b. A compound roof shape, in which the highest ridge line and the lowest ridge line have a height difference of two to five feet;
c. Parapet walls that vary in height by two to four feet; and
d. Towers that have a height that is four to six feet above the highest peak or ridge of the roof or highest point of the parapet.
2. Buildings that cover more than 30,000 square feet, but less than 60,000 square feet, shall have major changes in height or roof
line, which can be accomplished by one or more of the following techniques:
a. A compound roof shape, in which the highest ridge line and the lowest ridge line have a height difference of five or more
feet;
b. Parapet walls that vary in height by more than four feet;
c. Towers that have a height that is more than six feet above the highest peak or ridge of the roof or highest point of the
parapet. The mass of such towers shall be proportional to the building, so that the towers appear as substantial, but not
overwhelming architectural elements.
3. Buildings that cover more than 60,000 square feet shall have major changes in height or roof line, which shall in addition to the
requirements for buildings that cover 30,000 square feet or more, include:
a. Significant architectural features to identify principal entrances; and
b. Elements such as towers or significant projections from the building to break up the building mass.
E. Roof Styles. Flat roof and pitched roof systems are permitted. Flat roof systems shall be hidden by parapet walls that are at least 30 inches
in height. Mansard roofs are prohibited.
F. Awnings. Awnings, if installed, shall be constructed of canvas. Backlighting is not permitted.
G. Multi-Story Buildings. Buildings with more than two stories shall be designed with a clearly differentiated base, middle, and top.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 10.202 Mechanical Equipment and Meters
A. Generally. Mechanical equipment associated with building operations (e.g., HVAC systems) shall be screened as provided in this Section.
B. Ground-Level and Building-Mounted Equipment. Mechanical equipment and meters shall be screened from view of principal parking lots,
public rights-of-way, and residential uses and districts by landscaping, bufferyards, or building walls. Hedges and screening walls that are used to
hide mechanical systems shall be maintained at a height that is at least one foot higher than the equipment. Hedges shall be a minimum of three
feet in height at planting.
C. Roof-Mounted Equipment. Mechanical equipment shall be screened from all ground level views from abutting property and rights-of-way
by:
1. Parapet Walls. Parapet wall shall include cornice treatments that are of adequate height to screen the equipment (a slope of one
foot rise per 25 feet of run shall be used to determine if the wall is of adequate height); or
2. Screening Walls. Screening walls of adequate height to hide the equipment, which use materials and colors that are consistent
with the design of the building; or
3. Sloped Roof Systems. Sloped roof systems or other architectural elements of adequate height to hide the equipment.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/438
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
ARTICLE 11 SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS
Division 11.100 Supplemental Standards
Sec. 11.101 Accessory Buildings and Structures
A. Generally. The construction and use of accessory building or structures, except accessory dwelling units (see Section 11.102, Accessory
Dwelling Units and the provisions of Table 3.101A, Standard and Alternative Residential Development Standards), are subject to the
requirements of this Section.
B. All Uses.
1. Timing of Construction. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed unless the principal building is constructed and
connected to utilities or under construction simultaneously with the accessory building or structure.
2. Attached Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings that are structurally attached to a principal building shall conform to all
standards that are applicable to the principal building.
3. Easements. Accessory buildings and structures shall not be located within easements unless written permission is granted from
the owner/operator of the easement and proof of such permission is provided to the City prior to the issuance of permits or clearances
for such structures.
4. Building Permit.
a. Accessory buildings and structures greater than 200 square feet shall make application for a building permit.
b. Accessory buildings and structures are subject to all applicable building codes of the City, as amended from time-to-time.
5. Site Plan. A drawing showing all existing buildings and structures on the lot or parcel of land where the accessory building or
structure is proposed to be located shall be submitted with the required building permit application.
6. Converted semi-trailers, manufactured homes, dumpsters, or similar structures or equipment shall not be used for storage. In the
C-2 and I-1 district, modular shipping containers may be used for storage provided that they are located within the rear yard, outside
the boundaries of the Historic Downtown District and are completely screened from view of abutting properties and public rights-ofway
by buildings, fences or walls (see Section 11.103, Fences and Walls).
C. Agricultural Uses. Accessory buildings and structures are permitted to support agricultural uses. Nonagricultural accessory buildings and
structures shall cover an area that is the smaller of:
1. 50 percent of the footprint of the principal building; or
2. 1,800 square feet.
D. Residential Uses.
1. Maximum Number. No more than two accessory buildings or structures shall be constructed on a lot in the R-1, R- 2, NC, and
NT districts.
2. Design Standards/or Detached Accessory Buildings or Structures.
[a. Reserved]
b. Footprint. Accessory buildings and structures are counted toward the calculation of impervious surfaces. In addition, no
detached accessory building, buildings, or structures shall cover an area that is larger than that covered by the principal building,
nor cover more than 30 percent of the required rear yard.
c. Setbacks.
i. Front: Behind principal building[.]
ii. Street Side: Ten feet from the lot line.
iii. Interior Side: Five feet from the lot line provided the roof eave does not extend within three feet of the lot line and:
a. An accessory building or structure does not encroach into any easement; and
[b. Reserved]
c. It is demonstrated that drainage runoff from the accessory building or structure will not impact abutting
properties.
iv. Rear.
a. Generally: Five feet provided an accessory building or structure does not encroach into any easement.
v. Separations from Principal Building or Structure.
a. Generally: 10 feet from the principal building or structure.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/438
E. Nonresidential and Mixed-Uses.
1. Design Standards for Detached Accessory Buildings or Structures.
[a. Reserved]
b. Footprint.
i. In the C-1, C-2 and PR districts, no detached accessory buildings or structures on a lot shall cover an area that is
larger than 25 percent of the footprint of the principal building.
ii. In the I-1 district, accessory buildings and structures are not subject to a specific maximum footprint. However:
a. If they are larger than 200 square feet, they shall be located within the building envelope; or
b. If they are 200 square feet or less, they shall be situated behind the principal building and set back at least 10
feet from all side and rear property lines.
c. Setbacks.
i. Front. No detached accessory building or structure shall be located in a required front yard.
ii. Sides and Rear. All accessory buildings and structures shall be:
a. located within the building envelope in the side or rear yards;
b. not located in easement areas unless express written permission has been granted by all easement grantees. A
copy of such written permission shall be submitted to the Building Official prior to the issuance of permits for such
structures.
[d. Reserved]
e. Separation from Other Buildings and Structures. No detached accessory building or structure shall be located closer than
six feet to any other building.
2. Storage and Utility Sheds in C-1, C-2, and PR Districts. Storage buildings are permitted as accessory structures on lots in the C-
1, C-2, and PR districts, if it is demonstrated that:
a. Storage and utility buildings are used for property maintenance purposes, and not for commercial uses or storage of goods
for resale.
[b. Reserved]
c. Storage and utility buildings are completely screened from view from abutting properties and public rights-of-way by
buildings, fences or walls (see Section 11.103, Fences and Walls).
d. Storage and utility buildings are located only behind principal buildings.
e. The floor area of any individual storage or utility building does not exceed 1,500 square feet.
f. The cumulative floor area of storage and utility buildings does not exceed two percent of the maximum floor area permitted
on the lot.
3. Storage and Utility Buildings in I-1 District. Storage buildings are permitted as accessory structures on lots in the I-1 district,
provided that:
a. If they are larger than 200 square feet, they are located within the building envelope; or
b. If they are 200 square feet or less, they are situated behind the principal building and set back at least 10 feet from all side
and rear property lines.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2017-27 adopted 12/1/17; Ordinance 2018-02 adopted 3/12/18)
Sec. 11.102 Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs)
A. Generally. Accessory dwelling units (ADUs) are permitted as set out in this Section.
B. ADU Types. For the purposes of this UDC, there are three types of ADUs (see Figure 11.102, Illustrative ADU Types):
1. Integrated Units. Integrated units are units that are created within an existing building or attached to an existing building such
that they appear to be an integrated part of it.
2. One-Story ADU Buildings. One-story ADU buildings are one-story detached buildings that contain an accessory dwelling unit.
They may or may not also include a garage or storage area.
3. Two-Story ADU Buildings. Two-story ADU buildings are one and one-half story or two-story detached buildings that contain an
accessory dwelling unit, which is usually located above a detached garage.
Figure 11.102
Illustrative ADU Types
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/438
C. Where Permitted. Accessory dwelling units are allowed as provided in Table 11.102, Districts and ADU Types. ADUs are not allowed in
zoning districts that are not listed in the table. ADUs are only allowed as an accessory to single-family detached principal buildings.
Table 11.102
Districts and ADU Types
District Subdistrict Integrated Unit1 One-Story ADU Building1 Two-Story ADU Building1
AG N/A Allowed Allowed Allowed
R-1 N/A Allowed Allowed (see also subsection
E., below)
Allowed (see also
subsection E., below)
R-2 N/A1 Allowed Allowed (see also subsection
E., below)
Allowed (see also
subsection E., below)
NC NC-R1 and NC-R4 only Allowed Allowed Allowed
NT All Allowed Allowed Allowed
TABLE NOTES:
N/A - Not Applicable
1. Accessory dwelling units are only allowed on lots where the principal building is a single-family detached dwelling unit.
D. Design Standards. ADUs shall conform to the following bulk and design standards:
1. All ADUs.
a. Maximum Number. No lot shall contain more than one ADU.
b. Parking for ADUs.
i. In addition to the parking requirements for the principal building, one off-street parking space shall be provided for the
ADU.
ii. Use of tandem parking to meet this requirement is allowed; however, only one tandem space is allowed per lot.
c. Required Usable Outdoor Area. Lots that are developed with ADUs shall include a usable outdoor area of at least 1,100
square feet, located behind the principal dwelling unit.
d. Utilities. ADUs shall not be provided with utilities that are metered or billed separately from the principal building.
e. Manufactured Housing. In all districts, except the AG district, the construction of ADUs shall be either stick-built or
industrialized housing. No manufactured homes may be used as an ADU.
2. Integrated Units.
a. Integrated units shall not occupy more than 40 percent of the total floor area of the principal building or exceed a maximum
of 800 square feet.
b. Integrated units shall not involve design modifications to the exterior of the principal building that make their presence
obvious. Where the principal building is expanded to accommodate the integrated unit, the expansion shall be designed, clad,
painted, and roofed in a manner that is comparable to the principal building.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/438
c. Where exterior doors provide direct access to the integrated unit, such doors shall be designed, located, and configured in
a manner that is typical for secondary access to a single-family building.
d. Setbacks for integrated units are the same as for the principal building.
3. One-Story Detached ADU Buildings.
a. The floor area of the ADU in a one-story ADU building shall not exceed the following:
i. 40 percent of the floor area of the principal building or 800 square feet, whichever is greater;
ii. In the NC and NT districts 600 square feet; or
iii. 7.5 percent of the lot area.
b. One-story ADU buildings shall be set back from property lines as follows:
i. Front: Behind front building line.
ii. Interior side: Same as principal building.
iii. Street side: Same as principal building.
iv. Rear: 10 feet where no alley is present; 5 feet where an alley abuts the rear lot line.
c. The height of one-story ADU buildings shall not exceed:
i. Nine feet to the wall plate; and
ii. 20 feet to the ridge.
d. One-story ADU buildings shall be spaced at least 10 feet from all other habitable buildings and structures on the same lot.
4. Two-Story Detached ADU Buildings (living quarters on second floor of accessory building).
a. The floor area of the ADU in a two-story ADU building unit shall not exceed 800 square feet. For the purposes of this
standard, “floor area” means all enclosed areas with a floor-to-ceiling height of at least 7.5 feet.
b. The height of a two-story ADU building shall not exceed 28 feet to the ridge.
c. Generally, windows of two-story ADU building units shall face streets and alleys. Windows that face interior side property
lines shall be located at least six feet above the finished floor unless:
i. Other features are in place to protect the privacy of the abutting lot's rear yard; or
ii. The abutting property is nonresidential or a tract of common open space.
d. Two-story ADU buildings shall be spaced at least 10 feet from all other habitable buildings and structures on the same lot.
E. Additional Requirements in R-1 and R-2 Districts.
1. Lots within the R-1 and R-2 districts that may be developed with one-story ADU buildings or two-story ADU buildings (as
indicated in Table 11.102, Districts and ADU Types), shall be annotated on the plat of the subdivision as allowing such accessory use.
2. A Type A bufferyard is required along the boundary of the individual parcel proposed for development if all of the following
conditions exist:
a. ADUs are to be allowed on lots along the boundary; and
b. The abutting development is an existing R-1 or R-2 single-family residential development that does not allow ADUs.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 11.103 Fencing and Walls
A. Generally. The requirements of this Section apply to fences and walls and are intended to allow their construction in a manner that both
protects the health and safety of people and animals and in general anything on one's property (e.g., equipment, merchandise, etc.), while
contributing to an improved built environment within the City.
B. All Uses. All fencing and walls within the City shall comply with the following, unless exempted herein.
1. Easements. Fencing and/or walls constructed in required easements may be subject to removal for maintenance of utilities or
other reasons related to the purpose of the easement. Removal and/or replacement costs are the responsibility of the owner/operator
of the fence or wall.
2. Continuity of Fences and Walls Along Streets. The continuity of fences and walls along arterial or collector streets shall be
maintained between street intersections on the same side of the street in terms of design, color, materials, and height. Where fences
and walls along the same side of the street vary in design, color, materials, or height, then new or replacement fences or walls shall
be matched to existing structures in the following order of priority:
a. Existing masonry walls, if such walls occupy more than 20 percent of the distance between street intersections; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/438
b. The existing privacy fence that is in the best condition.
3. Location Restriction and Drainage.
a. No fence or wall shall be built on any lot or tract outside the surveyed lot lines.
b. No fence or wall shall be built by a private party on public land without the specific prior approval of the public entity.
Removal of any such fence or wall is at the expense of its owner/operator.
c. No fence or wall shall be built in natural drainage courses, or drainageways, created within easements.
4. Materials.
a. Materials shall be durable and in character for the use of development it is serving (i.e., residential fencing shall be of a
material commonly made and sold for residential fencing or wall construction uses). Materials shall include: weather resistant
wood species, split rail, wood treated with U.S. Environmental Protection Agency approved preservatives, painted wood,
ornamental iron or powder-coated aluminum, brick, stone, masonry and chainlink.
b. Scrap lumber, plywood, tree branches, tree trunks, sheet metal, plastic, fiberglass sheets, barbed wire (unless as excepted
by subsection E.3., Materials, below), spikes, nails, other sharp metal points or instruments on tops or sides, welded wire,
agricultural fencing, and chicken wire are not permitted.
5. Fence Orientation and Maintenance. Fence posts and horizontal rails shall be located on the side of the fence that faces into the
lot or parcel proposed for development. Fences shall be maintained in an upright position (not more than 5 degrees from vertical
orientation), and in good condition (e.g., free of rust, peeling paint or coatings, missing or broken pickets, wood rot, graffiti, etc.). See
Figure 11.103, Fence Orientation.
Figure 11.103
Fence Orientation
Fence Orientation Allowed
Fence Orientation Not Allowed
C. Agricultural Uses. Exempt.
D. Residential Uses.
1. Height. No fence or wall shall exceed the following heights:
a. Front yard: 48" inches.
b. Interior side yard (behind the front building line) and rear yard: six feet.
c. Street side yard: 42 inches to the front building line and then tapering up to six feet to the rear building line.
d. In an interior side yard or rear yard abutting a nonresidential, or mixed-use: eight feet.
e. In a rear yard abutting an arterial or collector street: six feet.
2. Setbacks. Fences or walls shall be set back from:
a. Streets:
i. Generally: five feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/438
ii. At intersections of street rights-of-way: 20 feet.
b. Alleys: three feet.
c. Sidewalks: two feet.
E. Nonresidential and Mixed-Uses.
1. Height. No fence or wall shall exceed eight feet in height.
2. Setbacks. Fences or walls shall be set back from:
a. Intersection of street lot lines: 20 feet.
3. Materials. In addition to the minimum material requirements set out in subsection B.4., Materials, above, fences for
nonresidential and mixed-uses shall comply with the following additional provisions:
a. Barbed wire cradles facing inward toward the property may be placed on top of fences enclosing public utility buildings or
wherever the Building Official finds that such are necessary to address security interest.
b. Chainlink fences are permitted as follows[:]
i. Industrial uses. In any yard that is not visible from an arterial or collector street, or highway, rights-of-way or existing
abutting nonindustrial use; and
ii. All other nonresidential and mixed-uses. Only in interior side and rear yards that are not also street yards.
c. The use or placement of slats in chainlink fences is permitted only in interior side and rear yards that are not also street
yards. This does not apply to outdoor storage yards, which is subject to the standards set out in Section 11.104, Outdoor
Storage and Display of Merchandise.
4. Pedestrian and Environmental Safety.
a. All nonresidential, mixed-use or multifamily construction sites shall be enclosed with a barrier fence approved by the
Building Official.
b. Any type of excavation shall be enclosed by a silt fence, hay bales or other proven practice of runoff mitigation measures,
and/or a barrier fence approved by the Building Official until covered or enclosed by a permanent fence.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2018-08 adopted 8/13/18)
Sec. 11.104 Outdoor Storage and Displays of Merchandise
A. Generally. All outdoor storage and outdoor display of merchandise, except temporary outdoor sales event displays allowed per Table
2.210A, Limited and Conditional Use Standards for Specific Temporary Uses, shall be in conformance with the provisions of this Section.
B. Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage is permitted as an accessory use to principal buildings on properties used for nonresidential and mixeduse
purposes subject to the standards of this Section. Outdoor display of merchandise is regulated by subsection C., Outdoor Display of
Merchandise.
1. Prohibitions. Outdoor storage areas shall not be used to dispose of inoperable machines or wastes, store or dispose of
hazardous materials, or store or dispose of materials that will create windblown dust or debris or stormwater contaminants.
2. Standards by Use.
a. Agricultural Uses. Exempt.
b. Nonresidential Commercial Retail/Service Uses and Mixed-Use. Outdoor storage areas are permitted if it is demonstrated
that the outdoor storage area:
i. Is not larger than 10 percent of the gross floor area of the principal building; and
ii. Is located in the buildable area in the rear yard and/or interior side yard; and
iii. Is screened in one of the following ways:
a. Enclosed by a wall that is designed into the principal building's facade and composed of the same materials as
the principal building; or
b. Enclosed by a wall or opaque fence and gate of sufficient height to completely screen the stored materials from
public view and rights-of-way. Such wall, fence, and gate shall be of a durable material that does not include slats
and shall be landscaped with a continuous hedge along its entire length, except at points of access.
c. Nonresidential Industrial Uses. Outdoor storage areas are permitted if it is demonstrated that the outdoor storage area:
i. Is not larger than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the principal building; and
ii. Is located in the buildable area in the rear yard and/or interior side yard; and
iii. Is screened in one of the following ways:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/438
a. Views from public rights-of-way are completely blocked by the principal building; or
b. The area is enclosed by a wall, opaque fence, or landscaping of sufficient height to completely screen the stored
materials from public view.
d. Nonresidential Office Uses. Outdoor storage is not allowed.
e. Residential Uses. Outdoor storage is limited to that normally associated with residential uses subject to the City's nuisance
standards (see Chapter 98, Nuisances, [Chapters 7 and 8] of the Cuero Code of Ordinances).
C. Outdoor Display of Merchandise. This subsection sets out the standards that are applicable to outdoor merchandise display areas. Outdoor
storage of items other than merchandise is regulated by subsection B., Outdoor Storage, above.
1. Display Areas that are Attached to Principal Buildings. Outdoor display areas that are attached to a principal building are
permitted if it is demonstrated that the display areas are:
a. Adjacent to a wall of a principal building or structure, and configured as a walled or decoratively fenced area that entirely
screens the merchandise on all sides;
b. Within the buildable area of the site;
c. Not located in areas that are required or used for access or parking, loading, or vehicular circulation; and
d. Not larger than the area set out in Table 11.104, Area of Outdoor Display of Merchandise.
Table 11.104
Area of Outdoor Display of Merchandise
Use Maximum Outdoor Display Area
Retail Sales and Services 15 percent of floor area of principal building
Heavy Retail (i.e., Home Centers,
Warehouse Clubs, and Superstores) 30 percent of floor area of principal building
Heavy Retail - All Others 35 percent of lot area
Nurseries/Greenhouses, Retail Area within building envelope
2. Motor Vehicle, Recreational Vehicle, and Heavy Equipment Rentals, Lease and Sales.
a. For motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, and/or heavy equipment rental, lease, and sales uses, outdoor display of
merchandise can only be displayed on improved hard surface areas of the parcel proposed for development and cannot
encroach on any area that is designated for landscape areas or rights-of-way.
b. The outdoor display of heavy equipment may be on crushed stone, gravel, or another surface approved by the Building
Official provided that all driveways and customer parking areas are on an improved hard surface.
c. Such merchandise shall not occupy or obstruct required parking spaces or loading spaces, but shall be set back behind
any required landscape areas and shall be screened with landscaping for 75 percent of the linear frontage (as if they were
parking spaces) for any motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, or heavy equipment that is for rental, lease, or sale and that is
visible from the public right-of-way.
d. Only two motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, and/or pieces of heavy equipment may be raised, to a height not to exceed
15 feet from the average grade of the display area, on a platform, berm, structure, or raised by other means, to display said
merchandise for greater visibility. This may be located anywhere within the outdoor display area, or in the front landscape strip;
provided however, no raised portion shall be located closer to any rights-of-way than 10 feet.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 11.105 Solar Arrays and Small Wind Energy Systems (SWES)
A. Generally. The placement and use of solar arrays and small wind energy systems (SWES) are subject to the requirements of this Section.
B. Solar Arrays. The following standards apply to solar arrays:
1. Roof-Mounts. Solar arrays may be roof-mounted on principal and accessory buildings in all zoning districts.
2. Ground-Mounts. Ground- or structure-mounted solar arrays (not mounted on buildings) shall be set back as if they were
detached accessory buildings if the highest point on the panels is more than six feet above grade.
3. Carports and Covered Walkways. Carports and walkways may be covered with solar arrays, provided that:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/438
a. There is not less than eight feet of clearance under the carport or covered walkway; and
b. In residential zoning districts and/or uses, solar panels that cover carports and covered walkways are set back from the
front property line as required for principal buildings. Additional setbacks may be required in other areas in order to comply with
building setback requirements or accessory structure requirements for the underlying structures.
4. Removal or Replacement of Damaged Panels. If solar panels are damaged (e.g., in a windstorm) such that the damage is
obvious when viewed from a public right-of-way, then the panels must be removed or replaced within 60 days of the event that caused
the damage.
C. Small Wind Energy Systems (SWES). The following standards apply to Small Wind Energy Systems:
1. Distance from Lot or Building or Power Lines. The distance from all lot lines or any building or power line to any tower support
base of all SWES shall be equal to the sum of the tower height plus the diameter of the rotor.
2. Distance between SWES. The distance between the tower support base and any two SWES shall be the minimum of five rotor
lengths, determined by the size of the largest rotor.
3. Interference. The SWES operation shall not interfere with radio, television, computer, or other electronic operations on abutting
or nearby properties.
4. Fence. A fence with a minimum height of six feet with a locking gate shall be placed around any SWES tower base. Alternatively
the tower climbing apparatus shall begin no lower than 12 feet above ground level.
5. Height Exemption. SWES are exempt from the height restrictions of the district within which it located.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 11.106 Solid Waste Collection
A. Generally. Nonresidential, mixed-use, multi-family, manufactured home parks, and recreational vehicle park uses shall provide for a
common area for solid waste collection.
B. Location. The location of the solid waste collection areas shall comply with the following:
1. They shall be located on the same lot as the parcel proposed for development they are intended to serve, unless otherwise
authorized by the Building Official upon written proof of an agreement with an abutting property owner/operator and demonstration
that the facilities will have the capacity to serve both properties.
2. They shall be located no more than 200 feet (walking distance) from the uses they are intended to serve.
3. The solid waste collection area shall be located behind the principal building or in a side or rear yard, unless it is not possible to
provide service access in such locations.
4. If the parcel proposed for development has access to an alley, the solid waste collection area shall be accessed via the alley.
5. If an enclosure must be located in a front yard, it is designed and constructed in conformance with subsection C., Enclosure,
below, and surrounded on the three non-access sides with landscaping that is sufficiently dense to completely conceal the enclosure
from view from abutting properties and public rights-of-way.
6. Access to the facilities is configured to meet the requirements of the refuse service provider.
7. All solid waste collection areas shall be spaced at least:
a. Fifteen feet from the lot lines of residential uses that are part of the parcel proposed for development; and
b. Thirty feet from the lot lines of residential uses that are abutting to the parcel proposed for development.
C. Enclosure. Solid waste collection areas shall be fully enclosed by:
1. An opaque wall or fence that is one foot taller than the refuse container and constructed of the same materials of the principal
building;
2. A separate opaque solid metal service pedestrian access gate or a pedestrian opening that screens the container(s) from view at
all times except when it is being serviced (see Figure 11.106, Solid Waste Collection Enclosure); and
3. An adequate size to accommodate one or more solid waste containers that are of a sufficient size to service the development,
based on the frequency of solid waste collection.
4. The opening of the enclosure shall be located away from any sidewalk.
Figure 11.106
Solid Waste Collection Enclosure
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/438
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2017-09, sec. 3, adopted 4/11/17)
PART 5
ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE 12 NONCONFORMITIES
Division 12.100 Nonconformities
Sec. 12.101 Nonconformities, Generally
A. Generally. This Article sets out the standards for when a nonconformity must be terminated or removed, and when it is allowed to be
restored after temporary cessation, damage or destruction.
B. Unlawful Uses, Buildings, Structures, or Signs.
1. This Article does not authorize or legitimize uses, buildings, structures, or signs that were not legally established or constructed.
Such uses, buildings, structures, or signs are not “legally nonconforming,” but instead remain “unlawful,” and are subject to all of the
provisions of this UDC (including enforcement provisions) and any other applicable law. Likewise, this Article does not legitimize
unlawful subdivisions of property that may have occurred before the effective date of this UDC.
2. Any use, building, structure and/or parcel of land which was used, erected or maintained in violation of any previous zoning
regulations shall not be considered as a legal, nonconforming use, building, structure, and/or parcel, and shall be required to comply
with all provisions of this UDC.
C. Effect on Existing Development Entitlements. Nothing in this UDC shall be interpreted to require a change in plans, construction, or
designated use of any building or structure in which a building permit was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this UDC, provided construction was commenced within 60 days after obtaining said building permit and diligently completed.
D. Nonconformities Created by Public Action. Any nonconforming building or structure or land expressly created or caused by a conveyance of
privately owned land to a federal, state or local government to serve a public purpose is conforming for the purposes of this UDC, and is not
subject to the limitations of this Article. This exemption applies only in cases where private land is obtained by a governmental entity for a public
purpose, through condemnation, threat of condemnation or otherwise, which creates a nonconformity in the remainder parcel in terms of
setback, lot size, or other applicable standards of this UDC. This exemption does not apply to right-of-way dedication or other public
conveyances of land required by the City in the course of subdivision or other routine site plan approvals.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 12.102 Nonconforming Uses
A. Generally. A nonconforming use is a use of land that was lawfully established (i.e., it was allowed and issued a permit, if a permit was
required at the time the use was established) on a parcel or lot before the effective date of this UDC, that is no longer allowed after the effective
date of this UDC. Amendments to this UDC may also make uses nonconforming. The following uses are legally nonconforming uses:
1. Uses that were lawfully established but are not currently listed as permitted, limited, conditional, or temporary uses in the zoning
district in Division 2.100, Permitted, Limited, Conditional, Temporary, and Prohibited Uses.
2. Uses that are listed as “Limited Uses” in the zoning district in Division 2.100, Permitted, Limited, Conditional, Temporary, and
Prohibited Uses, but were lawfully established without valid permit (issued in conformance with the additional limited use standards)
and do not comply with the applicable standards of Division 2.200, Limited and Conditional Use Standards.
3. Uses that are listed as “Conditional Uses” in the zoning district in Division 2.100, Permitted, Limited, Conditional, Temporary, and
Prohibited Uses, but were lawfully established without a conditional use permit. For these uses, the nonconforming use status may be
removed by obtaining a conditional use permit.
4. Uses that were lawfully established within a floodplain or floodway, but are no longer permitted in the floodplain or floodway.
B. Classifications of Nonconforming Uses. There are two types of nonconforming uses: major nonconforming uses and minor nonconforming
uses. The classification of the nonconforming use affects whether it can be converted to a conforming use.
1. Major Nonconforming Uses. Major nonconforming uses are those uses for which the nonconformity generates a nuisance per se
or represents such incompatibility with abutting uses and/or the Cuero Comprehensive Plan that public policy favors their elimination
from the zoning district if they are discontinued, abandoned, or destroyed. Major nonconforming uses are:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/438
a. Mobile homes.
2. Minor Nonconforming Uses. All nonconforming uses that are not classified as major nonconforming uses are minor
nonconforming uses. Such uses may be converted to conforming uses as provided in Section 12.109, Conversion of Nonconformities.
C. Standards.
1. All Nonconforming Uses.
a. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.
b. If a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, the nonconforming use shall not be resumed.
c. If the use of only a portion of a building or property is changed from a nonconforming use to a conforming use, then the use
of that portion of the building or property shall not be changed back to the nonconforming use.
2. Major Nonconforming Uses.
a. If a major nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of six months, for any reason, it shall not be resumed.
b. Major nonconforming uses shall not be expanded, enlarged, extended, increased, or moved to occupy an area of land or
building that was not occupied on the effective date of this UDC or any amendment that made the use a major nonconforming
use.
3. Minor Nonconforming Uses.
a. If a minor nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of six months, for any reason, it shall not be resumed. However, if
an application for conversion of the use is filed pursuant to Section 12.109, Conversion of Nonconformities, before the end of
the six-month period, the use may be resumed as a conforming use after the period expires if the application is granted.
b. No minor nonconforming use shall be expanded or extended in such a way as to:
i. Occupy any open space or landscaped area that is required by this UDC;
ii. Exceed building coverage, intensity, or height limitations of the zoning district in which the use is located;
iii. Occupy any land beyond the boundaries of the property or lot as it existed on the effective date of this UDC; or
iv. Displace any conforming use in the same building or on the same parcel.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 12.103 Nonconforming Buildings and Structures
A. Generally. A building or structure is classified as nonconforming if it was lawfully constructed prior to the effective date of this UDC (or
amendment hereto) and does not conform to the height, yard, building coverage, density, intensity, building scale, or design standards that are
applicable to the same type of building or structure in the district in which the building or structure is located.
B. Standards.
1. If a nonconforming building or structure or nonconforming element thereof is damaged or destroyed by any means, or is declared
unsafe by the Building Official to an extent that repairs would exceed more than 50 percent of the replacement cost of the building or
structure or damaged nonconforming element, the building or structure shall be reconstructed in conformity with the provisions of this
UDC.
2. If the reconstruction cost and/or area of reconstruction (whichever is less) is less than or equal to 50 percent of the cost of
replacement or area of the building or structure, respectively, then the building or structure may be strengthened or restored to a safe
condition provided that:
a. The original nonconformity is not enlarged, increased, or extended;
b. Building permits are obtained for repairs within 12 months of the date the building was damaged or, if no date can be
reasonably established for the damage, the date that the Building Official determines that the building is unsafe; and
c. The construction is commenced within 12 months after obtaining the required building permits.
3. Routine maintenance of nonconforming buildings and structures is permitted, including necessary nonstructural repairs, paint,
and incidental alterations which do not extend or intensify the nonconforming buildings or structures or materially extend their life. This
standard also applies to buildings or structures that are used by nonconforming uses if they are designed in a way that is not suitable
for re-use as a conforming use (if the building is conforming and could be re-used for a conforming use, there is no limitation on its
maintenance).
4. Structural alterations to nonconforming buildings or structures are permitted only if it is demonstrated that the alteration will
eliminate the nonconformity or reduce it in accordance with the standards of this Section.
5. No building or structure that contains a major nonconforming use shall be enlarged unless the major nonconforming use is
permanently discontinued.
C. Standards for Existing Buildings or Structures in the Floodplain. It is the intent of the City that no permanent buildings or structures be
located or substantially improved in the floodplain, except according to the standards in Division 6.200, Floodplain Management and Flood
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/438
Damage Prevention, and that existing legal nonconforming buildings or structures shall be removed upon abandonment, destruction, or
substantial damage.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 12.104 Nonconforming Signs
A. Generally. Any permanent sign located within the City limits on the effective date of this UDC that does not conform to the provisions of
Article 9, Signs, is a “legal nonconforming” sign, provided it also meets the following requirements:
1. The sign was approved by a sign permit on the effective date of this UDC, or amendment hereto, if a permit was required under
applicable law; or
2. If no sign permit was required under applicable law for the sign in question, the sign:
a. Was in all respects in conformity with the applicable law (or there was no applicable law) immediately prior to the effective
date; or
b. Had legal nonconforming status at such time.
B. Standards.
1. A nonconforming sign which has been damaged by fire, wind or other cause in excess of 50 percent of its replacement cost shall
not be restored except in conformance with this UDC.
2. If a nonconforming sign structure is does not display any message for a period of three months, it shall be removed or brought
into conformance with this UDC.
3. If a nonconforming sign structure is removed for any reason other than routine repair and maintenance, it shall not be replaced
unless the replacement sign conforms to this UDC.
4. Nonconforming signs that are a danger to the public safety due to damage or wear shall be removed and shall not be replaced
unless the replacement sign conforms to this UDC.
5. Routine maintenance of nonconforming signs is permitted, including nonstructural repairs and paint (even if such repairs would
materially extend the life of the sign), changes to the sign face or messages, and incidental alterations that do not increase the
nonconformity or sign area. Structural repairs or changes are not allowed. If the sign requires structural repairs because it has been
damaged, destroyed, or worn, it shall be removed as required by Article 9, Signs.
6. Structural alterations to nonconforming signs are permitted only if it is demonstrated that the alternative will eliminate the
nonconformity or reduce it in accordance with this Section.
7. Temporary signs that are not in compliance with this UDC shall be removed as required by Article 9, Signs.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 12.105 Nonconforming Parking and Landscaping
A. Generally. Nonconforming parking refers to parking spaces, parking drive aisles, and loading areas, and the required landscaping that
normally is associated with it, that do not conform to the requirements that are set out in Article 5, Parking, Loading, Access, Circulation, and
Lighting, or Article 7, Landscaping, Buffering, and Tree Protection, in terms of their number or dimensions.
B. Standards.
1. If an existing building or use is expanded, additional parking and landscaping shall be required only in proportion to the new area
of the building or use.
2. If the use of a building changes, resulting in additional demand for parking, additional parking and associated landscaping shall
be provided in an amount equal to the difference between the requirements of the former use (not the actual parking provided on-site)
and the requirements for the new use, as set out in Division 5.100, Parking and Loading, and Article 7, Landscaping, Buffering, and
Tree Protection. However, a permit for the new use may be denied if the available parking is less than 75 percent of the required
parking.
3. If an existing building is redeveloped, parking shall be provided as required by Article 5, Parking, Loading, Access, Circulation,
and Lighting, and Article 7, Landscaping, Buffering, and Tree Protection.
4. If a nonconforming use is required to be brought fully into compliance, then parking and landscaping shall also be brought into
compliance.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 12.106 Nonconforming Lots
A. Generally. Nonconforming lots are lots that were lawfully created before the effective date of this UDC or amendments hereto, but which no
longer comply with the lot width, lot frontage, lot area, or access requirements of this UDC.
B. Exception. All lots within NC or NT districts that were lawfully created before the effective date of this UDC are conforming, regardless of
their dimensions.
C. Standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/438
1. Combination of Lots to Increase Conformity.
a. Where a landowner owns several abutting lots that do not conform to the dimensional requirements of the zoning district in
which they are located, they shall be combined to create fully conforming lots or, if full conformity is not possible, they shall be
combined if the combination will increase the degree of conformity. See Figure 12.106, Combination of Nonconforming Lots.
b. The City will not require the combination of lots pursuant to paragraph C.1.a, above, if (see Figure 12.106, Combination of
Nonconforming Lots):
i. The combination of lots would not address the nonconformity;
ii. The combination of lots would materially disrupt the lotting pattern of the street, for example, by creating a through lot
mid-block on a street segment that does not include any other through lots;
iii. Two or more of the lots are developed with principal buildings, and the combination of lots would require that one or
more of the buildings be torn down in order to comply with this UDC;
iv. The combination of lots would result in regularly shaped lots being combined into a single lot with an irregular shape;
or
v. The lots are located in the NC or NT district (in which case they are not nonconforming).
Figure 12.106
Combination of Nonconforming Lots
2. Construction on Legal Lots That Do Not Conform to Dimensional Requirements. A legal lot that does not meet zoning district
requirements with respect to lot area or lot width may be built upon if:
a. The lot is a lot of record; and
b. The use is permitted in the zoning district in which the lot is located; and
c. The lot has sufficient frontage on a public street to provide access that is appropriate for the proposed use; and
d. All yards or height standards are complied with, except that the Building Official may authorize a reduction of required yards
of up to 10 percent, provided that the Building Official finds that the reduction does not allow a building that would be larger than
a building that would be permitted on the minimum conforming lot in the zoning district.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 12.107 Nonconforming Manufactured Homes
A. Generally. Manufactured homes that were existing on December 1, 2005 and located outside of an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, are allowed to be replaced in accordance with the following:
B. Standards.
1. Replacement.
a. Each manufactured home shall only be replaced one time with a newer model constructed no greater than five years from
the date of the proposed replacement.
b. The replacement manufactured home shall be of equal size or greater than the manufactured home it is replacing and shall
be installed in conformance with Section 10.103, Manufactured Home Unit Standards.
c. After a manufactured home is replaced, all additional replacements shall be with a stick-built home in conformance with the
standards set out in this UDC.
2. Replacement Restrictions. Lots which are eligible for a single manufactured home replacement, as specified by this
Section, shall also be subject to the abandonment provisions set out for all nonconforming uses (see Section 12.102,
Nonconforming Uses).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/438
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
[Sec.] 12.108 Nonconforming Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks
A. Generally. Any recreational vehicle park that was lawfully under construction or in licensed operation on July 7, 2011 that does not fully
comply with the provisions set out in Section 4.204, Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks, shall be considered a nonconforming grandfathered RV
park until there is a change in ownership.
B. Standards. Nonconforming recreational vehicle parks shall be made conforming upon a change of ownership of the property. The new
property owner shall be issued a temporary license and given 90 days to bring the existing RV park into compliance with the requirements of
Section 4.204, Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks. The Building Official is authorized to grant extensions for work that may require more than 90
days. The extension shall be in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Change of ownership shall include a change from ownership of any
person, firm or entity to any other person, firm or entity. Change of ownership shall not include an assignment to an entity formed by the original
grandfathered owner.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 12.109 Conversion of Nonconformities
A. Purpose. Many minor nonconforming uses have existed for a period of time, and some may have only recently become nonconforming. In
many instances, minor nonconforming uses are integral parts of the City's fabric, that is, its character and function, so their continuing existence
promotes the City's policy objective of protecting its neighborhoods. In these instances, the classification “nonconformity” and resulting restriction
on investment may not be what the community desires. As such, the use may be made conforming pursuant to this Section in order to remove
the potential stigma that may be associated with the “nonconforming” designation.
B. Procedure. An owner of a minor nonconforming use may apply for a conditional use permit which has the effect of making the
nonconforming use conforming. The criteria for conditional use approval are set out in subsection C. [D.], Criteria for Approval.
C. Exclusions. This procedure does not apply to nonconforming lots, which may be buildable in accordance with the standards of Section
12.106, Nonconforming Lots.
D. Criteria for Approval. A conditional use permit approval may be granted to make a nonconforming building, structure, use, or sign
conforming, if, in addition to the criteria for approval of a conditional use permit set forth in Section 14.402, Conditional Use Permits, all of the
criteria of this Section are satisfied.
1. Approval Criteria. The use, as conducted and managed, has minimal nonconformities and has been integrated into the
neighborhood's (or zoning district's if it is not in or adjacent to a residential neighborhood) function, as evidenced by the following
demonstrations:
a. The neighborhood residents regularly patronize or are employed at said use (for nonresidential uses in or abutting
residential neighborhoods).
b. Management practices eliminate nuisances such as noise, light, waste materials, unreasonably congested on-street
parking, or similar conflicts.
c. There is no material history of complaints about the use (a history of complaints is justification for denying the conditional
use permit, unless the conditions of the permit will eliminate the sources of the complaints).
d. The use has been maintained in good condition and its classification as a nonconformity would be a disincentive for such
maintenance.
2. Conditions. Conditions may be imposed relative to the expansion of bufferyards, landscaping and landscape areas, or other site
design provisions, or other limitations necessary to ensure that, as a conforming use, the use will not become a nuisance. Such
conditions may relate to the lot, buildings, structures, or operation of the use.
E. Effect and Annotation. Uses that comply with the terms of a conditional use permit issued in accordance with this Section are converted
from “legally nonconforming uses” to “conforming uses” by virtue of the issuance of the permit.
1. Written Approval. Conditional use permit approvals shall be provided to the applicant in writing and may be recorded by the
applicant at the applicant's expense.
2. Annotation of Official Zoning Map. Upon granting a conditional use permit and the applicant's demonstration of compliance with
any conditions placed upon it, the Building Official shall place an annotation on the official zoning map that states that the property
has a conditional use permit, as well as the permit number and date of approval.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
ARTICLE 13 ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES
Division 13.100 Council, Boards, and Commissions
Sec. 13.101 City Council
A. Generally. The City Council has all powers conferred upon it by the City's Home Rule Charter and this UDC. As it relates to development,
the City Council will exercise the powers set out in this Section.
B. Powers and Duties. After a public hearing is held and after reports and recommendations are provided by the Building Official, Planning and
Zoning Commission, or another board or commission of the City, the City Council shall hear and decide the following applications:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/438
1. Plans and programs for the development and redevelopment of its area of jurisdiction. This includes, but is not limited to,
amended text and maps of the Cuero Comprehensive Plan, from time to time;
2. Other policies and procedures to facilitate implementation of planning elements;
3. Proposed covenants, conditions, and restrictions as set out in Section 4.110, Required Property Owners' Association and CCRs;
4. Proposed amendment of the text of this UDC;
5. Proposed amendment of the Official Zoning Map, (i.e., rezonings) including conditional use permits;
6. Variances that are not under the authority of the Zoning Board of Adjustments or Board of Adjustments and Appeals; and
7. Any other action not delegated to any other board or commission as the City Council may deem desirable and necessary to
implement the provisions of this UDC and the goals and objectives of the City; provided such action is not contrary to the
requirements of this UDC or state law.
C. Appeals. The City Council shall hear and decide appeals from decisions of the Tree Board after a public hearing in the same manner as an
appeal of an administrative decision.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 13.102 Planning and Zoning Commission
A. Generally. The Planning and Zoning Commission is authorized by Chapter 211, Municipal Zoning Authority, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code
and Article VII, Municipal Planning and Zoning, of the City's Home Rule Charter. This Section is adopted pursuant to these statutory and
municipal authorizations. Consequently, amendment of the state statute or Home Rule Charter after the effective date may modify, delete, or
supplement the provisions of this Section.
B. Powers and Duties. As set out in Section 7.05, Powers and Duties, of the City's Home Rule Charter, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be responsible to and act as an advisory board to the City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission is delegated the following
powers:
1. Review and Recommendation after a Public Hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and make a
recommendation after a public hearing for the following:
a. Preliminary plats;
b. Final plats;
c. Amendments to the text of this UDC; and
d. Proposed amendments to the official zoning map, including permitted uses and conditional use permits (no fee required for
the filing of such a proposal in the name of the City).
2. Other Powers of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
a. Periodically review this UDC and the official zoning map and make recommendations regarding amendments;
b. Periodically review the Cuero Comprehensive Plan and other plans of the City and make recommendations regarding
amendments; and
c. Ensure that new development is consistent with the policies of the Cuero Comprehensive Plan.
C. Enactment, Membership, Terms, Organization, and Composition. The enactment, appointment, removal, composition, terms of office, and
organization of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be in accordance with Article VII, Municipal Planning and Zoning, of the City's Home
Rule Charter.
D. Rules of Procedure. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall adopt the rules of procedure as it may deem proper for the practical and
efficient transaction of its business, subject to the City's Home Rule Charter, this UDC, and any other applicable ordinance of the City. Its records
shall be public records. It shall meet from time to time upon call of its Chairperson, the City Manager, or designated appointee, as necessary to
hear and decide applications or other business of the City.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Charter reference–Planning commission, sec. 7.01 et seq.
State law reference–Zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.007.
Sec. 13.103 Zoning Board of Adjustment
A. Generally. The Zoning Board of Adjustment is authorized by Section 211.008, Board of Adjustment, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code. This
Section is adopted pursuant to this statutory authorization, as well as the provisions of Section 158.051, Board of Adjustment, of the City's Code
of Ordinances.
Editor's note–Section 158.051 of the 1994 Code of Ordinances is repealed by section 15.305 of the Unified Development Code.
B. Powers and Duties. The Zoning Board of Adjustment is assigned the following powers, to be carried out in accordance with the terms and
limitations of this UDC and as provided by state law:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/438
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official or body in the enforcement of this UDC, as well as orders, decisions, or determinations made by the Building
Official or his/her representative relative to the application and interpretations of all the adopted building and construction codes. All
appeals shall have the effect of staying the decision appealed from and, thereby, preserving the status quo until the appeal is decided
in accordance with the rules.
2. To authorize a variance from the terms of this UDC as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the UDC will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this UDC
shall be observed and substantial justice done. Variances may be granted only in the following instances:
a. To vary the front yard, side yard, rear yard, lot width, lot depth, lot area, building size or percent of building materials
required, where the literal enforcement of the provisions of this UDC would result in an unnecessary hardship, or where such
variance is necessary to permit a specific parcel of land, which differs from other parcels of land in the same district by being of
such area, shape or slope, that it cannot be developed in a manner commensurate with the development permitted upon other
parcels of land in the same zoning district.
b. To vary the applicable minimum building setback requirements, lot coverage, and maximum permitted height.
c. To vary the regulations pertaining to signs as permitted in Article 9, Signs, as contained in this UDC.
d. To vary the regulations pertaining to off-street parking and loading contained in Division 5.100, Parking and Loading.
C. Membership, Composition, and Terms of Office.
1. Membership. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members who are residents of the City, each to be appointed
by the City Council for a term of two years and removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public
hearing.
2. Officers. The City Council shall designate one member as Chairperson.
3. Vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member, whose place becomes vacant for any cause, in the
same manner as the original appointment was made.
4. Alternate Members. All cases to be heard by the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be heard by a minimum of 75 percent of the
number of regular members.
a. The City Council may appoint two alternate members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment who shall serve in the absence of
one or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the Chairperson or City Secretary, as the case may be.
b. These alternate members, when appointed, shall serve for the same period as the regular members, which is for a term of
two years, and any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner, and they shall be subject to removal the same as the regular
members.
5. Reappointment.
a. Appointments of members and alternate members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be made at the first regular City
Council meeting in the month of June of each year.
b. Newly appointed members and alternate members shall be installed at the first regular Zoning Board of Adjustment
meeting after their appointment.
c. Zoning Board of Adjustment alternate members may be appointed to successive terms.
D. Rules of Procedure. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt the rules of procedures as it may deem proper for the practical and
efficient transaction of its business, subject to the City's Home Rule Charter, this UDC, and any other applicable ordinance of the City.
1. Meetings. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall meet from time to time upon call of its Chairperson, the City Manager, or
designated appointee, as necessary to hear and decide applications or other business of the City.
2. Administering Oaths. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence, the acting Chairperson, may administer oath[s] and compel the
attendance of witnesses.
3. Public Meetings. All meetings of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be open to the public.
4. Minutes. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each
question, and shall keep record of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed with the City
Secretary and shall be a public record.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
State law reference–Establishment and authority of zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.008 et seq.
Sec. 13.104 Tree Board
A. Generally. A Tree Board is created and established to work in cooperation with the City and its designees for the purposes of promoting the
proper planting, maintenance, and removal of trees on public properties.
B. Membership, Composition, and Terms of Office.
1. Membership. The Tree Board shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/438
2. Terms of Office. The term of office for the five appointed members shall be three years except that the term of two of the
members appointed for the first Tree Board shall be for only one year and the term of two members of the first Tree Board shall be for
two years.
3. Vacancy. In the event that a vacancy occurs, the term of any member shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the
remaining term.
C. Powers and Duties.
1. Tree Preservation Plan. It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to study, investigate, counsel, and develop and/or update
annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and
shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public places. Such plan will be presented to the City Council annually and upon their
acceptance and approval shall constitute the official Tree Preservation Plan. A copy of this file will be kept at the City Secretary's
Office, the Parks Department Office, and at the Cuero Public Library.
2. Official Plant List. It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Board to make modifications to Appendix A, Plants Lists, which are the
permitted and prohibited plants that can or cannot be used by the private sector to meet the minimum requirements for landscaping,
buffering, and tree protection (see Article 7, Landscaping, Buffering, and Tree Protection).
3. Other Duties. The Tree Board, when requested by the City Council, shall consider, investigate, take finding [make findings],
report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
D. Rules of Procedure. Subject to the approval of the City Council, the Tree Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules of
procedure and keep minutes of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for transaction of business.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 13.200 City Staff and Other Review Bodies
Sec. 13.201 Building Official
A. Generally. The Building Official is a member of the City staff who is ultimately responsible for processing an application to decision (in case
of administrative approval) or recommendation to an another review body (in case of public hearing approvals). The Building Official shall
designate staff members to manage applications through the review process and to be points of contact for applicants, and to perform such other
functions and duties as may be required of the Building Official by this UDC. The Building Official may also designate review responsibilities to
other members of the City staff with relevant technical training or expertise, or, as appropriate, to consultants that are authorized by the City
Council.
B. Powers and Duties. For the purpose of reference, the Building Official has the following powers and duties with respect to the administration
of this UDC. Such duties may be allocated and reallocated by the City Manager in the exercise of the responsibilities of that office without
amendment to this UDC:
1. Processing Permits and Applications. The Building Official shall:
a. Receive and log applications for development approval;
b. Review application materials and verify that applications are complete;
c. Communicate with applicants to inform them that their applications are complete or not complete; and if the applications are
not complete, what items are required to complete the application;
d. Manage the processing of applications according to Article 14, Permits and Procedures;
e. Process and review all applications (or cause the applications to be reviewed) and either decide applications or make a
recommendation regarding how the application should be decided (depending upon the type of application);
f. Work in conjunction with the City Secretary to set applications on agendas of the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning
Board of Adjustment, Board of Adjustment and Appeals, or the City Council, as appropriate;
g. Work in conjunction with the City Secretary to provide public notice as may be required by the provisions in Article 14,
Permits and Procedures; and
h. Promptly issue written permits, resolutions, or orders that reflect the substance of approvals granted by the City pursuant to
this UDC.
2. Recommendations. The Building Official shall provide professional recommendations regarding:
a. Whether applications that are placed on an agenda of the Planning and Zoning Commission, Zoning Board of
Adjustment, Board of Adjustment and Appeals, and City Council comply with the requirements of this UDC, and, if not,
whether conditions of approval could be imposed to bring the application into compliance (including specification of such
conditions);
b. Whether amendments to this UDC are advisable to, among other things:
i. Bring the UDC into conformity with state or federal requirements as they change over time;
ii. Implement amendments to the Cuero Comprehensive Plan or other adopted plans of the City; or
iii. Resolve errors, internal inconsistencies, or other administrative matter.
3. Interpretation. The Building Official interprets the building codes, this UDC, and other City ordinances as they relate to plans and
permits.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/438
4. Approvals. The Building Official shall decide the following types of applications:
a. Building and other development-related permits;
b. Certificates of occupancy;
c. Minor plats;
d. Sign permits;
e. Temporary use permits; and
f. Other approvals as may be needed and delegated by this UDC.
5. Assignments. The Building Official is responsible for all other responsibilities as the City Council or City Manager may assign
from time to time.
6. Recordkeeping. The Building Official shall maintain all records of development applications, including materials and outcomes.
7. Inspection. The Building Official shall inspect site improvements and landscaping for compliance with this UDC and approved
plans.
8. Enforcement. The Building Official shall, on an ongoing basis, identify code violations and shall enforce the provisions of this
UDC and approvals granted hereunder pursuant to Article 15, Enforcement and Legal Status.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 13.202 Floodplain Administrator
A. Generally. The Building Official, or his designee, shall also serve as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator shall share
in the administration and enforcement of all floodplain management regulations in this UDC and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National
Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
B. Powers and Duties. The power and duties of the Floodplain Administrator include, but are not limited to:
1. Permit Review.
a. Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding;
b. Review and then approve or deny all applications for floodplain development permits; and
c. Review permits for parcels proposed for development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. section 1334) from which prior approval is required.
2. Recordkeeping. Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of Division 6.200, Floodplain
Management and Flood Damage Prevention.
3. Interpretations of SFHA Boundaries. Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of special
flood hazards areas (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
4. Responsibilities with Regard to Alterations of Watercourses.
a. Notify adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the state water development board, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
b. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
5. Floodplain Information and Determination.
a. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 6.202B., Basis for Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
data and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources, in order to administer the provision[s] of Division 6.200,
Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention. If adequate data is not available, the Floodplain Administrator may
require the applicant to provide additional data, information and/or studies for review.
b. When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain Administrator shall not permit new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) within zones A1-30 on the applicable FIRM, unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
6. Required Map Revisions. Under provisions of 44 CFR, Part 65, Section 12 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations,
the City is authorized to approve certain development in the SFHA (A zones) on the applicable FIRM maps which increases the water
surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot. However, the City must first apply for a conditional FIRM revision through
FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map Revision).
7. Enforcement. The Floodplain Administrator shall enforce the floodplain management and flood hazard reduction standards of
this UDC.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/438
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 13.203 Development Review Committee
A. Generally. In addition to the Building Official, there are various other reviewing bodies that may participate in the technical review of
development applications for the City. This Development Review Committee (DRC) includes, but is not limited to, the following:
1. City Departments. Staff from the water/wastewater, sanitary, and street departments; fire marshal's office; and code
enforcement/inspections may participate in the review of development applications, as necessary.
2. Others. Staff from various local, county, state (e.g., Texas Department of Transportation), and federal agencies and other outside
entities may participate in the review of development applications as may be needed from time to time.
B. Coordination. The coordination and administration of the technical review comments from the Development Review Committee shall be the
responsibility of the Building Official.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
ARTICLE 14 PERMITS AND PROCEDURES
Division 14.100 Required Permits and Approvals
Sec. 14.101 Approvals and Permits Required
A. Generally. Permits are required for development in the City. Other approvals or permits may be required by this UDC; other City ordinances,
rules, or regulations; state or federal law.
B. Required Permits. The required permits for both administrative and public hearing approvals are set out in Section 14.102, Administrative
Approval and Permits, and Section 14.103, Public Meeting and Hearing Approvals.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.102 Administrative Approvals and Permits
A. Generally. Administrative permits are permits that are generally issued by the Building Official without a requirement for a public meeting or
hearing.
B. Administrative Approvals and Permits Established. The administrative approvals and permits required by this UDC are set out in Table
14.102, Administrative Approvals and Permits. Other development permits may also be required by this UDC, state or federal law, or the building
code (see Chapter 150, Building Regulations, [Article 4.02] of the Cuero Code of Ordinances).
Table 14.102
Administrative Approvals and Permits
Permit Required For Timing Exceptions Issued By Cross-reference1
Site Permits
Site or Land
Clearing Permit
Clearing; grading;
excavation; fill, land
disturbing activities,
or construction of
any site
improvements
After site plan or
preliminary plat
approval, if required.
Prior to
commencement of
activity for which
permit is required
The construction of
a single-family
home on a singlefamily
lot in an
improved
subdivision;
agriculture; and
forestry
Building Official See Section
14.301D, Site and
Land Clearing
Permits
Tree Removal
Permit
Clearing; grading;
excavation; fill, land
disturbing activities,
or construction of
any site
improvements
After site plan or
preliminary plat
approval, if required.
Prior to
commencement of
activity for which
permit is required
None Building Official See Section
14.301E, Tree
Removal Permits
and Section 7.103,
Land Clearing and
Existing Trees; all
applicable
standards of this
UDC; and
conditions of
approval
Use Permits
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/438
Zoning Clearance
Permit - Permitted
Use
New land uses and
changes in land use
Prior to
establishment of a
permitted use
None Building Official See Section
14.302D, Zoning
Clearance Permits,
Permitted and
Limited Uses, and
Article 2, Land Use,
for a list of permitted
uses
Zoning Clearance
Permit - Limited
Use
New land uses and
changes in land use
Prior to
establishment of a
limited use
None Building Official,
however, can be
forwarded to the
Planning and
Zoning Commission
See Section
14.302D, Zoning
Clearance Permits,
Permitted and
Limited Uses
Temporary Use
Permit - Public and
Commercial Events
Public and
commercial events
with an expected
peak attendance of
less than 1,500
persons
Prior to installation
of temporary
buildings or
structures or
establishment of a
temporary use or
event, whichever
comes first
Public and
commercial events
with an expected
peak attendance of
more than 1,500
persons requires
City Council
approval
Building Official (or
City Council
depending on
expected event
size)
See Section
14.302E, Temporary
Use Permits and
Section 2.210,
Temporary
Permitted, Limited,
and Temporary
Conditional Use
Standards
Temporary Use
Permit -
Neighborhood
Events
Neighborhood
events including
special events
At least one week
prior to the event
None Building Official See Section
14.302E, Temporary
Use Permits and
Section 2.210,
Temporary
Permitted, Limited,
and Temporary
Conditional Use
Standard
Environmental Permits
Floodplain
Development
Permit
Construction and
development within
an area of special
flood hazard or
flood-related erosion
hazard
Prior to
commencement of
land disturbance
activity or
construction in an
area of special flood
hazard or floodrelated
erosion
hazard
None Floodplain
Administrator
See Section
14.303D, Floodplain
Development Permit
and Division 6.200,
Floodplain
Management and
Flood Damage
Prevention
Floodplain
Development
Variance
Needed for
deviations to the
floodplain
requirements
Prior to
commencement of
land disturbance
activity or
construction in an
area of special flood
hazard or floodrelated
erosion
hazard as it relates
to deviations to the
minimum standards
or requirements
being varied
None Floodplain
Administrator
See Section
14.303E, Floodplain
Development
Variance and
Division 6.200,
Floodplain
Management and
Flood Damage
Prevention
Drainage Plan Prior to installation
of drainage system
Prior to
commencement of
land disturbance
activity or
construction
Single-family
homes or duplex
homes on individual
lots in an improved
subdivision
Building Official
(after input from the
City Engineer)
See Section
14.303F, Drainage
Plan Permit, and
Section 8.302,
Stormwater
Management,
Drainage, and Low
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/438
Impact
Development
Miscellaneous Permits
Sign Permit Installation of a new
or replacement sign
Prior to installation
of sign or sign mount
Signs that do not
require a permit, as
set out in Article 9,
Signs
Building Official See Section
14.304D, Sign
Permits, and Article
9, Signs
Building Permit Construction,
reconstruction,
improvement, or
repair of any
building or structure
for which a permit is
required by this
UDC or applicable
building codes
Prior to
commencement of
construction
None Building Official See Section
14.304E, Building
Permit, and all
applicable building
codes
Fence or Garden
Wall Permit
Construction,
reconstruction,
improvement, or
repair of any fence
or wall
Prior to
commencement of
construction
None Building Official See Section
14.304F, Fence and
Garden Wall
Permits
Certificate of
Occupancy
Occupancy of a
building or structure
Upon completion of
construction or
before change in
occupancy
None Building Official See Section
14.304G, Certificate
of Occupancy;
compliance with all
applicable
standards of this
UDC; conditions of
approval; and
applicable building
code requirements
Recreational
Vehicle (RV)
Licenses
Construction,
reconstruction,
improvement, or
repair of any
recreational vehicle
(RV) park
Upon completion of
construction or
before change in
occupancy
None Building Official See Section
14.304H,
Recreational
Vehicle (RV) Park
Licenses
TABLE NOTES:
[1.] Cross-references are provided for convenience only and do not exempt the application from complying with all applicable standards of this UDC.
Site Plan permit receives review by the Department Review Committee.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.103 Public Meeting and Hearing Approvals
A. Generally. Public meeting and hearing approvals are approvals that are issued by the City after compliance with the requirements of this
UDC only after a public meeting or hearing.
B. Public Meeting and Hearing Approvals Established. The public meeting and hearing approvals established by this UDC are set out in Table
14.103, Public Meeting and Hearing Approvals. Other development permits may also be required by state or federal law, or the building code.
Table 14.103
Public Meeting and Hearing Approvals
Permit Required For Timing Exceptions Issued By Cross-reference1
Public Meeting Only/No Public Hearing Required
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/438
Plans and Plats
Preliminary plats Subdivision of
property; land
development
Preliminary plat is
required prior to
final plat
Exceptions set out
in Chapter 212,
Municipal
Regulation of
Subdivisions and
Property
Development, of
the Tex. Local Gov't
Code
City Council, upon
recommendation of
the Planning and
Zoning Commission
See Division
14.500, Plat
Approvals
Public Hearing Required
Use Permits
Conditional Use
Permit
New conditional
uses; changes to a
conditional use;
material changes to
or expansion of a
conditional use
Prior to
establishment or
modification of a
conditional use
None City Council, upon
recommendation of
the Planning and
Zoning Commission
See Section 14.402,
Conditional Use
Permits, and
Division 2.200,
Limited and
Conditional Use
Standards
Plats and Plans
Final plats Subdivision of
property; land
development
Final plat required
after preliminary
plat and prior to, or
concurrent with, site
plans
Exceptions set out
in Chapter 212,
Municipal
Regulation of
Subdivisions and
Property
Development, of
the Tex. Local Gov't
Code
City Council, upon
recommendation of
the Planning and
Zoning Commission
See Division
14.500, Plat
Approvals
Text and Map Amendments
Text Amendments Amendments to the
text of this UDC
N/A None City Council, upon
recommendation of
the Planning and
Zoning Commission
See Section 14.405,
Text Amendments
to this UDC
Rezoning Changing the
zoning district of a
parcel from one
district to another
Prior to any change
in land use other
than those that are
permitted in the
respective zoning
district
None City Council, upon
recommendation of
the Planning and
Zoning Commission
See Section 14.404,
Rezonings
Appeals and Variances
Appeals of
Administrative
Decisions
Appeals from
decisions of City
staff
Within 15 days of
the decision
appealed
None Zoning Board of
Adjustment
See Section 14.401,
Appeals of
Administrative
Decisions
Variance Deviation from the
standards of this
UDC
Prior to building
permit for
improvements for
which a variance is
Prohibited uses
shall not be allowed
by variance
Zoning Board of
Adjustment
See Section 14.406,
Variances
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/438
required;
concurrently with
other applications
for development
approval that
include variances
Other Plans
Pattern Book Design and
arrangement of
individual buildings
or dwellings in
mixed housing
neighborhoods
Upon approval of
the site plan.
None City Council, upon
recommendation of
the Planning and
Zoning Commission
See Section 14.403,
Pattern Books
TABLE NOTES:
1. Standards are provided for cross-reference purposes only, and do not exempt the application from all applicable standards of this UDC.
2. Site Plan permit receives review by the Department Review Committee.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 14.200 Standardized Development Approval Procedures
Sec. 14.201 Generally
A. Generally. The standardized approval procedures of this Division apply to all applications for development approval that are set out in
Division 14.100, Required Permits and Approvals.
B. Development Approval Process. In general, the approval procedures set out in this Division are intended to be undertaken in sequence until
the application is considered and decided by the decision-maker identified in Section 14.102, Administrative Approvals and Permits or Section
14.103, Public Meeting and Hearing Approvals.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.202 Pre-Application Conference
A. Generally.
1. A pre-application conference is recommended for all applications for development approval except applications for building
permits for single-family detached dwellings, residential accessory buildings or structures, and signs. At the pre-application
conference, the Building Official, or designee, and other members of the Development Review Committee, as appropriate, will meet
with the applicant to review preliminary materials, identify issues, and advise the applicant regarding which applications and approvals
will be required from the City and what information will have to be provided.
2. Informal meetings may be scheduled prior to a pre-application conference, at the discretion of the applicant and the City staff.
Such meetings are recommended prior to the development of site plans and preliminary plats.
B. Required Materials.
1. The applicant shall bring (or submit prior to) sufficient supporting materials to explain:
a. The location of the project;
b. The proposed uses (in general terms);
c. The proposed arrangement of buildings, parking, access points, open spaces, and drainage facilities;
d. The relationship to existing development;
e. The presence of natural resources, floodplains, and floodways on the parcel proposed for development; and
f. Any other conditions or items that the applicant believes are relevant to the processing of the application.
2. The Building Official may request that the applicant bring completed application forms (in draft form) for the types of permits or
approvals being sought.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.203 Filing of Application
A. Generally. Every application for development approval required by this UDC shall be submitted on a form approved by the Building Official,
along with the corresponding application fee.
B. Forms.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/438
1. The Building Official shall promulgate and periodically revise forms for each type of application required by this UDC.
2. Application forms shall include the specific information that is required to process each type of application. The specific
information requirements shall be established and periodically revised by the Building Official, or designee, and have the purpose of
facilitating:
a. The evaluation of applications for compliance with the standards of this UDC; and
b. The administration of this UDC.
C. Schedule. The Building Official is authorized, but not required, to establish regular intake days for any or all classifications of applications
for development approval, provided that:
1. The schedule is posted at City Hall and on the City's website; and
2. The schedule provides for applications to be submitted in accordance with the following:
a. Site permits and building permits are not limited to certain days.
b. At least twice per month for applications listed in Section 14.207, Public Meetings and Public Hearings.
3. The schedule does not restrict the timing of notices of appeal.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.204 Application Completeness Review
A. Generally. All development review applications shall be reviewed for completeness by the Building Official.
1. Applications with Submittal Deadlines. For application types that have an established submittal deadline, the application
completeness review shall be complete no later than five business days after the specified submittal deadline.
2. Applications without Submittal Deadlines. For application types that do not have an established submittal deadline, the
application completeness review shall be complete no later than five business days from the date the application is submitted.
B. Incomplete Applications.
1. Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant, along with any fee included with the application, with a written
explanation that describes in general terms the materials that must be submitted in order to complete the application.
2. An application that does not include the applicable processing fee shall not be considered complete.
3. Incomplete applications are not considered filed.
C. Complete Applications. Complete applications shall be processed according to the applicable standardized development approval
procedures of this Division.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.205 Administrative Review and Referral
A. Generally. Upon determination that an application is complete, the Building Official shall cause the application to be reviewed for technical
compliance with all applicable requirements of this UDC.
B. Recommended Revisions.
1. The Building Official shall provide comments from the Development Review Committee, and others as necessary, to the
applicant, who shall revise and resubmit materials with appropriate changes within the time required by Section 14.210, Stale
Applications.
2. The resubmittal shall not require an application fee unless both of the following conditions are met:
a. The revisions are not related to the comments or are incomplete; and
b. Repeated failure to address comments requires more than three rounds of revisions.
C. Administrative Recommendation or Decision. Promptly after submittal of a complete application that addresses City staff and other
development review comments:
1. If the application is for an administrative approval, the Building Official shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
application, as appropriate.
2. If the application is for a public meeting or public hearing approval, the Building Official shall make a recommendation regarding
the application and forward the recommendation to the next administering body, as described in Section 14.102, Public Meeting and
Public Hearing Approvals, who will consider it for further recommendation or approval.
D. Meeting Logistics.
1. If the application is for a public meeting or hearing approval, the City Secretary, in coordination with the Building Official, shall set
the application on the next available agenda of the administering body that will consider the application, consistent with the legal
requirements for public notice, as set out in Section 14.206, Public Notice.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/438
2. The Building Official shall coordinate with the applicable administering body to fix reasonable times for public hearings.
3. The Building Official shall notify the applicant regarding the time and place of a public hearing.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.206 Public Notice
A. Generally. Public notice of public hearings required by this UDC shall be provided as required by Table 14.206, Required Notice.
Table 14.206
Required Notice
Type of Public Hearing Types of Notice Required
Publication Notice Mailed Notice
Appeals of Administrative
Decisions
Published not less than 10 days
before the public hearing Not Required
Conditional Use Permits Published not less than 15 days
before the public hearing
Written notice shall be sent not
less than 15 days before such
hearing
Text Amendments to this
UDC
Published not less than 15 days
before the public hearing Not Required
Variances Published not less than 10 days
before the public hearing
Written notice shall be sent not
less than 10 days before such
hearing
Zone Changes (i.e.,
rezoning)
Published not less than 15 days
before the public hearing
Written notice shall be sent not
less than 15 days before such
hearing
B. Procedural Requirements for Notice. All notices shall describe the action proposed to be taken and the date, time, and place of the public
hearing. In addition, the following requirements apply based on the type of required notice:
1. Publication Notice. Notice shall be published in an official newspaper of general circulation in the City as provided by state law.
2. Mailed Notice.
a. Written notice shall be sent to all owners of real property which is located within 200 feet of the subject property or within
200 feet of any other abutting property under the same ownership as the subject property.
b. Measurements shall be taken inclusive of public streets.
c. Such notice may be served by using the last known address as listed on the City tax roll and depositing the notice, postage
paid, with the United States Postal Service (USPS).
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.207 Public Meetings and Hearings
A. Generally. All public meetings and hearings shall be open to the public except as otherwise provided in the Chapter 551, Open Meetings, of
the Tex. Gov't Code (also known as the “Texas Open Meetings Act”). However, not all decisions require public hearings. Therefore,
recommendations and decisions that are authorized by this UDC are classified as requiring a “public meeting” or “public hearing.”
B. Joint Meetings. Any public hearing required by this UDC or the laws of the state may be held jointly with any public hearing required to be
held by any other Board, Council, or Commission of the City, except the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Such joint meetings may be held after
publication of notice as required by law.
C. Public Meetings. Any Board, Council, or Commission that is identified in Article 13, Administrative Bodies, except the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, may establish a consent agenda. The consent agenda may consist of all matters brought before the Board, Council, or Commission
for action that does not require a public hearing. All items on the consent agenda shall be approved simultaneously by motion without comment
or debate. An item may be removed from the consent agenda prior to said approval at the request of any member of the Board, Council, or
Commission present at the meeting, or by City staff. Items removed from the consent agenda shall be considered on the regular agenda.
D. Public Hearings.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/438
1. Procedures. Boards, Councils, and Commissions will adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of public hearings. The following
general procedures shall be reflected in the adopted rules of procedure.
a. Any person may appear at a public hearing, submit evidence, and be heard.
b. If a speaker represents an organization, the body conducting the hearing may request written evidence of that person's
authority to speak on behalf of the group in regard to the matter under consideration.
c. Persons appearing at a public hearing shall identify themselves and state their address and similar information about any
organization they represent.
d. Citizens, applicants, and the City have the right to present expert witnesses.
e. The chairperson may impose a reasonable time limit on speakers and may limit testimony that is irrelevant or redundant.
2. Representation. Persons appearing before a Board, Council, or Commission may appear in person or through a representative
or agent. The representative or agent shall provide satisfactory proof of his or her authority upon the request of the City, Board,
Council, or Commission.
3. Quorum. The number of members of a Board, Council, or Commission that is required in order to constitute a quorum is set out
in the Cuero Code of Ordinances and this UDC.
E. Decisions.
1. All Decisions. Except when voice votes are authorized, a vote shall be conducted in such a manner that the public may know the
vote of each person entitled to vote.
2. Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council Decisions. Except where this UDC or Texas state statutes provides
otherwise, official action requires the favorable vote of a majority of a quorum present.
3. Zoning Board of Adjustment Decisions. In accordance with Section 211.009, Authority of Board, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, the
decisions of the Zoning Board of Adjustment are as follows.
a. In exercising its powers, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of the statutes of the state
as existing or hereafter amended, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination as ought to be made and shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
b. The Zoning Board of Adjustment Board shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions to be complied with by the
applicant. The concurring vote of 75 percent of the number of regular members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of
the application on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Chapter or to effect any variance in said Chapter.
4. Protest against change. In case of a protest against a change in zoning district, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more
either of the land included in such proposed change, or of the land within 200 feet thereof, including any intervening public street,
such amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the City Council.
F. Time Limitations for Decisions.
1. For rezoning applications, the Planning and Zoning Commission may defer its report for not more than 60 days to City Council. If
the Planning and Zoning Commission fails to finally report after 60 days to City Council, then the report is deemed to have a
recommendation of denial. If the Planning and Zoning Commission makes a recommendation after the public hearing, then the
proposal will move forward to the next regularly scheduled City Council hearing in accordance with Section 14.206, Public Notice.
2. For preliminary and final plats, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation within 30 days of when the
application has been determined complete. Once the Planning and Zoning Commission has made a recommendation, it is forwarded
to the City Council for a final consideration of approval, which must occur within 30 days of the Planning and Zoning Commission
recommendation.
G. Conditions of Approval. Some procedures set out in this UDC authorize the administering body to impose such conditions upon the
premises benefited by the approval as may be necessary to reduce, minimize or eliminate potential adverse impact upon other property in the
area, or to carry out the general purpose and intent of the Cuero Comprehensive Plan and this UDC. In such cases, any conditions attached to
approvals shall be directly related to the impacts of the proposed use or development and shall be roughly proportional in both extent and
amount to the anticipated impacts of the proposed use or development and/or shall carry out the general purpose and intent of the City's
comprehensive plan and this UDC. No conditions of approval, except for those attached to a variance approval, shall be less restrictive than the
requirements of this UDC.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.208 Continuances and Withdrawal of Applications
A. Continuances. Requests for continuance of any proceeding called for herein may be granted at the discretion of the administering body
holding the meeting. If granted, the applicant shall pay all additional costs associated with the rescheduling of the proceeding.
B. Withdrawal. Any application may be withdrawn, either in writing or on the record during the proceeding before the recommendation or
decision is made.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.209 Successive Applications
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/438
A. Generally. It is the policy of the City not to hear successive applications for the same approval after an application is denied. The limitations
of this Section prevent the consideration of successive applications.
B. Time Required Between Substantially Similar Applications. The City shall not accept any application that is substantially similar to an
application that was denied six months prior.
C. Appeal and Waiver of Restrictions.
1. The Building Official's determination that an application is substantially similar to a denied application is subject to administrative
appeal (see Section 14.401, Appeals of Administrative Decisions).
2. In the alternative to an appeal, the applicant may seek a waiver of the successive application rules from the City Council, which
may grant the waiver for good cause shown.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.210 Stale Applications
A. Generally. Applications for development approval must be diligently pursued by the applicant. Accordingly, this Section extinguishes
applications that become stale due to inaction by the applicant.
B. Expiration of Stale Applications.
1. When an action by the applicant is required for further processing of an application (e.g., submittal of supplementary
documentation), the application shall become void six months after the date that the action is requested if:
a. The applicant fails to take action; or
b. The applicant fails to request an extension of time pursuant to subsection C., below.
2. When an action by the applicant is required for further processing of an application for preliminary plat approval, the application
shall become void 30 days from receipt of the application if the application has remained dormant during that period where no activity
has occurred toward the completion of the application where changes or corrections are required or where instruments or documents
requested or required is not forthcoming within that period from the property owner or authorized agent.
3. No refunds of application fees will be issued to applicants whose applications expire pursuant to this Section.
C. Extension of Time. The time for expiration of an application may be extended by up to six additional months upon written request of the
applicant before the end of the period set out in subsection B., above.
D. Effect of Expiration. Applications that expire pursuant to this Section shall automatically become null and void, closed and discarded without
further notice or activity by the City. Any application proposal for a lot, parcel or tract, regardless of the commonality with an expired application,
will be treated as a new application, subject to requirements in effect at the time of the most recent submittal, and with new fees.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 14.300 Administrative Procedures
Sec. 14.301 Administrative Permits
A. Generally. As set out by Section 14.102, Administrative Permits and Approvals, administrative permit applications for development approval
are reviewed by the Building Official for compliance with the substantive provisions of this UDC in accordance with this Section.
B. Application. Applications for approval of an administrative permit shall be on a form approved by the Building Official.
C. Procedure. Applications for administrative permits are processed according to the sequential steps set out in Section 14.202, Pre-
Application Conference, through Section 14.205, Administrative Review and Referral, and shall be referred to other departments and agencies
and then decided by the Building Official.
D. Site or Land Clearing Permits.
1. Required. A site plan or land clearing permit is required when any of the following, but not limited to the following, exist:
a. Tree removal in excess of three protected trees within a one calendar year period.
b. Any excavation, fill, or land disturbing activity involving an earthwork volume greater than 10 cubic yards.
c. Construction, paving, or repaving of any driveway, private street, parking lot, sidewalk, or path.
d. Construction of any paved or improved hard surface larger than 100 square feet in area.
e. Construction or installation of any sewer, pipe, swale, or ditch for drainage purposes, except footing tiles or roof drainage
interior to a structure.
f. Installation of any exterior lighting for any site or use except single-family detached and duplex dwelling units.
2. Permit Conditions. All site plan or land clearing permits are issued upon the following conditions:
a. The applicant shall notify the Building Official at least five days before beginning any land disturbing activity;
b. The applicant shall install and maintain all erosion control measures;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/438
c. The applicant shall maintain all road drainage systems, stormwater drainage systems and other facilities;
d. The applicant shall remove sediment resulting from land disturbing activities from adjacent surfaces and/or drainage
courses;
e. The applicant shall allow the Building Official or designee to enter the site to verify compliance or to perform any work
necessary to bring the site into compliance with approved permit; and
f. The applicant shall submit a revised site plan or land clearing permit for approval if the nature of the project changes from
that proposed under the approved permit.
3. Decision Criteria. A site plan permit shall be issued if the Building Official finds that:
a. All applicable requirements of this UDC have been met; and
b. If any state or federal approvals are required, said approvals have been granted.
E. Tree Removal Permits.
1. Required. An administrative tree removal permit is required for the removal of more than three protected trees within a one
calendar year period.
2. Additional Application Requirements. In addition to the requirements established by the Building Official for all administrative
plans and permits, applications for an administrative tree removal permit shall be accompanied by a tree location map and site plan
showing, at a minimum, the following:
a. The location of all buildings, structures, and other improvements that are proposed;
b. The limits of the construction lines shall be shown as applicable;
c. The location of trees to be removed, located by measurements from the two nearest property lines and assigned a
reference number cross-referenced in tabular form;
d. The caliper and common name of all protected trees; and
e. Any required replacement trees, shown with caliper size and the common name and scientific name of the tree. The
scientific name will include Genus and species (e.g., Ulmus Americana).
3. Decision Criteria. An administrative tree removal permit shall be approved by the Building Official if it is demonstrated that:
a. Removal of the tree is reasonably required in order to conduct anticipated activities; or
b. A reasonable accommodation cannot be made to preserve the tree.
c. Generally, permits for tree removal shall be issued in connection with a building permit, or upon approval of a site or land
clearing permit, and shall be valid for the period of that building permit's or site permit's term. Permits for tree removal not issued
with a building permit or a site permit are void 180 days after the issue date on the permit
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.302 Administrative Use Permits
A. Generally. As set out by Section 14.102, Administrative Permits and Approvals, administrative use permit applications for development
approval are reviewed by the Building Official for compliance with the substantive provisions of this UDC in accordance with this Section.
B. Application. Applications for approval of an administrative use permit shall be on a form approved by the Building Official.
C. Procedure. Applications are processed according to the sequential steps set out in Section 14.202, Pre-Application Conference, through
Section 14.205, Administrative Review and Referral, and shall be referred to other departments and agencies and then decided by the Building
Official.
D. Zoning Clearance Permits, Permitted and Limited Uses.
1. Required. A zoning clearance permit is an administrative procedure in which the Building Official verifies that an application for
development approval of a permitted or limited use, or a building or structure that is permitted without site plan approval, complies
with the requirements of this UDC. In addition, a zoning clearance permit is required as a pre-condition to establishment of or changes
in use, as well as redevelopment, or substantial improvement of an existing building or structure.
2. Decision Criteria. The Building Official shall approve or deny the application based on the following.
a. Zoning clearance permits for permitted uses shall be approved if it is demonstrated the parcel proposed for development
meets the applicable substantive requirements of this UDC.
b. Zoning clearance permits for limited uses shall be approved if it is demonstrated that the parcel proposed for development
meets the applicable substantive requirements of this UDC, including the applicable additional standards that are set out in [sic]
for specific limited uses as set out in Division 2.200, Limited and Conditional Use Standards.
c. Zoning clearance permits may be issued simultaneously with building permits or other required permits.
E. Temporary Use Permits.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/438
1. Required.
a. Administrative approval of temporary use permits are applicable to public, commercial, and neighborhood events, as set
out in Section 2.106, Temporary Uses.
b. Proposed temporary uses that are designated as “T” in Table 2.106, Temporary Uses, shall be processed as a conditional
use permit as set out in Section 14.402, Conditional Use Permits.
2. Decision Criteria. The Building Official shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application depending on how it meets
the applicable substantive requirements of this UDC, particularly those specified for the proposed use in Section 2.106, Temporary
Uses and Section 2.210, Temporary Permitted, Limited, and Temporary Conditional Use Standards.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.303 Environmental Permits
A. Generally. As set out by Section 14.102, Administrative Permits and Approvals, administrative environmental permit applications (i.e.,
floodplain development permits and drainage permits) for development approval are reviewed by the Building Official for compliance with the
substantive provisions of this UDC in accordance with this Section.
B. Application. Applications for approval of an environmental permit shall be on a form approved by the Building Official.
C. Procedure. Applications are processed according to the sequential steps set out in Section 14.202, Pre-Application Conference, through
Section 14.205, Administrative Review and Referral, and shall be referred to other departments and agencies and then decided by the Building
Official.
D. Floodplain Development Permit.
1. Required. All development proposed within a special flood hazard area and all development constructed, installed, commenced,
improved or maintained within a special flood hazard area after the effective date (to the extent permitted by this UDC), is required to
obtain a floodplain development permit from the Floodplain Administrator in accordance with the procedures established in this
Section.
2. Additional Application Requirements. In addition to the requirements established by the Building Official for all administrative
plans and permits, applications for a floodplain development permit shall be accompanied by plans drawn to scale showing location,
dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, and the location of the foregoing in
relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
a. Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved
structures;
b. Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed;
c. A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the
floodproofing criteria of Section 6.203, Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction;
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development.
3. Decision Criteria. Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all
applicable provisions of Division 6.200, Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention, and the following relevant factors:
a. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
c. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
d. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
e. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
f. The costs of providing governmental service during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets
and bridges and public utilities and facilities such as sanitary sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
g. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site;
h. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
i. The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
j. The relationship of the proposed use to the Cuero Comprehensive Plan.
E. Floodplain Development Variance. In coordination with the Development Review Committee (DRC), the Floodplain Administrator shall
decide appeals and requests for variances from Division 6.200, Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention.
1. Exceptions and Limitations. The application of this Section is subject to the following exceptions and limitations:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/438
a. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this
Section and applicable sections of Division 6.200, Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention.
b. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair
or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
c. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result, unless the requirements of 44 CFR Part 65, Section 12 are met.
2. Prerequisites for Granting Variances.
a. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood
hazard, to afford relief.
b. Variances shall only be issued upon:
i. Showing a good and sufficient cause;
ii. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
iii. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, unless:
a. The standards of 44 CFR Part 65, Section 12 are met;
b. There are no additional threats to public safety;
c. There will be no extraordinary public expense;
d. The variance will not create a public nuisance;
e. There is no fraud on or victimization of the public; and
f. There is no conflict with other applicable laws or ordinances.
iv. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice of the consequence to the variance (e.g.,
increase in flood insurance requirements, FEMA map revision, and/or easements from other property owners).
v. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements or damage repairs in special flood
hazard areas and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
a. The criteria outlined in Division 6.200, Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention, are met;
b. The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood
and create no additional threats to public safety;
c. There is no increase in footprint from the existing structure for requests related to substantial improvement or
substantial damage request in the special flood hazard area; and
d. No new habitable structures are placed within the special flood hazard area.
3. Decision Criteria.
a. In approving floodplain variance requests, the Floodplain Administrator shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of Division 6.200, Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention, and all
of the following:
i. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
ii. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
iii. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;
iv. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
v. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
vi. The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
vii. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
viii. The availability of alternative locations, for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
ix. The relationship of the proposed use to the Cuero Comprehensive Plan and floodplain management program for that
area;
x. The impacts of such requests on other properties; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/438
xi. In the case of substantial improvements and repairs to existing structures, the continued reasonable economic use of
the property.
b. The Floodplain Administrator shall interpret these criteria in a way that strongly discourages filling within the flood fringe.
4. Conditions of Approval. Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this [sic] Section 6.201C., Purpose, the
Floodplain Administrator may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further [the] purpose and
objectives of this Section and of Division 6.200, Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention.
5. Notification. Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be
built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the
increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
6. Annotation and Recording. Floodplain variance approvals shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator at the applicant's
expense. Upon recording, the Floodplain Administrator shall annotate the official zoning map with the case number of the floodplain
variance. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all variances and shall report them, upon request, to FEMA.
F. Drainage Plan Permit.
1. Required. Every proposed development must have a drainage system that shall be designed by a registered engineer and
constructed by the developer or subdivider, who shall design and construct the drainage facilities to retain/detain stormwater to
provide a 10 percent reduction in runoff from pre-construction conditions. The design considerations for the drainage system are set
out in Section 8.302B, Stormwater Management, Drainage, and Low Impact Development.
2. Additional Procedure.
a. A drainage report and plans shall be prepared by a registered engineer engaged by the developer or subdivider for any
land that is proposed to be subdivided, developed, improved, or used to build any residential or nonresidential development or
subdivision. The study and report shall be submitted to the Building Official, together with subdivision or site plan applications
and the fee(s) established by the City Council.
b. The Building Official shall transmit the drainage study and report to the City Engineer and other applicable review, approval,
or implementing agencies.
c. Prior to authorization of any building permit, the City Engineer shall review and approve the drainage report and plans as
set out in Section 8.302B, Stormwater Management, Drainage, and Low Impact Development. The City Engineer shall have final
authority of engineer interpretations of all required submittals necessary to this UDC, and shall report the findings to the Building
Official for appropriate action regarding the subdivision or site plan applications.
d. Sufficient inspections shall be made to ensure compliance with the specifications set out in this UDC and other applicable
regulations and ordinances. A registered engineer, employed by the developer or subdivider and approved by the City Engineer,
may certify in writing to the City Engineer that such engineer has inspected each phase of the construction of the storm drainage
improvements and certified that they meet the requirements and standards of this UDC and all other applicable regulations and
ordinances of the City, as well as other applicable review, approval, or implementing agencies. The City Engineer shall make a
final inspection of the storm drainage improvements before accepting the improvements for dedication to the City for permanent
maintenance.
3. Enforcement. No zoning clearance permit or building permit shall be issued for any new building or development without a
written statement from the City Engineer stating that the storm drainage facilities and improvements meet all of the requirements of
this UDC and other applicable regulations and ordinances.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.304 Miscellaneous Permits
A. Generally. As set out by Section 14.102, Administrative Permits and Approvals, administrative miscellaneous permit applications (i.e., sign,
building, fence, certificate of occupancy, and RV park licenses) for development approval are reviewed by the Building Official for compliance
with the substantive provisions of this UDC in accordance with this Section.
B. Application. Applications for approval of a miscellaneous administrative permit shall be on a form approved by the Building Official.
C. Procedure. Applications are processed according to the sequential steps set out in Section 14.202, Pre-Application Conference, through
Section 14.205, Administrative Review and Referral, and shall be referred to other departments and agencies and then decided by the Building
Official.
D. Sign Permits.
1. Required. A sign permit is required by Section 9.101, General Provisions [sic], and is an administrative procedure in which the
Building Official verifies that an application for approval of a sign complies with the requirements of Article 9, Signs.
2. Decision Criteria.
a. If a proposed sign meets all of the standards of Article 9, Signs, and all other applicable standards of this UDC, then the
Building Official shall issue the sign permit.
b. Sign permits may be issued simultaneously with building permits or other required permits.
E. Building Permits.
1. Required. No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit, issued by the
Building Official. Nor shall any man-made change begin on improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, mining,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/438
dredging, filling, grading, paving excavations, or drilling operations, without a permit, issued by the Building Official. No building permit
shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this UDC and applicable building code except after written order from the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals. Procedure shall be according to the procedures set out in
the applicable international building code (as set out in the Cuero Code of Ordinances, which is amended from time to time) and this
Section.
2. Additional Application Requirements. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to a
scale of not less than one-eighth inch to one foot, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact size
and location of the buildings already existing, if any; and for the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The
application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the Building Official including existing or proposed
building or alteration; existing rental units the building is designated to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other
matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for enforcement of this UDC and building code.
3. Decision Criteria. The Building Official issues building permits upon a finding that the proposed building or structure, or
improvements to an existing building or structure, complies with:
a. Approved plans for development (e.g., site plans), or in the absence of a requirement for previously approved plans, this
UDC (including but not limited to setbacks, building coverage, height, and design); and
b. All applicable international building codes, as set out in the Cuero Code of Ordinances.
4. Plans. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the Building Official after he or she has marked the copy as
approved or disapproved and attested to same by his or her signature on the copy. The second copy of the plans, similarly marked,
shall be retained by the Building Official.
5. Expiration.
a. If the work described in any building permit has not begun within 90 days from the date of issuance, the building permit
shall expire and be canceled by the Building Official. Written notice shall be given to the persons affected.
b. If the work described in any building permit has not been substantially completed within one year of the date of issuance,
the building permit shall expire and be canceled by the Building Official. Written notice shall be given to the persons affected,
together with notice that further work as described in the canceled permit shall not proceed unless and until a special building
permit has been obtained.
F. Fence or Garden Wall Permits.
1. Required. A fence or garden wall permit is required for all new construction of fences or garden walls, and repair of existing
fences or garden walls that includes the following:
a. Any part of the fence or garden wall is replaced with different materials (e.g., wood is replaced with masonry); or
b. The fence or garden wall is reconfigured in any way; or
c. The height of the fence or garden wall is increased.
2. Decision Criteria. The Building Official issues fence or wall permits upon a finding that the proposed fence or wall complies with
Section 11.103, Fences and Walls, and other applicable sections of this UDC.
G. Certificates of Occupancy.
1. Required. A certificate of occupancy is required to certify that occupancy of the building is permitted.
2. Decision Criteria. A certificate of occupancy is issued after a zoning clearance permit has been issued and the Building Official
determines that all requirements of this UDC, conditions of approval, and applicable building code requirements are met.
H. Recreational Vehicle Park Licenses.
1. Required. A recreational vehicle (RV) park license is required to operate an RV park.
2. Approval Criteria. In districts where the use is conditional, review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission is
required in accordance with Division 14.400, Public Hearing Procedures. In districts where the use is limited, RV park licenses may be
issued administratively by the Building Official if it is demonstrated that the application meets the applicable substantive requirements
of this UDC.
3. Expiration. All RV park licenses expire on December 31st of every year.
4. Renewal. Renewal applications are due no later than December 15th of any given year and shall:
a. Form. Be made on a form approved by the Building Official; and
b. Changes. Include any changes in information that have occurred since the original license was issued, or the latest renewal
was granted.
5. Owner/Operator Transfer.
a. Notification. The owner/operator who is designated on the RV park license shall give notice in writing to the Building Official
within 10 days after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of interest or control (e.g., changing operators)
of any RV park.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/438
b. Review and Approval. The City will review and approve the owner/operator change if the RV park has been brought in
compliance with all standards set out in Section 4.204, Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks, as required by Section 12.108,
Nonconforming Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 14.400 Public Hearing Procedures
Sec. 14.401 Appeals of Administrative Decisions
A. Generally. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may decide appeals of dispositive administrative decisions made during the processing of
applications for approvals pursuant to this UDC, including asserted errors in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination, refusal, or
interpretation made by any administrative officer in interpreting the provisions of this UDC.
B. Applicability. Appeals of administrative decision applications may be made by any person aggrieved or by an officer, department, or board
of the City affected by any decision of the Building Official or other City staff person set out in Division 13.200, City Staff and Other Review
Bodies, provided that:
1. The action by the administrative officer is dispositive with respect to the application or a material part of it;
2. There is no other specific appellate procedure provided for the application type in this UDC or in state law (e.g., the appeal is
related to a building code requirement subject to the jurisdiction of the Building Board of Adjustment and Appeals, the action could be
handled via the variance process, etc.); and
3. The administrative appeals process is not used to address or resolve disputed questions of fact or law in connection with an
enforcement action, nor to seek relief from an enforcement action.
C. Application. Appeals of administrative decision applications shall be on a form approved by the Building Official. Such appeal shall be made
within 15 days after the decision has been rendered by the administrative official. No appeal shall be heard if the application is untimely.
D. Procedure.
1. Applications for appeals of administrative decisions are processed according to the sequential steps set out in Section 14.202,
Pre-Application Conference, through Section 14.207, Public Meetings and Hearings, and shall be referred to other departments and
agencies, as applicable, and then decided by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as set out in Section 14.103, Public Meeting and
Hearing Approvals.
2. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Zoning Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril of life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order that may be granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application or
notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
E. Decision Criteria.
1. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to review the decision of the administrative official de novo, but shall not
consider new evidence that was not available to the administrative official.
2. The Zoning Board of Zoning Adjustment shall render a final written decision within 30 days after conclusion of the public hearing
for an appeal alleging error.
3. To support its decision and resolution of the questions and issues raised in the proceedings, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall adopt findings of fact and may include mixed questions of law and fact.
F. Effect of Decision.
1. In determining an appeal alleging error, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may, as long as such action is in conformity with the
terms of this UDC, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and
may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the
Building Official or administrative official from whom the appeal is taken.
2. The Zoning Board of Adjustment, in deciding any appeal alleging error, may prescribe such supplementary conditions, limitations
and safeguards which are not in conflict with this UDC and which is deemed necessary to protect the public interest and neighboring
properties. Such supplementary conditions, limitations and safeguards shall be made a part of the proceedings and shall be
incorporated in the final decision.
G. Appeals of Zoning Board of Adjustment Decisions. Recourse from written decisions of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be filed within
10 days to the courts as set out in Section 211.011, Judicial Review of Board Decision, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.402 Conditional Uses Permits
A. Generally. A conditional use is a use that is allowed within a zoning district, but which is subject to specific standards and a public hearing
process in order to reduce the potential for incompatibility with other uses within the district. These uses commonly have the potential for various
adverse impacts such as traffic congestion, noise, visual and aesthetic impacts, which if unmitigated, could undermine the integrity of the zoning
district. The designation of a conditional use means that it is only allowed in a proposed location if all of the conditions applicable to the use, set
out in Division 2.200, Limited and Conditional Use Standards, the criteria of subsection D., below, and all of the other applicable requirements of
this UDC, or additional conditions imposed by the City Council, are met.
B. Application. Applications for a conditional use permit shall be on a form approved by the Building Official.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/438
C. Procedure.
1. In issuing a conditional use permit, applications are processed according to the sequential steps set out in Section 14.202, Pre-
Application Conference, through Section 14.207, Public Meetings and Hearings, and shall be referred to other departments and
agencies, as applicable, and then decided by the City Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, as
set out in Section 14.103, Public Meeting and Hearing Approvals. Approval.
2. In reviewing a conditional use application, the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the application in accordance with the following:
a. Approval with conditions requires the resubmission and approval of a revised plan, subject to the conditions or stipulations
of the Commission. Failure to submit a revised plan that meets the conditions of approval within two months of the date of
written notice to the applicant shall be deemed a withdrawal of the submission. A withdrawal will be noted as a denial of the
application at the next scheduled Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. An applicant may request in writing, and may be
granted additional time to make the necessary modifications if the request is made within 30 calendar days of the date of written
notice to the applicant.
b. Approval without conditions requires written findings that the plan meets all of the standards of this UDC.
c. Denial of an application requires written findings as to the reasons for denial.
D. Decision Criteria. After a public hearing and recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council may authorize the
issuance of a conditional use permit when the City Council finds all of the following conditions present.
1. That the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the conditional use will not be materially detrimental to, or endanger, the
public health, safety, morals, or general welfare;
2. That the uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood, for purposes already permitted, shall be in no
foreseeable manner substantially impaired or diminished by the establishment, maintenance, or operation of the conditional use;
3. That the establishment of the conditional use will not significantly impede the normal and orderly development and improvement
of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district;
4. That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary site improvements have been or are being provided;
5. That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress or egress, so designed as to minimize traffic congestion
in the public streets; and
6. That the conditional use shall conform to all applicable yard area regulations of the district in which it is located.
E. Additional Conditions. The Building Official and the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend; and the City Council may attach;
such conditions, restrictions, and duration upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, and operation of the conditional use as
deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community; and to secure compliance with the standards and
requirements specified in this Section. In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the City Council shall require such evidence and
guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
F. Effect of Decision.
1. The granting of a conditional use does not create a right to the use and the conditional use may be canceled at the City Council's
sole discretion.
2. No application for a conditional use that has been denied wholly or in part by the City Council shall be resubmitted for a period of
six months from the date of said denial.
G. Legal Status of Approval. Once an approval is granted, the plan shall not be modified in any manner without submitting a revised plan for
approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The project must be built in accordance with the approved plan.
H. Annotation of Official Zoning Map. If the application is approved, the official zoning map shall be annotated to reference the approval by
case number.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.403 Pattern Books
A. Generally. The pattern book is a design guide for a specific development. It is submitted by the applicant to address the design and
arrangement of individual buildings or dwellings. The pattern book ensures that the development will be attractive and harmonious. The pattern
book:
1. Provides a palette of development styles and materials (e.g., addresses the design elements and not the use or intensity of
development);
2. Provides details of streetscape design and landscaping; and
3. May provide for specific modifications of the requirements of this UDC in order to ensure that the development is a cohesive
whole and meets stated design objectives.
B. Applicability. An application for pattern book approval shall accompany all applications for approval of alternative subdivision and
development design standards pursuant to Article 3, Residential and Nonresidential Development Yield, for any mixed housing neighborhood.
C. Application. Applications for a pattern book shall be on a form approved by the Building Official, and shall include the following elements:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/438
1. A map showing the general location of streets, private lots, and commonly owned areas (including but not limited to parks,
drainage, and bufferyards), which shows the general locations of the subdistricts within the development, if any.
2. A description of each type of housing that is proposed, and for the mixed housing neighborhood.
3. Standards for lot dimensions for each type of housing, expressed either as lot width and lot depth or lot width and lot area. Such
standards may be expressed as averages.
4. Standards for setbacks or build-to lines for front, street side, interior side, and rear lot lines, which may be different for principal
buildings and accessory buildings. Such standards may be presented in tabular or illustrated format.
5. Standards for setbacks or courtyards, if different from areas between required setback lines and lot lines.
6. Standards for the design of each type of building that is proposed in the development, which shall include:
a. Architectural style/typology;
b. Typical architectural elements for each style/typology; and
c. Typical building materials for each style/typology.
7. A collection of illustrative elevations for each architectural style/typology, with standards that will ensure diversity of architectural
presentation; or a collection of proposed elevations for each architectural style/typology, which demonstrates diversity of architectural
presentation.
8. Standards for fences and garden walls, if different from those set out in Section 11.103, Fences and Walls.
9. Standards for accessory buildings, if different from those set out in Section 11.101, Accessory Buildings and Structures.
D. Procedure. Pattern books are processed according to the sequential steps set out in Section 14.202, Pre-Application Conference, through
Section 14.207, Public Meetings and Hearings, and shall be referred to other departments and agencies, as applicable, and then decided by the
City Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, as set out in Section 14.103, Public Meeting and Hearing
Approvals.
E. Decision Criteria.
1. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a pattern book depending how it conforms to
the objectives set out in Article 3, Residential and Nonresidential Development Yield.
2. Conditions of approval of a pattern book shall not be used to:
a. Limit density, intensity, amount of open space, or land use in a manner that is different from the requirements of this UDC;
or
b. Address the design of the development in ways that are covered in the site plan review. The pattern book approval shall
defer any overall plan layout issues (other than placement of buildings on individual lots or requested variations to the area or
width of lots) to be addressed in the site plan approval.
F. Effect of Decision. Pattern books may be approved, approved with conditions, or rejected.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.404 Rezonings
A. Generally. A rezoning is the change of the zoning classification on the official zoning map that applies to a lot or parcel proposed for
development.
B. Application.
1. Applications for a rezoning shall be on a form approved by the Building Official and may be initiated by:
a. Motion of the City Council;
b. Motion of the Planning and Zoning Commission; or
c. Petition of the owner or owners of the property which is the subject of the proposed zoning change.
2. The Building Official may require the submission of such other information as may be necessary to permit the informed exercise
of judgment under the criteria for the review of the rezoning application. Such information shall be related to the scale, location, and
impacts of the rezoning application and may include, by way of illustration and not limitation, analysis of the capacity of the land to
support development (e.g., soil characteristics and hydrology) or the additional impacts (or reduction in impacts) that may be created
by changing the district designation, in terms of traffic (trip generation), drainage (flooding), visual, aesthetic, and land use adjacency
impacts, water and wastewater use and availability, and other information determined by the City as necessary to make an informed
analysis and decision.
C. Procedure. Rezonings are processed according to the sequential steps set out in Section 14.202, Pre-Application Conference, through
Section 14.207, Public Meetings and Hearings, and shall be decided by the City Council after recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, as set out in Section 14.103, Public Meeting and Hearing Approvals, including the following:
1. Staff Review. The Building Official shall review each proposed rezoning in light of the approval criteria of subsection D., below,
and refer the application to other departments or entities as deemed necessary. Based on the results of those reviews, the Building
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/438
Official shall provide a report and recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Planning and Zoning Commission Recommendation.
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed rezoning. Following the hearing, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a final report to the City Council.
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission may defer its report for not more than 60 days to the City Council. If the Planning
and Zoning Commission fails to finally report after 60 days to City Council, then the report is deemed to have a recommendation
of denial. If the Planning and Zoning Commission makes a recommendation after the public hearing, then the proposal will move
forward to the next regularly scheduled City Council hearing within the confines of Section 14.206, Public Notice.
c. Upon receiving the report of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Secretary or City Attorney shall draft an
ordinance and forward the ordinance to the City Council for consideration.
D. Decision Criteria. The City Council may approve an application for a rezoning after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning
Commission if:
1. The proposed zoning is preferable to the existing zoning in terms of its likelihood of advancing the goals, objectives, and policies
of the Cuero Comprehensive Plan or another adopted land use or area plan, including but not limited to small area or redevelopment
plans;
2. The proposed zoning is consistent with the future land use plan of the Cuero Comprehensive Plan (a future land use plan
amendment may be processed concurrently with the rezoning);
3. The proposed change is consistent with the implementation of existing or pending plans for providing streets, water and
wastewater, other public utilities, and the delivery of public services to the area in which the parcel proposed for a rezoning is located;
4. The range of uses and the character of development that is allowed by the proposed zone will be compatible with the properties
in the immediate vicinity of the parcel proposed for a rezoning, and the parcel proposed for a rezoning has sufficient dimensions to
accommodate reasonable development that complies with the requirements of this UDC, including parking and buffering
requirements; and
5. The pace of development and/or the amount of vacant land currently zoned for comparable development in the vicinity suggests
a need for the proposed rezoning in order to ensure an appropriate inventory of land to maintain a competitive land market that
promotes economic development.
E. Additional Conditions. A request for a rezoning may be conditioned upon adherence to a site plan submitted by the applicant, which may
limit the uses that are permitted on the site. The site plan may be processed concurrently with the rezoning request if it meets all the applicable
requirements of this UDC.
F. Effect of Decision.
1. The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed rezoning and, at the close of the hearing shall, based upon the
recommendations of the Building Official and/or Planning and Zoning Commission:
a. Approve the rezoning by ordinance;
b. Approve the rezoning by ordinance with modifications (e.g., change the zoning on a designated portion of the property or
change the zoning to another designation);
c. Deny the rezoning; or
d. Refer the proposed rezoning back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration.
2. No application for rezoning shall be considered within six months of denial of a request by the City Council for the same
classification on the same property.
G. Protest Against Rezoning. In case of a protest against a rezoning, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the land included in
such proposed rezoning, or of the land within 200 feet thereof, including any intervening public street, such amendment shall not become
effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the City Council.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.405 Text Amendments to this UDC
A. Generally. The City Council may amend the text of this UDC in accordance with the procedures set out in this Section and Section 14.103,
Public Meeting and Hearing Approvals, to implement the Cuero Comprehensive Plan, as may be amended from time to time, conform to state or
federal legal requirements, address changing or changed conditions, or otherwise advance the public health, safety, and welfare of the City.
B. Initiation of Amendment. Petitions to amend the text of this UDC shall be made to the Building Official. The City Council and any other body
that is described in Article 13, Administrative Bodies, may initiate an amendment by motion.
C. Procedure. Text amendments are processed according to the sequential steps set out in Section 14.202, Pre-Application Conference,
through Section 14.207, Public Meetings and Hearings, and shall be decided by the City Council after recommendation of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, as set out in Section 14.103, Public Meeting and Hearing Approvals, including the following:
1. Staff Review. The Building Official shall review each proposed amendment in light of the approval criteria of subsection D.,
below, and refer the application to other departments or entities as deemed necessary. Based on the results of those reviews, the
Building Official shall provide a report and recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/438
2. Planning and Zoning Commission Recommendation.
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed text amendment. Following the hearing,
the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a final report to the City Council.
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission may defer its report for not more than 60 days to the City Council. If the Planning
and Zoning Commission fails to finally report after 60 days to City Council, then the report is deemed to have a recommendation
of denial. If the Planning and Zoning Commission makes a recommendation after the public hearing, then the proposal will move
forward to the next regularly scheduled City Council hearing within the confines of Section 14.206, Public Notice.
c. Upon receiving the report of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Secretary or City Attorney shall draft an
ordinance and forward the ordinance to the City Council for consideration.
D. Decision Criteria. Recommendations and decisions regarding petitions to amend the text of this UDC are legislative in nature, but shall be
based on consideration of all the following criteria:
1. The proposed amendment will help to implement the adopted Cuero Comprehensive Plan, or, if it addresses a topic that is not
addressed or not fully developed in the Cuero Comprehensive Plan, the proposed amendment does not impair the implementation of
the adopted Cuero Comprehensive Plan when compared to the existing UDC.
2. The proposed amendment is consistent with the stated purposes of this UDC.
3. The proposed amendment will maintain or advance the public health, safety, or general welfare.
4. The proposed amendment will help to mitigate adverse impacts of the use and development of land on the natural or built
environment, including, but not limited to mobility, air quality, water quality, noise levels, stormwater management, wildlife protection,
and vegetation; or will be neutral with respect to these issues.
5. The proposed amendment will advance the strategic objectives of the City Council, such as fiscal responsibility, efficient use of
infrastructure and public services, and other articulated City objectives.
E. Effect of Decision. Upon receipt of the final report from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council shall vote to approve,
approve with amendments, or reject the proposed amendment, based on the approval criteria in subsection D., above. The City Council also
may refer the proposed amendment back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration, continue a public hearing, or
postpone action on an application for a period not to exceed 90 days.
F. No Retroactive Cure of Violations. The amendment of the text of this UDC may transform a legally nonconforming situation into a
conforming one. However, no petition for a text amendment shall be used to cure a violation of any part of this UDC.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.406 Variances
A. Generally. The variance process is intended to provide limited relief from the requirements of this UDC in those cases where strict
application of a particular requirement will create an unnecessary hardship by preventing the use and development of land in a reasonable
manner that is otherwise allowed under this UDC.
B. Applicability. Additional variances that are within the jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and are therefore, subject to this
Section include:
1. Building Code Variances. Building code variances (variances to the requirements of adopted international building codes which
are set out in the Cuero Code of Ordinances). Variances to the requirements of the adopted building code are under the purview of
the Building Board of Adjustments and Appeals.
2. Variances to Imposed Conditions of Approval. Variances from the terms of one or more conditions of approval imposed by an
administering body described in Article 13, Administrative Bodies. Modifications to conditions of approval shall be sought from the
body that granted the approval.
3. Variances Regarding Nonconformities. Variances that would have the effect of make [making] existing nonconforming or illegal
construction (buildings and structures), site improvements, parking, or landscaping conforming. Nonconforming situations are subject
to the requirements of Article 12, Nonconformities.
4. Floodplain Variances. Variances to the requirements of Division 6.200, Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention,
which are handled by the Building Official, in consultation with the City Engineer (see Section 14.303, Environmental Permits).
5. Use Variances. Variances shall not be used to allow a use in a zoning district in which the use is prohibited or which would
constitute a change in district boundaries (i.e., variances to Article 2, Land Use).
6. Conditional Use Variances. Variances shall not be used to modify any requirements that are set out in Division 2.200, Limited
and Conditional Use Standards, with respect to an application for conditional use approval.
7. Variances to Other Laws or Regulations. State and/or federal laws and/or regulations may not be varied by the City unless such
authority is expressly granted to the City.
C. Application.
1. Applications for a variance shall be on a form approved by the Building Official.
2. It is the obligation of an applicant, who bears the burden of proof, to present facts about the circumstances which would justify a
variance in convincing fashion so that the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be satisfied that the request meets each of the criteria set
out in subsection F., below.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/438
D. Procedure. Variances are processed according to the sequential steps set out in Section 14.202, Pre-Application Conference, through
Section 14.207, Public Meetings and Hearings, and shall be referred to other departments and agencies, as applicable, and then decided by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as set out in Section 14.103, Public Meeting and Hearing Approvals.
E. Additional Conditions. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may impose such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a
variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards established in this Section, to reduce or minimize the effect of such variations upon
other property in the neighborhood and to better carry out the general intent of this UDC.
F. Decision Criteria. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a variance from the strict application of this UDC if the variance is not
prohibited by subsection B., above, and the Zoning Board of Adjustment makes findings based upon the evidence presented to it in each specific
case that all of the following are demonstrated:
1. The variance is consistent with the policy directions of the Cuero Comprehensive Plan.
2. The variance will not permit an intensity of use of land that is not permitted in the applicable district; and
3. The variance will not permit a use of land, building, or structure that is not otherwise permitted in the applicable district;
4. The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible a permitted use of the land, building, or structure;
5. Granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this UDC and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare;
6. A literal interpretation of the provisions of this UDC would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other residents of
the district in which the property is located;
7. Granting the variance will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied to other lands or structures in the same
district;
8. The need for a variance or the extraordinary and exceptional conditions do not result from the actions of the applicant; and
9. There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the subject property because of its size, shape, or topography
that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district.
G. Effect of Decision.
1. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a variance.
2. An application for a variance may be processed simultaneously with other required applications, and approval of the other
applications may be a condition of approval of the variance. However, each application shall be processed on its own independent
merits according to the standards applicable to the application.
3. All applicants requesting a variance from the provisions of this UDC shall be notified in writing of the final action taken by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
4. An approved variance shall be accompanied by an order of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to direct the issuance of a permit
within 10 business days.
H. Annotation of Official Zoning Map. If the application is approved, the official zoning map shall be annotated to reference the approval by
case number.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 14.500 Plat Approvals
Sec. 14.501 General Provisions for All Plat Approvals
A. Generally. Preliminary, final, and minor plats may be approved if they meet the applicable standards of this Division.
B. Purpose. The procedures and standards for the development, layout, and design of subdivisions of land within the City, as authorized by
Chapter 212, Municipal Regulation of Subdivisions and Property Development, of the Tex. Local Gov't. Code, are intended to:
1. Promote and develop the utilization of the land in a manner to assure the best possible community environment in accordance
with the Cuero Comprehensive Plan, and other long-range plans of the City;
2. Guide and assist the developers in the correct procedures to be followed and to inform them of the standards which shall be
required;
3. Protect the public interest by supervising the location, design, class, and type of streets, sidewalks, utilities and essential areas
and services required; and
4. Protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare.
C. Concept Plan May Be Required. Where the parcel proposed for development or subdivision constitutes a unit of a larger tract owned or
controlled by the subdivider which is intended to be subsequently subdivided as additional phases of development, a concept plan shall be
required showing the conceptual layout of the entire area of the tract, including the tentative proposal layout of streets, blocks, drainage, water,
sewerage and other improvements for such areas. Concept plans shall be subject to the following:
1. Prior to filing a preliminary plat, a subdivider who intends to submit a sequence of preliminary plats of a proposed development
shall submit a concept plan of the entire development for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by the City
Council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/438
2. A subdivider may, at his or her own risk, submit the first preliminary plat along with a concept plan for concurrent review.
However, such plan must be approved before any preliminary plat of such development is approved.
3. When a concept plan is required, every preliminary plat must substantially comply with the approved concept plan.
D. General Decision Considerations. In addition to that which may be individually specified per plat type, the administering body may approve
or conditionally approve plats only if it finds that the plat:
1. Conforms to any and all applicable provisions of this UDC;
2. Promotes the public health, safety and general welfare;
3. Provides for the proper arrangement of streets in relation to existing or proposed streets and conforms to the City's Thoroughfare
Plan (as adopted in the Cuero Comprehensive Plan) for the extension of roads, streets, and public highways within the City, taking
into account access to and extension of public utilities;
4. Provides for the efficient movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
5. Ensures adequate and appropriately placed utilities;
6. Provides access for firefighting apparatus as determined by the Fire Chief;
7. Provides light and air and avoids congestion;
8. Facilitates the orderly and efficient layout and use of the land;
9. Delineates and labels all building and lot lines for all residential and nonresidential uses, including required setbacks; and
10. Advances the goals and policies of the Cuero Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this UDC, including, if applicable,
current and future streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, and public utilities.
E. Acceptance of Required Improvements.
1. Installation. After the minor, final, or other applicable plat has been approved, and associated site plans and construction
specifications have been approved, the developer shall cause the contractor to install all required improvements in accordance with
the requirements of this Section and the approved plans and specifications.
2. Inspection. The City shall have the authority to inspect work and materials furnished as part of the work associated with
construction of all public and other required improvements (e.g., required landscape plantings). Inspections made by the City are for
the sole benefit of the City and do not relieve the contractor, owner, or developer of any obligations or liabilities.
3. As-Builts. For required public improvements (e.g., new streets and public utilities), a one-year maintenance bond from each
contractor in the amount of 10 percent of the contract price is due upon receipt by the City. The following plans and documents shall
be submitted:
a. Three sets of blackline “as built” plans; and
b. One set of “as built” sepias certified “as built” by the developer's engineer; and
c. A letter from each contractor specifying compliance with the terms of this Division.
4. Acceptance and Approval. The City Manager shall receive and approve for the City the title, use, and maintenance of the
improvements that are dedicated to and accepted by the City.
5. Effect on Certificate of Occupancy. Except as otherwise agreed by the City, no certificate of occupancy for any habitable
structure shall be issued until all required improvements have been completed and finally accepted by the City, including
improvements which will be dedicated to the City for future maintenance and/or ownership.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.502 Administrative Plats
A. Generally. As provided for in Section 212.0065, Delegation of Approval Authority, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, the City Council delegates
the following platting and subdivision authority to the Building Official for administrative approval.
B. Application. Applications for approval of an administrative plat shall be on a form approved by the Building Official.
C. Procedure. Applications are processed according to the sequential steps set out in Section 14.202, Pre-Application Conference, through
Section 14.205, Administrative Review and Referral, and shall be referred to other departments and agencies and then decided by the Building
Official.
D. Address Plats. The address plat is an exact duplicate of the plat exhibit with the addition of a label that reads “address plat” and labels the
addresses for each lot or tract in the subdivision. The purpose of the address plat is to facilitate the effective provision of adequate public safety
services through the uniform addressing of all properties and addressable buildings within the City.
1. Required. An address plat is required with the submittal of the minor or final plat documentation.
2. Decision Criteria. The Building Official, in coordination with other departments, approves street names and assigns addresses.
a. The address plat must be signed by the owner(s) of the parcel proposed for development and the signature(s) need to be
notarized.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/438
b. The address plat is routed the same as the plat but is not recorded with the plat.
c. When multiple sheets are needed, a cover sheet may be required which shows a composite of the subdivision.
E. Amending Plats. An amending plat is an administratively approved plat which is used to supersede an approved plat without requiring its
vacation. Amending plats do not require public notice to adjacent property owners or a public hearing.
1. Decision Criteria. As set out in Section 212.016, Amending Plat, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, the Building Official shall approve
an amending plat if it implements any of the following purposes and, if standards or limitations are provided, complies with said
standards or limitations:
a. To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat;
b. To add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat;
c. To correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat;
d. To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for
setting monuments;
e. To show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or that is shown
incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat;
f. To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the City Council, including lot
numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of abutting recorded plats;
g. To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two abutting lots if:
i. Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat;
ii. Neither lot is abolished;
iii. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants, conditions or restrictions; and
iv. The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat;
h. To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement;
i. To relocate one or more lot lines between one or more abutting lots if:
i. The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
ii. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants, conditions or restrictions; and
iii. The amendment does not increase the number of lots;
j. To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision
covered by the preceding plat if:
i. The changes:
a. Do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the City;
b. Do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants, conditions or restrictions; and
c. Affect an area that approved by the City Council as a residential improvement area; or
k. To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if:
i. The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
ii. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants, conditions or restrictions;
iii. The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
iv. The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of City
public utilities.
2. Referral. The Building Official shall not deny an application for an amending plat. If the Building Official does not approve the
proposed amending plat it shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
F. Minor Plats. A minor plat is an administratively approved plat that involves four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street which does not
require the creation of any new street or the extension of public utilities.
1. Decision Criteria.
a. Approval by the Building Official shall be in lieu of the procedures set out in Section 14.504, Final Plats
b. The Building Official shall approve the minor plat with or without conditions.
2. Referral. The Building Official shall not deny an application for a minor plat. If the Building Official does not approve the proposed
minor plat it shall be referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/438
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.503 Preliminary Plats
A. Generally. No final plat shall be approved until a preliminary plat is approved pursuant to this Section.
B. Applicant. An application for a preliminary plat may be made only by persons with a financial, contractual, or proprietary interest in the
property for which the preliminary plat approval is requested. If the applicant is not the owner of the subject property, the applicant shall submit a
notarized authorization letter of the owner.
C. Application Requirements. An application for preliminary plat approval shall be submitted on a form approved by the Building Official, and
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Size. The preliminary plat shall be prepared on sheets which are a maximum size of 24 inches by 36 inches, regardless of the
size of the subdivision.
2. Scale. The scale should be 100 feet or 50 feet to the inch (e.g., one inch equals 100 feet or one inch equals 50 feet) but may be
200 feet to the inch (e.g., one inch equals 200 feet) in cases of large development which would exceed the dimensions of a sheet
[with] 100 foot scale.
3. Minimum Requirements. The following data shall be shown on the preliminary plat:
a. Record lot lines, survey abstract lines, corporation line, and the location of existing utility easements, streets, and highways
traversing, abutting, or within 200 feet of the property lines;
b. The proposed locations, widths, and names of streets and proposed locations and widths of alleys, easements, walkways,
open spaces, and lots;
c. The title of the subdivision or addition, the name and address of the subdividers, and the engineer, surveyor, or planner
platting the tract;
d. The north arrow, scale, and date;
e. Lot or tract numbers and City block numbers, addition names, and dates recorded;
f. Acreage within subdivision and the total number of lots;
g. Boundary of the subdivision, with bearings and distance;
h. Topographic information shall include contour lines at two-foot intervals as determined from the U.S. Geological Survey
datum or on the ground survey;
i. Proposed uses of the land within the subdivision; and
j. Preliminary drainage report prepared by a licensed civil or geotechnical engineer, or registered land surveyor.
4. Water and Sewer Service. Where a preliminary plat proposes to divide a tract in a manner that creates any lots that are intended
for residential purposes and are five acres or less, then the owner of the tract must:
a. Either:
i. Include on the plat or have attached to the plat a document containing a description of the water and sewer service
facilities that will be constructed or installed to service the subdivision and a statement of the date by which the facilities
will be fully operable; and
ii. Have attached to the plat a document prepared by an engineer registered to practice in the State of Texas, certifying
that the water and sewer service facilities described by the plat or on the document attached to the plat are in compliance
with the model rules adopted under Section 16.343, Minimum State Standards and Model Political Subdivision Rules, of
the Texas Water Code;
b. Or:
i. Include on the plat a statement that water and sewer service facilities are unnecessary for the subdivision; and
ii. Have attached to the plat a document prepared by an engineer registered to practice in the State of Texas, certifying
that water and sewer service facilities are unnecessary for the subdivision under the model rules adopted under Section
16.343, Minimum State Standards and Model Political Subdivision Rules, of the Texas Water Code.
5. On-Site Groundwater. The following requirements apply if the proposed subdivision pertains to lots that are to remain in
agricultural use only and are not intended for residential use, and the source of the water supply intended for the subdivision is
groundwater under the land to be subdivided:
a. The plat shall have attached to it a statement that conforms to the requirements of Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (“TCEQ”) rules with respect to the implementation of Section 212.0101, Additional Requirements: Use of Groundwater,
of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, which certifies that:
i. The plat is prepared by an engineer or a geoscientist who are both licensed to practice in the state; and
ii. Adequate groundwater is available for the subdivision.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/438
b. The applicant shall provide to the Texas Water Development Board, and any groundwater conservation district that includes
in the district's boundaries any part of the subdivision, information that would be useful in:
i. Performing groundwater conservation district activities;
ii. Conducting regional water planning;
iii. Maintaining the state's groundwater database; or
iv. Conducting studies for the state that are related to groundwater.
D. Procedure. Preliminary plat applications are processed according to the sequential steps set out in Section 14.202, Pre-Application
Conference, through Section 14.207, Public Meetings and Hearings, and shall be referred to other departments and agencies, as applicable, and
then decided by the City Council, upon the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, as set out in Section 14.103, Public
Meeting and Hearing Approvals.
1. Staff Review. The Building Official shall review each preliminary plat in light of the decision criteria set out in Section 14.501,
General Provisions for all Plat Approvals, and subsection E., below, and refer the application to other departments or entities as
deemed necessary. Based on the results of those reviews, the Building Official shall provide a report and recommendation to the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
2. Planning and Zoning Commission Recommendation. As required by Section 212.009, Approval Procedures, of the Tex. Local
Gov't Code, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public meeting on the preliminary plat within 30 days from when the
application is determined complete, pursuant to Section 14.204, Application Completeness Review. Following the public meeting, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a final report to the City Council. A plat is considered approved by the City unless it is
disapproved during that time period. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide a recommendation for approval, approval
with conditions, or denial to the City Council. If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends approval with conditions, they shall
state its recommendation as “conditional”; if disapproved, they shall state its reasons for the recommendation of denial.
3. City Council Decision. As required by Section 212.009, Approval Procedures, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, the City Council shall
hold a public meeting to act on the preliminary plat within 30 days of the date of the recommendation for approval by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. A plat is considered approved by the City unless the City Council disapproves the plat during that time period.
E. Decision Criteria.
1. The administering body shall review the preliminary plat using the decision criteria set out in Section 14.501, General Provisions
for all Plat Approvals, and this Section.
2. The Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council may require any conditions necessary to ensure that future approval
of the final plat will conform to the requirements of this UDC. If the preliminary plat conforms to this UDC without the establishment of
approval conditions, no conditions shall be imposed.
F. Effect.
1. A preliminary plat approval authorizes an applicant to file an application for a final plat approval.
2. The action of both the City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary
plat, along with any conditions required by City Council (see subsection E.2., above). One copy shall be returned to the applicant and
the other retained by the City.
3. If a plat is approved, the City shall endorse the plat with a certificate indicating the approval. The certificate must be signed by:
a. The City Council's presiding officer and attested by the City Secretary; or
b. A majority of the members of the City Council.
4. If the City Council fails to act on a plat within the prescribed period, the City on request shall issue a certificate stating the date
the plat was filed and that the City Council failed to act on the plat within the period. The certificate is effective in place of the
endorsement required by subsection D.3., above.
G. Expiration and Extension.
1. Expiration. The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for one year unless reviewed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and City Council in the light of new or significant information which would necessitate the revision of the preliminary plat.
2. Extension. If no development or change in requirements has occurred which would affect the proposed plat at the end of the
year of an effective approval, the City Council may extend its approval another year without the submission of a new preliminary plat
by reapproving the original preliminary plat. No filing fee is required for the reapproval.
H. Amendments. All amendments to the preliminary plat shall be approved in the same manner as the original preliminary plat.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.504 Final Plats
A. Generally. Final plats authorized by Chapter 212, Municipal Regulation of Subdivision and Property Development, of the Tex. Local Gov't
Code, shall be processed as provided in this Section.
B. Applicant. An application for a final plat may be made only by persons with a financial, contractual, or proprietary interest in the property for
which the final plat approval is requested. If the applicant is not the owner of the subject property, the applicant shall submit a notarized
authorization letter of the owner.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/438
C. Application Requirements. An application for final plat approval shall be submitted on a form approved by the Building Official, and shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. All final plats shall be submitted on sheets 24 inches by 36 inches and to a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch or larger.
Where more than one sheet is required to encompass the final plat an index sheet, 24 inches by 36 inches, shall be filed showing the
entire subdivision together with the complete dedication, attests, dates, titles and seals, on one sheet.
2. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be indicated by the distinct dash line and corner markers by individual symbols.
3. The length and bearing of all straight lines, radii, arc lengths, tangent length, and central angles of all curves shall be indicated
along the boundary line of the subdivision and each block. All dimensions along the lines of each lot shall be shown. The curve data
pertaining to block or lot boundary may be placed in a curve table at the base of the plat.
4. The names of all abutting subdivisions, the dimensions of all abutting lots, lot and block numbers, and accurate reference ties to
courses and distances of at least two recognized land corners shall be shown.
5. The names and accurate location of all streets adjoining, abutting or within 200 feet of the subdivision shall be shown.
6. The location and dimension of any utility easement adjoining or abutting the subdivision or proposed within the subdivision shall
be shown.
7. All streets must intersect at 90 degrees.
8. All lots, blocks, streets, alleys, pipelines, watercourses, easements, rights-of-way, reserves (e.g., open spaces) and total area,
number of lots and number of blocks.
9. Building lines (i.e., setback lines).
10. The description and location of all survey monuments placed in the addition or subdivision shall be shown. In all subdivisions
and additions corners shall be established at the corner of each block in the subdivision consisting of:
a. An iron rod or pipe not less than three-fourths (3/4) inches in diameter and 24 inches deep flush with the top of the
sidewalk;
b. Lot corner monuments shall be placed at all lot corners except corners which are also block corners, consisting of iron rods
or pipes of a diameter of not less than a one-half (1/2) inch and 18 inches deep set flush with the top of the sidewalk; and
c. Curve point markers shall be established of the same specifications as lot corners; all lot corners shall be installed prior to
filing of the final plat.
11. The final plat shall show a title including the name of the addition or subdivision, the name and address of the owner and
engineer or surveyor, scale and location of subdivision with reference to original land grant or survey and abstract number and a north
arrow with true or magnetic north.
12. A certificate of ownership giving a metes and bounds description of the property, dedication of all streets, alleys, parkways and
parks where donated to the City and dedication or reservation of all easements and drainageways to the public use, signed and
acknowledged before a Notary Public by the owner of the land, shall appear on the face of the plat or index sheet of the plats where
two or more sheets are required.
13. A waiver of any claim(s) against the City for damages occasioned by the establishment of grades or the alteration of the surface
of any portion of existing streets and alleys to conform to grades established in the subdivision.
14. The certificate of the licensed professional engineer or licensed public surveyor who surveyed or mapped and monumented the
land, which certificates shall be attested before a Notary Public, shall be placed on the face of the plat on index sheets of the plats
together with the seals of the engineer or surveyor and Notary Public. Printed seals and signatures are prohibited except for extra
prints that the owner or developer may need certified for other purposes. The certificate of the engineer or surveyor to be placed on
the plat shall be as follows “KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENT: That I, do hereby certify that I prepared this plat from an actual
and accurate survey of the land and that the corner monuments shown thereon were properly placed under my personal supervision,
in accordance with the subdivision regulations of the City.”
15. At the time the developer files the final plat with the City, he or she shall file a certificate showing that all taxes have been paid
on the tract to be subdivided and pay the filing fee.
16. The final plat shall be accompanied by a written agreement of the developer to install improvements required by this UDC
together with a performance bond (corporate or personal surety), letter of credit, or certified check in a sufficient amount to assure the
completion of all the required improvements.
17. Any covenants, conditions and restrictions (CCRs) proposed for the property.
D. Procedure. Final plat applications are processed according to the sequential steps set out in Section [14.207], Public Meetings and
Hearings, and shall be referred to other departments and agencies, as applicable, and then decided by the City Council, upon the
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, as set out in Section 14.103, Public Meeting and Hearing Approvals.
1. Staff Review. The Building Official shall review each final plat in light of the decision criteria set out in Section 14.501, General
Provisions for all Plat Approvals, and subsection E., below, and refer the application to other departments or entities as deemed
necessary. Based on the results of those reviews, the Building Official shall provide a report and recommendation to the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
2. Planning and Zoning Commission Recommendation. As required by Section 212.009, Approval Procedures, of the Tex. Local
Gov't Code, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public meeting on the final plat within 30 days from when the
application is determined complete, pursuant to Section 14.204, Application Completeness Review. Following the public meeting, the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/438
Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a final report to the City Council. A plat is considered approved by the City unless it is
disapproved during that time period. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide a recommendation for approval, approval
with conditions, or denial to the City Council. If the Planning and Zoning Commission recommends approval with conditions, they shall
state its recommendation as “conditional”; if disapproved, they shall state its reasons for the recommendation of denial.
3. City Council Decision. As required by Section 212.009, Approval Procedures, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, the City Council shall
hold a public meeting to act on the final plat within 30 days of the date of the recommendation for approval by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. A plat is considered approved by the City unless the City Council disapproves the plat during that time period.
E. Decision Criteria.
1. The administering body shall review the final plat using the decision criteria set out in Section 14.501, General Provisions for all
Plat Approvals, and this Section.
2. The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and incorporate all changes, directions, and additions imposed by
the City Council. The final plat shall not be released for filing until detailed engineering site plans have been approved by the City.
3. If so desired by the developer, the final plat may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he or she
proposes to record and then develop, provided the portion conforms to all the requirements of this Section.
F. Effect.
1. The action of both the City Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be noted on two copies of the final plat. One
copy shall be returned to the applicant and the other retained by the City.
2. If a plat is approved, the City shall endorse the plat with a certificate indicating the approval. The certificate must be signed by:
a. The City Council's presiding officer and attested by the City Secretary; or
b. A majority of the members of the City Council.
3. If the City Council fails to act on a plat within the prescribed period, the City on request shall issue a certificate stating the date
the plat was filed and that the City Council failed to act on the plat within the period. The certificate is effective in place of the
endorsement required by subsection D.3., above.
G. Site Plans. The engineering site plans showing details of streets, alleys, culverts, bridges, storm sewers, water mains, sanitary sewers, and
other engineering details of the proposed subdivision shall be submitted to the Building Official along with the final plat of the subdivision. The
site plans shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall conform to the design standards established by this UDC and all
applicable building codes. The final plat will not be released for filing until detailed engineering plans have been approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and the City Council. Engineering site plans and the final plat can be reviewed concurrently by City staff.
H. Recordation. In accordance with Section 212.004, Plat Required, of the Tex. Local Gov't Code, the Building Official will ensure all applicable
requirements have been met prior to recording the plat with the DeWitt County Clerk within 30 days of the date of the final approval. Three
copies of the recorded plat and one sepia will be returned to the developer.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 14.505 Vacating Plat and Replats
A. Vacating Plats. A vacating plat is a replat to eliminate the subdivision of property reflected by a prior plat, whereby the subdivided land
would return to a single unit of property.
1. Limitations.
a. The owners of the tract covered by a plat may vacate the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold.
b. If lots in the plat have been sold, the plat, or any part of the plat, may be vacated on the application of all the owners of lots
in the plat with approval obtained in the manner prescribed for the original plat.
2. Procedure.
a. The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is approved and recorded in the
manner prescribed for the original plat.
b. Pursuant to Section 212.013, Vacating Plat, Tex. Local Gov't Code, the DeWitt County Clerk shall write legibly on the
vacated plat the word “Vacated” and shall enter on the plat a reference to the volume and page at which the vacating instrument
is recorded.
c. On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the vacated plat has no effect.
B. Replats. Replats may be allowed without prior vacation of the existing plat according to the applicable standards of Section 212.014, et
seq., of the Tex. Local Gov't Code.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 14.600 Fees
Sec. 14.601 Fees
A. Fees Authorized.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/438
1. The City Council shall, from time to time, establish fees for the processing and review of the various applications and reviews
contemplated by this UDC.
2. The fees shall be reasonable, but shall not exceed the actual costs of staff and consultant time in reviewing the applications.
3. The City Council may provide for a flat fee, plus require the reimbursement of extraordinary costs to the City that are
necessitated by an application, such as fees for expert technical review or advice.
B. Relationship to Application. No application is complete until all up-front fees for review are paid. The time period for processing an
application after completeness review does not start unless the fees are paid.
C. Exception. No fees shall be charged to any government agency for work being performed by the employees of the agency.
D. No refunds. Once an application has been accepted by the Building Official, and City staff reviews have been initiated, the filing fee is
nonrefundable.
E. Periodic Review of Fee Schedule. It is the intent of the City Council to periodically review and update the fee schedule. The Planning and
Zoning Commission with input from the Building Official shall make a report and recommendations to the City Council with regard to the fee
schedule at intervals of not more than two years. The City Council shall consider the report and initiate a revised fee schedule resolution as it
considers appropriate.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
ARTICLE 15 ENFORCEMENT AND LEGAL STATUS
Division 15.100 Enforcement
Sec. 15.101 Enforcement Powers and Remedies
A. Generally. This Section sets out remedies that may be requested by the City to enforce this UDC prior to and in a court of competent
jurisdiction. This Section shall not limit the power of the City to pursue multiple or alternative actions, remedies, and penalties, or to pursue
actions, remedies and penalties that are authorized by law but not listed in this Section.
B. Enforcement Powers. The City may enforce this UDC prior to and without judicial process by:
1. Withholding Permits. The City may deny or withhold all permits, approvals, or other forms of authorization on any land, building,
or structure for which there is an uncorrected violation of a section of this UDC or of a condition of a permit, certificate, approval or
other authorization previously granted by the City. In lieu of withholding or denying an authorization, the City may grant such
authorization subject to the condition that the violation be corrected.
2. Suspension of Permits. The City may suspend permits, including conditional use permits, for a period of up to 60 days to allow
for the correction of the violation or the judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
3. Stopping Work. With or without revoking permits, the City may stop work on any building or structure on any land on which there
is an uncorrected violation of a section of this UDC or of a permit or other form of authorization issued pursuant to this UDC, in
accordance with its power to stop work under its building codes.
4. Revocation of Permits and Approvals.
a. Revocation of Permits. Any permit, certificate of occupancy, or other approval required under this UDC shall be revoked
when it is determined that:
i. There is a departure from the approved plans, specifications, limitations, or conditions as required under the permit or
approval;
ii. The permit or approval was procured by false representation;
iii. The permit or approval was issued in error; or
iv. There is a violation of any provision of this UDC.
b. Notice and Opportunity to Correct. Written notice of revocation stating that such violation shall be corrected within 10 days
shall be served upon the property owner, agent, applicant, or other person to whom the permit or approval was issued, or such
notice may be posted in a prominent location at the place of violation.
c. Effect of Notice. No work or construction shall proceed after service of the revocation notice unless such work is to correct
a violation.
d. Failure to Correct. If after the 10-day period, arrangements acceptable to the City have not been made, the Building Official
shall:
i. File litigation in a court of competent jurisdiction; and/or
ii. Remove or correct such violation and cause to be placed a lien upon the property and/or improvements to the
property in an amount to cover all costs related to correction or abatement of the violation.
C. Judicial Remedies. The City may seek the following judicial remedies to enforce this UDC:
1. Injunctive Relief.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/438
a. The City may seek an injunction or other equitable relief in court to stop any violation of this UDC or of a permit, certificate
or other form of authorization granted under this UDC. Such relief may include revocation or termination of permits, including
conditional use permits. In any court proceedings in which the City seeks a preliminary injunction, it shall be presumed that a
violation of this UDC or continued violation of this UDC is, will, or may be an injury to the public health, safety or general welfare;
that the public health, safety or general welfare will or may be irreparably injured by the continuation of the violation unless the
violation is enjoined; and that there is no plain and adequate remedy at law for the subject violation.
b. The City may seek an affirmative injunction to require the demolition or removal of a structure, or to allow the City to
demolish or remove a structure and recover costs against the landowner, pursuant to Section 54.018, Tex. Local Gov't Code.
2. Abatement. The City may seek a court order in the nature of mandamus, abatement, or other action or proceeding to abate or
remove a violation or to otherwise restore the premises in question to the condition in which they existed prior to the violation.
3. Civil Remedies. The City shall have the right to institute any appropriate civil action as provided in Section 54.012, et seq., Tex.
Local Gov't Code, in a county court or district court, to enforce, enjoin, prevent, restrain, correct or abate any violation of this UDC,
including any and all remedies available pursuant to state law. All court costs and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the City in
connection with any civil action shall be awarded to the City if it is the prevailing party.
4. Criminal Remedies. Any person who violates any section of this UDC shall be guilty, upon conviction, of a separate offense for
each day or portion of a day during which the violation continues, which shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000 for each
offense.
D. Floodplain Remedies. Violations of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) floodplain regulations set forth in Division 6.200,
Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention, shall be subject to the following, in addition to the remedies provided by other
subsections of this Section:
1. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TECQ) shall be
notified immediately in writing of any property or structure in violation of the floodplain section of this UDC.
2. New or renewal National Flood Insurance shall be denied for any structure remaining in violation or situated on property in
violation of this UDC.
E. Other Remedies. The City shall have such other remedies as are and as may be from time to time provided by state law for the violation of
regulations.
F. Remedies Cumulative. The remedies and enforcement powers set out in this Section shall not be considered exclusive remedies, but rather
they shall be cumulative with all other remedies provided in this UDC, in any other applicable ordinance, or by law.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 15.102 Enforcement Procedures
A. Generally. The City may enforce the provisions of this UDC as set out in this Division, or as otherwise authorized by law.
B. Responsible Official. The Building Official, or the City Manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this UDC. The Building Official
may consult with the City Attorney, the Director of Utilities and other officials in the exercise of this duty.
C. Right to Enter. The Department will investigate and find as a matter of fact whether a violation of this UDC has occurred. The Building
Official or any person authorized by the Building Official, or the City Manager, shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable
time for the purpose of making inspection of buildings or premises necessary to carry out the duty to enforce this UDC.
D. Filing a Complaint. Any person may allege a violation of this UDC by written and signed complaint that is filed with the Department. Such
complaint shall state the factual basis for the alleged violation along with the complainant's name, address, and telephone number.
E. Notice of Violation. Upon investigation, with or without a complaint, the City may issue a written notice of violation to the owner of property
upon which a violation of this UDC exists. The Notice of Violation shall set forth the grounds upon which the notice is based, including the
specific code section or sections at issue. Notices shall conform to the requirements of Section 54.005, Tex. Local Gov't Code, and shall include
the optional statements set forth therein.
F. Correction of Violation.
1. For a first violation, the person responsible for the violation shall have a period of no more than 15 days to correct the violation.
2. For a subsequent or continued violation, the person responsible for the violation shall correct the violation within 24 hours.
3. Any violation that creates an immediate danger to the public safety shall be corrected immediately, regardless of whether it is a
first violation, a continuing violation, or a subsequent violation.
G. Further Enforcement. If the code violation is not corrected in accordance with the requirements of subsection F., above, then the City may
enforce this UDC in accordance with Section 10.99, General Penalty, [Section 1.01.009] City of Cuero, Texas, Code of Ordinances, or this
Division.
H. Records. The Building Official shall maintain a record of all complaints of violations of this UDC, including how they were resolved.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 15.103 Collection of Civil Penalties
A. Manner of Collection. The procedure for the issuance of citations, collection of fines, and trial with respect to disputed or unsatisfied
citations shall be that prescribed in state law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/438
B. Duty of Local Officials.
1. The Building Official has the authority to issue an original citation and deliver it to a person believed to be committing a civil
violation and are hereby declared to be the officials with the duty of enforcing this UDC for that purpose.
2. The Building Official or a designee is hereby declared to be the official with the duty of enforcing this UDC with respect to:
a. Receiving and filing a copy of each original citation and any fines or notices of intention to stand trial;
b. Mailing formal notices of the violation to persons who do not give notice of intention to stand trial or pay the established fine
within the time set in the citation; and
c. Notifying the court of competent jurisdiction of any notice of intention to stand trial or any request for adjudication when a
fine is not paid after the UDC has given formal notice thereof.
C. Court Appearance. The person who issued the initial citation and any other members of the Department so directed by the Building Official
shall appear and testify in any trial held with respect to the citation.
D. City Attorney. The City Attorney is authorized to prosecute any civil violation.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 15.200 Transitional Provisions
Sec. 15.201 Respect for Existing Development
A. Generally. It is the intent of the City Council to respect property owners' expectations regarding the continuation of their existing uses and
improvements which were lawfully established prior to the effective date of this UDC as provided in this Section and in Article 12,
Nonconformities.
B. Use for Designed Purpose Protected. The rights of landowners to use improvements on private property for the use for which the
improvements were originally intended, designed, and approved pursuant to City regulations then in place is hereby recognized, regardless of
the subsequent application of a new zoning district to the property.
C. Restoration of “Conforming Use” Status. It is the intent of the City Council to create additional rights with respect to existing buildings and
land uses. To this end, Article 12, Nonconformities, sets out standards by which:
1. Many nonconforming uses may be made “conforming” through a conditional use permit review process; and
2. Many nonconforming improvements (e.g., buildings, parking, signs, etc.) may be brought into compliance over time to avoid
disproportionate financial burdens on landowners who want to upgrade their properties, but cannot reasonably be expected to bring
the properties into full compliance all at once.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 15.202 Effect on Pending Applications
A. Generally. Each application that is processed under this UDC shall be evaluated only according to the duly adopted ordinances and
technical regulations in effect at the time that the complete application is submitted. If the application is approved, then it is a development right
for the duration of the approval (see Division 14.200, Standardized Development Approval Procedures).
B. Consent Required for Retroactive Application of Amendments to Pending Applications. If this UDC is adopted or amended during the time
that a complete application for a development permit is pending, then the portions of the UDC which were effective after the date of submittal of a
complete application may be applied to the pending application only if the applicant's request for the retroactive application of the amendments is
of record in the application file or a related hearing transcript.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 15.203 Effect on Existing Violations
A. Generally. Any violations of previous versions of the City of Cuero zoning, subdivision, and development regulations shall continue to be a
violation under this UDC and shall be subject to the penalties and enforcement set out in Division 15.100, Enforcement and other applicable City
ordinances.
B. Fines and Penalties. Payment of fines shall be required for any civil penalty assessed under the previous regulations, even if the original
violation is no longer considered a violation under this UDC.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 15.204 Effect on Prior Conditions of Approval
A. Generally. Conditions of development approvals that were granted prior to the effective date remain in force, regardless of the standards of
this UDC.
B. Modification or Elimination of Conditions. Conditions of approvals that were imposed prior to the effective date may be modified or
eliminated pursuant to new applications that meet the procedures and standards of this UDC.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 15.205 No Effect on Private Restrictions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/438
A. Generally. The UDC does not change or override private restrictions on property. The UDC will be enforced on property that is subject to
private restrictions in the same manner as other properties. The City's obligations and policies about existing private restrictions are set out in
this Section.
B. No Duty to Search for Private Restrictions. The City has no duty to search for the existence of private restrictions on property. In the review
of applications pursuant to this UDC, the City will enforce only its own regulations.
C. No Duty to Interpret Private Restrictions.
1. The City will not interpret or apply private restrictions unless it is a party to them and as a party, it determines that interpretation
is necessary.
2. When the City zones or rezones property or otherwise issues a permit such action shall not be considered an interpretation
regarding existing private restrictions to which the City is not a party.
3. Parties to private covenants who seek permits from the City which are inconsistent with their private covenants do so at their
own risk that the covenants may be enforced by other private parties who may have standing to file suit.
D. No Duty to Enforce Private Restrictions. The City will not generally seek to enforce private restrictions. The City may become involved in
the enforcement of private restrictions only if:
1. The City is a party to or has an explicit right of enforcement set out in the restrictions; and
2. The City Council finds that it is likely to have legal standing to enforce the private restrictions.
E. Most Restrictive Standards Apply. Where the provisions of this UDC and private restrictions overlap, the most restrictive provision shall
apply.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 15.300 Interpretation and Legal Status
Sec. 15.301 Interpretation, Generally
A. Generally. The purpose of the regulation to be interpreted must be determined so that the protection that it is intended to provide the public
is enforced. Therefore, this UDC should be interpreted in the context of:
1. The general findings and purposes stated in Section 16.101, Title, Authority, Applicability and Purposes; and
2. The goals and policies of the Cuero Comprehensive Plan and Downtown Cuero Plan.
B. Word Usage, Acronyms, and Definitions. Rules for construction of words and phrases, common acronyms, and defined words and phrases
are set out in Part 6, Measurements and Words.
C. Illustrations. Illustrations in this UDC are generally provided for explanatory purposes, and do not necessarily set out all options or
alternatives for each standard in this UDC. Where an illustration appears to set out different substantive requirements than the text of this UDC,
the text of this UDC shall control.
D. Cross-References. Hyperlinked cross-references to internal provisions within the UDC (e.g., between Parts, Articles, Divisions, Sections,
and subsections) and external documents and regulations (e.g., Tex. Local Gov't Code and Cuero Comprehensive Plan) are provided to increase
the ease of use in complying with the intended regulations. Where a conflict exists between a given cross-reference (e.g., number or hyperlinked
location) and the name of the cross-reference, the name shall control.
E. Quantifiable or Numeric Standards. If the section to be interpreted has a quantifiable standard, no interpretation can result in a reduction of
the standard. Standards listed as maximums shall be interpreted to allow any number equal to or lesser than the maximum standard listed.
Standards listed as minimums shall be interpreted to allow any number equal to or greater than the minimum standard listed. By way of example,
if the maximum density is listed as 3.0 units per acre, then it cannot be interpreted to allow 3.2 units per acre as-of-right.
F. Qualitative Standards. Non-numeric standards shall be construed in favor of the element being projected unless there is sufficient evidence
to indicate that the alternative language will protect the public as well as provide the landowner with other options.
G. Land Usage. Interpretations of land uses shall be in accordance with Article 2, Land Use.
H. Signs; Substitution of Noncommercial Speech for Commercial Speech. Notwithstanding anything contained in this UDC to the contrary, any
sign erected pursuant to the provisions of this UDC, or otherwise lawfully existing with a commercial message may, at the option of the owner,
contain a noncommercial message in lieu of a commercial message. The noncommercial message may occupy the allowable area of the sign
face or any portion thereof. The sign face may be changed from commercial to noncommercial messages, or from one noncommercial message
to another, as frequently as desired by the owner of the sign, provided that:
1. The sign is not a prohibited sign or sign type;
2. The frequency of changes to the message is not greater than is allowed for digital message centers (see Section 9.103,
Message Centers); and
3. The size, height, setback, and other dimensional criteria contained in this UDC have been satisfied, or the sign is legally
nonconforming.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 15.302 Interpretation, Official
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/438
A. Generally. Any person may request an administrative interpretation of the terms, provisions, or requirements of this UDC if the application
of the terms, provisions, or requirements are not obvious.
B. Intent and Applicability.
1. Intent.
a. It is the intent of the City Council that this UDC be accessible and clear to the residents, business owners, and landowners
in the City, and that the spirit of Chapter 552, Public Information, Tex. Gov't Code be observed. As such, City staff will provide:
i. Requested public records that are related to the administration and enforcement of this UDC.
ii. References to the standards that may be applied to individual uses, buildings, or structures; and
iii. General information to residents, business owners, and landowners with respect to the zoning districts that apply to
property;
b. It is not the intent of the City Council that the Building Official, or designee, affirmatively evaluate the full development
potential of individual properties or resolve other such detailed inquiries about specific properties or issues without a pending
permit or approval application.
2. Applicability. This Section applies to any request to interpret a provision of this UDC.
C. Process. The interpretation is made by the Building Official, although the City is not obligated to render an interpretation. The interpretation
is not subject to appeal, although related appeals may proceed as provided in this UDC (e.g., appeals of administrative decisions on applications
which may be impacted by the interpretation). After an interpretation is issued, the Building Official may propose a text amendment to this UDC
to codify the interpretation.
D. Application Requirements.
1. Applications for interpretations shall be submitted on a form approved by the Building Official.
2. The applicant shall cite the code provision for which interpretation is sought, a description of a hypothetical situation or scenario
to which the application of this UDC is in question, and a statement of the nature of the interpretation sought.
E. Decision. Within a reasonable period after the application for an interpretation is filed, the Building Official shall make a good faith effort to
interpret the provision that is the subject of the application. The Building Official shall respond to the applicant in writing, and shall keep a copy of
the response in a record of interpretations. The responsible official may consult with other City Staff and the City Attorney in drafting the
interpretation.
F. Standards for Interpretations. The interpretation shall be based on:
1. The materials or scenario posed by the applicant;
2. The plain and ordinary meaning of the terms that are subject to the application for an interpretation as set out in Webster's Third
New International Dictionary or other current and authoritative dictionaries;
3. The purpose statement for the UDC section that is subject to interpretation;
4. Any other provision of the Cuero Comprehensive Plan, the City of Cuero, Texas, Code of Ordinances, state law, or federal law
that are related to the same subject matter;
5. Any technical meanings of the words used in the provision subject to interpretation;
6. Other interpretations rendered by the City relating to the same or related provisions of this UDC;
7. The consequences of the interpretation;
8. The legislative history;
9. The problem or issue that is addressed by the provision subject to interpretation; and
10. Sources outside of the UDC provision that provide a related source for the definition, such as technical or professional
literature.
G. No Legal Advice. The City does not provide legal advice to applicants or property owners. Private parties, including purchasers, lenders,
title insurers, and others are advised to seek legal opinions from their attorneys with respect to specific potential applications of this UDC. No
interpretation provided by City Staff pursuant to this Section shall be construed as legal advice.
H. No Binding Effect. It is the policy of the City to evaluate applications for development approval comprehensively on their individual merits.
Therefore, interpretations may be persuasive to the applicable development review bodies, but they are not binding on the City.
I. Recordkeeping. The Building Official shall keep records of interpretations made pursuant to this Section.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 15.303 Severability
A. Generally. If any Part, Article, Division, Section, subsection, paragraph, clause, provision, or portion of this UDC is held unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this UDC shall not be affected. If any application of this UDC to a particular use,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/438
building, structure, land, subdivision, or water is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not
be applicable to any other use, building, structure, land, subdivision, or water not specifically included in said judgment.
B. Signs. With respect to Article 9, Signs, and any Section, subsection, paragraph, clause, provision, or portion of this UDC which explicitly
addresses signs, the following severability provisions shall apply:
1. Severability Generally. If any Section, subsection, paragraph, clause, provision, or portion of Article 9, Signs, or any other
provision of this UDC related to the construction, maintenance, or display of signs, is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment
or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such unconstitutionality shall not affect any other Section,
subsection, paragraph, clause, provision, or portion of Article 9, Signs, or this UDC.
2. Severability Where Less Speech Results. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the declaration of severability set out in
Subsection B.1., above, or elsewhere in this Section, this UDC, or any adopting ordinance, if any Section, subsection, paragraph,
clause, provision, or portion of Article 9, Signs, or any other provision of this UDC related to the construction, maintenance, or display
of signs, is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any other Section, subsection, paragraph, clause, provision, or portion of Article 9, Signs, or this
UDC, even if such severability would result in a situation where there would be less speech, whether by subjecting previously exempt
signs to permitting or otherwise.
3. Severability of Provisions Pertaining to Prohibited Signs and Sign Elements. Without diminishing or limiting in any way the
declaration of severability set out in subsection B.1., and subsection B.2., above, if any Section, subsection, paragraph, clause,
provision, or portion of Article 9, Signs, or any other provision of this UDC related to the construction, maintenance, or display of
signs, is declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration of such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any other Section, subsection, paragraph, clause, provision, or portion of Article 9, Signs, or any
other provision of this UDC that pertains to prohibited signs or sign elements. It is the intent of the City Council to ensure that as many
prohibited sign types and sign elements as may be constitutionally prohibited continue to be prohibited.
4. Severability of Provisions if Adjudicated Stricken Due to a Content-Basis. It is the intent of the City Council to regulate signage in
a manner that implements the purposes of Article 9, Signs, as expressed in Section 9.101, Purpose and Applicability. The City finds
that the purposes stated in Section 9.101, Purpose and Applicability, are legitimate, substantial, and compelling public interests, that
the regulation of signage in Article 9, Signs, is unrelated to the suppression of free expression, and that the incidental restrictions on
expression that may occur as a result of these regulations is no more than is essential to the furtherance of the public interests.
However, if a court of competent jurisdiction finds any regulation to be based upon content and, further, declares such regulation
unconstitutional, then it is the intent of the City Council that only that portion of the provision that is found to relate to content be
severed from this UDC, and if it is not possible for the court to strike only the portion of the provision that is found to relate to content,
then it is the intent of the City Council that all signs that would be subject to the stricken provision will instead be subject to the next
surviving provision for a sign of like geometry and character that is more restrictive than the stricken provision in terms of, in
descending order of priority:
a. sign height; and
b. sign area.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 15.304 Conflicting Provisions
A. Generally. In the event that the provisions of this UDC conflict with each other or with other sections of the City of Cuero, Texas, Code of
Ordinances:
1. The more restrictive provision shall control, if the provisions were adopted at the same time; or
2. The more recent provision shall control if the provisions were adopted at different times.
B. State and Federal Law. No part of this UDC relieves any applicant from compliance with applicable provisions of state or federal law. If a
use, building, structure, operational characteristic, construction technique, environmental impact, or other matter is prohibited by state or federal
law, it is also prohibited in the City. Likewise, if a matter is regulated by state or federal law, then compliance with state or federal law does not
relieve the applicant from compliance with this UDC, unless the application of this UDC is legally preempted.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 15.305 Repealer
The following chapters of the City of Cuero, Texas, Code of Ordinances that existed on the effective date prior to the adoption of this UDC are
repealed:
1. Chapter 104, Trees;
2. Chapter 151, Flood Damage Prevention;
3. Chapter 152, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home Parks;
4. Chapter 154, Subdivisions Regulations;
5. Chapter 155, Signs;
6. Chapter 157, Telecommunications;
7. Chapter 158, Zoning; and
8. Chapter 159, Recreational Vehicle Parks.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/438
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
ARTICLE 16 TITLE, AUTHORITY, APPLICABILITY, AND PURPOSES
Division 16.100 Title, Authority, Applicability, and Purposes
Sec. 16.101 Title, Authority, and Applicability
A. Title. The title of these zoning, subdivision, and land development regulations shall be known as the City of Cuero Unified Development
Code or this UDC.
B. Authority. The UDC is adopted and enforced pursuant to the authorities contained in the City's Home Rule Charter, adopted pursuant to
Article XI, Section 5 of the Constitution of the State of Texas, and such additional authority as may be conferred by the Texas Statutes.
C. Applicability.
1. The provisions of this UDC apply to all land, development, and the use of all land, buildings, and structures within the corporate
limits of the City of Cuero, Texas, except as specifically provided herein or preempted by state or federal law.
2. To the extent allowed by law or permitted by application of agency policy, this UDC shall also apply to all land, buildings,
structures, and uses owned by government agencies, including all municipal, state, and federal lands, within the corporate limits of
the City of Cuero.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. 16.102 Purposes
A. Generally. The City Council intends to exercise all zoning and other police powers now or hereafter conferred by Chapter 211, Municipal
Zoning Authority of the Tex. Local Gov't Code or the Texas Statutes. This UDC is enacted to be consistent with and implement the Cuero
Comprehensive Plan and Downtown Cuero Plan. The provisions of this UDC are specifically intended to protect the public health, safety, morals,
and general welfare of the City's residents, business owners, employees, and visitors, and to protect and preserve places and areas of historical,
cultural, or architectural importance and significance through the purposes set out in subsection B., below.
B. Purposes.
1. Encourage economic opportunities by:
a. Promoting the vitality and development of Cuero's commercial/industrial districts; and
b. Encouraging the efficient use of the available land supply in the City, including redevelopment of underutilized lands.
2. Protect public health and safety and environmental quality by:
a. Ensuring greater public safety, convenience, and accessibility through the physical design and location of land
uses/activities;
b. Minimizing losses due to destruction by nature or acts of God;
c. Facilitating the adequate and safe provision of transportation, water, sewage, drainage, schools, parks, and other public
facilities; and
d. Preserving and protecting existing trees and vegetation, floodplains, stream corridors, and other areas of environmental
significance from adverse impacts of development.
3. Protect the quality of life of the City's residents, business owners, employees, and visitors by:
a. Ensuring the provision of adequate open space for light, air, and fire safety;
b. Preserving and enhancing the character and quality of stable residential neighborhoods;
c. Upgrading the character and quality of neighborhoods in transition;
d. Promoting a healthful and convenient distribution of population by regulating the density of development;
e. Enhancing the visual character of the City through the regulation of design, where such regulation is appropriate; and
f. Ensuring that the appearance, visual scale, and orientation of developments are compatible with that of the Cuero
Comprehensive Plan, Downtown Cuero Plan, and/or other plans, goals and objectives of the City Council.
4. Protect the fiscal and functional health of the City by:
a. Fostering convenient, compatible, and efficient relationships among land uses;
b. Ensuring that service demands of new development will not exceed the capabilities of existing streets, utilities, or other
public facilities and services; and
c. Promoting a balanced supply of residential, commercial, industrial and transportation land uses that is compatible with
adjacent land uses and has good access to transportation networks.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/438
PART 6
WORDS AND DEFINITIONS
ARTICLE 17 WORD USAGE AND DEFINITIONS
Division 17.100 Word Usage; Abbreviations; and Acronyms
Sec. 17.101 Word Usage
The word “shall” is mandatory; the word “may” is permissive. The particular shall control the general. Words used in present tense shall include
the future, and words used in the singular include the plural, and plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. All public
officials, bodies, and agencies to which reference is made are those of the City, unless otherwise indicated. (Ordinance 2015-30 adopted
10/30/15)
Sec. 17.102 Abbreviations and Acronyms
Set out in Table 17.102, Meaning of Acronyms and Abbreviations, is the meaning of the acronyms and abbreviations used in this UDC.
Table 17.102
Meaning of Acronyms and Abbreviations
Acronym or Abbreviation Meaning
ac. Acres
ADA Americans with Disabilities Act
ADT Average Daily Trips
BFE Base Flood Elevation
BR Bedroom
CCRs Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions
dBA A-Weighted Decibels
D.B.H. or DBH Diameter Breast Height
du Dwelling Unit
e.g. For Example
EIFS External Insulating Finishing System
EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
FAA Federal Aviation Administration
FAR Floor Area Ratio
FCC Federal Communications Commission
FEMA Federal Emergency Management Agency
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/438
ft. Feet
FHWA Federal Highway Administration
FIRM Flood Insurance Rate Map
in. Inches
ITE Institute of Traffic Engineers
LEED Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
LOS Level of Service
LSR Landscape Surface Ratio
Max. Maximum
Min. Minimum
N/A Not Applicable
NFIP National Flood Insurance Program
OSR Open Space Ratio
POA Property Owners' Association
Sec. Section
sf Square Feet
SFHA Special Flood Hazard Area
u/a Units per Acre
UDC Unified Development Code
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
Division 17.200 Definitions
A Terms
Abutting, when referring to lots, parcels or property, means next to and having some portion of a boundary that is coterminous with the parcel
proposed for development. Lots or parcels that are separated only by an alley are abutting if their property lines would be shared if they extended
to the centerline of the alley. See Figure “Illustrative Example of Abutting Lots.”
Illustrative Example of Abutting Lots
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/438
Access means an area designated as a way for vehicles to enter or leave a property or lot to a public or private street or alley. Access is intended
to permit residents to bring their vehicles onto the property, to allow employees, customers, or tenants to park, and to provide for public access in
emergencies.
Access Easement means a private easement for vehicular access across one lot or parcel to another (e.g., a driveway across a lot to access
another lot). Cross-access easements are reciprocal arrangements that provide for the free flow of vehicles across the property line of abutting
lots (e.g., a driveway connection between abutting shopping centers, two retail businesses, etc.).
Accessory Building means a building that is subordinate to the principal building which serves a purpose that is customarily associated with the
principal use. Examples of accessory buildings include storage sheds and detached residential garages. The phrase “accessory building” does
not include a parking structure.
Accessory Dwelling Unit (“ADU”) means a secondary dwelling unit which is located in a separate accessory building on the same lot as the
principal dwelling unit. The ADU provides a complete, independent living space with facilities for cooking, eating, sanitation, and sleeping. See
Section 11.102, Accessory Dwelling Units.
Accessory Structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as a principal use or building the use of which is incidental to the
use of the principal use or building (e.g., gazebos and carports).
Accessory Use means a use incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use, located on the same lot or parcel.
Agriculture, General means land (with and without farm residences) which is primarily used for the commercial production of field crops for food,
fiber, or energy; orchards; viniculture; horticulture; dairying; pasturage; aquaculture, and truck farming. The term also includes the raising or
breeding of livestock, cattle, horses, poultry, where there is no more than one animal equivalent unit per acre, and the keeping of bees. The term
includes the necessary accessory uses for storing the products and inputs needed to produce them. The phrase does not include the phrase
“community garden.”
Airports means aircraft take-off and landing fields and flight training schools; or airstrips for personal aircraft for the private use of an individual.
The term “airport” also includes the term “helistop.”
Alcoholic Beverage Sales means the following:
1. Off-site Consumption means the retail sale of beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages for off-premise consumption.
2. On-site Consumption means the retail sale of beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption.
See Chapter 110, Alcoholic Beverages, [Article 5.03] of the Cuero Code of Ordinances.
Alluvial Fan Flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is
characterized by:
1. High-velocity flows;
2. Active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and
3. Unpredictable flow paths.
Amusement or Water Park means an area of land used for outdoor commercial amusement on a general admission or per-amusement fee basis.
Facilities at an amusement park include amusement rides (e.g., motorized rides, water slides, wave pools, go-carts, bumper cars, bumper boats,
and comparable facilities), and may also include supporting uses and facilities such as concert stages, theaters, batting cages, gardens,
playgrounds, shops, child care, food stands, and restaurants.
Animal Boarding and Veterinarian Services, Large Animal means an animal hospital or clinic that provides services for horses and other
livestock, and which may board animals in the course of treatment. The phrase “animal boarding and veterinarian services, large animal” does
not include “animal boarding and veterinarian services, small animal.”
Animal Boarding and Veterinarian Services, Small Animal means veterinary clinics, hospitals, or other facilities that provide care and boarding of
small domestic animals. The phrase “animal boarding and veterinarian, small animal” does not include “animal boarding and veterinarian
services, large animal.”
Animal Grooming Facility means an establishment where domestic animals are bathed, clipped, or combed for the purpose of enhancing their
appearance or health, and for which a fee is charged, but not including overnight boarding of animals.
Apartment means a multi-family building type that is comprised of three or more dwelling units, each having an entrance to a hallway, stairway, or
balcony in common with at least one other dwelling unit. Apartments may be leased, rented, or owned in a condominium style of ownership.
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes
unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/438
Applicant means a person, firm, or governmental agency that executes the necessary forms to obtain approval or a permit for any zoning,
subdivision, land development, building, land disturbing activity, or other activity regulated by this UDC.
Approval means the final action granting an application given by the appropriate administrative body specified in Article 13, Administrative
Bodies, as having final approval responsibility.
Appurtenance means a feature in and of a parcel of land or a site, or a building, structure or object, or a related group of any of these. The term
includes, but is not limited to, buildings, structures, objects, landscaping, walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving, sidewalks, shutters, awnings
and signs.
Area of Shallow Flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on the City's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one
percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the
path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard means the land in the floodplain that is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in
preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH,
AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. The term “area of special flood hazard” is also referred to as “special flood hazard area.”
As-Built Plan means a civil drawing depicting the completed infrastructure improvements as they were installed on the lot. As-built plans must be
prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor and may involve a licensed engineer.
Asphalt or Concrete Batching Plant means a temporary light manufacturing facility used for the production of asphalt or concrete, or asphalt or
concrete products, used in building or construction of a specific site or project, and includes facilities for the administration and management of
the business, the stockpiling of bulk materials used in the production process or of finished products manufactured on the premises and the
storage and maintenance of required equipment, but does not include the retail sale of finished asphalt or concrete products.
Assisted Living Facility means an establishment that:
1. Furnishes, in one or more facilities, food and shelter to four or more persons who are unrelated to the proprietor of the
establishment;
2. Provides:
a. Personal care services; or
b. Administration of medication by a person licensed or otherwise authorized in this state to administer the medication; and
3. May provide assistance with or supervision of the administration of medication.
See Chapter 247, of the Tex. Health and Safety Code
B Terms
Bar or Nightclub means a commercial establishment which can further defined as:
1. Bar. An establishment where the primary purpose is to sell alcohol beverages for on-premise consumption; or
2. Nightclub. An establishment where the consumption of alcoholic beverages (sold at the facility or brought in by patrons) is
combined with dancing and/or musical entertainment.
The term “bar or nightclub” is sometimes also called a cocktail lounge, tavern, saloon, cantina, etc. The term “bar or nightclub” does not mean a
restaurant, as the sale of food is an accessory use to the primary purposes described above.
Base Flood means a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base Flood Elevation means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a one
percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year (also called the base flood).
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Bed and Breakfast (Home or Inn) [means] a small lodging establishment that offers overnight accommodation and inclusive breakfast, but does
not offer other meals. Typically, Bed and Breakfasts are private homes or family homes offering accommodations; the typical Bed and Breakfast
establishment has between 4 and 11 rooms, with 6 being the average (see also overnight accommodations).
Biodegradable means the capability of being decomposed by biological agents, especially bacteria.
Block means a piece of land surrounded on all sides by streets or other transportation rights-of-way or by physical barriers such as waterbodies,
watercourses, or public open spaces. Blocks are normally divided into lots. See Figure “Illustrative Blocks” for an illustrative example of blocks
within a City.
Illustrative Blocks
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/438
Broadcast Tower means a radio, television or microwave structure exceeding 120 feet in height, with or without guide wires, used to transmit
and/or receive commercial radio, television or microwave communications.
Buffer means open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof, which are used to physically and visually
separate one use or property from an abutting property in order to mitigate the impacts of noise, light, or other nuisance.
Bufferyard means a designated strip of land upon which a buffer is installed. Bufferyards may be required between land uses, along zoning
district boundaries, along parking lot boundaries, and along street and railroad rights-of-way.
Building means a structure that has a roof and walls, and which is intended to shelter people, animals, property, or business activity, and includes
any structure used or intended to be used for supporting or sheltering a use or occupancy. The term “building” shall be construed as if it were
followed by the words “or part or parts thereof and all equipment therein.”
The term building may also mean an industrialized building which is a nonresidential structure that is constructed off-site as one or more modular
components (including the installation of plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems), bearing an approved decal or insignia, and
then transported to the site to be affixed to a permanent foundation. To approve a building permit for an industrialized building, the Building
Official shall review the designs, plans, and specifications, whereby each page must be stamped by the Texas Industrialized Building Code
Council (which is the state-designated authority that ensures that all preconfigured modular components are in compliance with state-mandated
building codes). On-site building code inspections are to be made by the state-designated authority and witnessed by the Building Official.
See Tex. Occ. Code Section 1202, Industrialized Housing and Buildings.
Building Coverage means the footprint of all buildings (area within exterior walls) on a parcel or lot divided by the total area of the parcel or lot.
Building Official means the designated authority of the Department, or designee thereof, whose duties include administration and enforcement of
this UDC.
C Terms
Certificate of Occupancy means an official certificate issued by the Building Official that sets forth that a building, structure, or use legally
complies with this UDC and the applicable building codes, and that the building, structure, or use may be used for the purposes stated therein.
Character, Auto-Urban means a character of development which can be described as follows:
1. Nonresidential. The form of auto-urban nonresidential development exhibits a largely horizontal pattern. Although there is an
open environment, it is mainly to accommodate extensive surface parking lots versus the more prominent green spaces found in
suburban character areas. Significant portions of the development site are devoted to vehicular access drives, circulation routes,
surface parking lots, and loading/delivery areas, whereby the pavement areas become the most prominent visual feature versus
green or open areas.
2. Residential. The predominant form of auto-urban residential development is auto-oriented in nature, where driveways and front
loaded garages dominate the front yard and facade of homes. Typically these areas are comprised of single-family detached
dwellings on smaller lots and with narrower lot widths (than compared to homes exhibiting a suburban character). In some cases,
single-family attached housing is provided in planned or cluster developments.
See Chapter 2, Land Use and Character and Appendix A, Existing and Future Character Descriptions, from the Cuero Comprehensive Plan.
Character, Rural/Natural means a character of development that is comprised of individual farms and residences, conservation and cluster
developments, agriculture uses, and areas that are in their natural state (e.g., buffered stream corridors, etc.). Residential developments are
typically scattered on large acreages, or clustered with high open space ratios. Drainage is typically managed through natural means and in
many cases there are no public water or wastewater utilities.
See Chapter 2, Land Use and Character and Appendix A, Existing and Future Character Descriptions, from the Cuero Comprehensive Plan.
Character, Suburban means a character of development which can be described as follows:
1. Commercial. The form of suburban commercial development is characterized by more open space and less impervious surface
(compared to auto-urban character areas) on the lot, where the buildings are more residential in appearance. The allowed uses are
typically smaller in scale and are intended to provide services to nearby residential areas. Oftentimes, suburban commercial areas are
established because changes in traffic patterns along specific corridors or intersections make an area less desirable for residential
uses. In these cases, adaptive reuse of existing residential buildings is common. Parking is typically allowed in the former residential
driveway, or is located (and fully screened) in the side or rear yard.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/438
2. Industrial. The form of suburban industrial development is characterized by more open space and less impervious surface than
compared to a similar industrial use in an auto-urban character area.
3. Residential. The predominant form of suburban residential development is characterized by a high degree of open space on the
lot. In these areas, less accommodation is made to the automobile, and in many cases, the driveways lead to side loaded garages or
detached garages in the rear yard. Typically these areas are comprised of single-family detached dwellings where larger front and
side yards allow for much greater building setbacks (compared to auto-urban residential areas). In some cases, single-family
detached and single-family attached housing is provided in planned cluster developments, where smaller individual lot sizes are
allowed in exchange for large areas of common open space, where each lot abuts the common open space.
See Chapter 2, Land Use and Character and Appendix A, Existing and Future Character Descriptions, from the Cuero Comprehensive Plan.
Character, Urban means a character of development that is comprised of nonresidential and mixed-uses (e.g., live/work units, or residential over
retail uses, etc.) where a sense of enclosure is created through the buildings being brought to the street (i.e., a build-to line), parking is on the
street or in public parking lots or parking structures, and the street atmosphere is more pedestrian-friendly and walkable than in other character
areas.
See Chapter 2, Land Use and Character and Appendix A, Existing and Future Character Descriptions, from the Cuero Comprehensive Plan.
Child-Care Facility means a facility licensed, certified, or registered by the state to provide assessment, care, training, education, custody,
treatment, or supervision for a child who is not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for all or part of the
24-hour day, whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services it offers.
See Chapter 42, of the Tex. Human Resources Code.
Child-Care Facility, Day-Care means a child-care facility that provides care at a location other than the residence of the director, owner, or
operator of the child-care facility for seven or more children under 14 years of age for less than 24 hours a day, but at least two hours a day,
three or more days a week, which could include the following:
1. Before or After-School Programs. Provides care before or after, or before and after, the customary school day and during school
holidays, for at least two hours a day, three days a week, to children who attend pre-kindergarten through grade six.
2. School-Age Programs. Provides supervision, along with recreation or skills instruction or training, and may provide
transportation, before or after the customary school day, for at least two hours a day, three days a week, to children attending prekindergarten
through grade six. A school-age program may also operate during school holidays, the summer period, or any other time
when school is not in session.
See Chapter 42, of the Tex. Human Resources Code.
Child-Care Facility, Group Home means a child-care facility that provides care at the residence of the director, owner, or operator of the childcare
facility for seven or more children under 14 years of age for less than 24 hours a day, but at least two hours a day, three or more days a
week.
See Chapter 42, of the Tex. Human Resources Code.
Child-Care Facility, Residential (“RCCF”) means a facility licensed or certified by the state that operates for all of the 24-hour day. The term
includes general residential operations, child-placing agencies, foster group homes, foster homes, agency foster group homes, and agency
foster homes, which are further defined as follows:
1. General Residential Operation means a child-care facility that provides care for more than 12 children for 24 hours a day,
including facilities known as children's homes, halfway houses, residential treatment centers, emergency shelters, and therapeutic
camps.
2. Child-Placing Agency means a person, including an organization, other than the natural parents or guardian of a child who plans
for the placement of or places a child in a child-care facility, agency foster home, agency foster group home, or adoptive home.
3. Foster Group Home means a child-care facility that provides care for 7 to 12 children for 24 hours a day.
4. Foster Home means a child-care facility that provides care for not more than six children for 24 hours a day.
5. Agency Foster Group Home means a facility that provides care for seven to 12 children for 24 hours a day, is used only by a
licensed child-placing agency, and meets department standards.
6. Agency Foster Home means a facility that provides care for not more than six children for 24 hours a day, is used only by a
licensed child-placing agency, and meets department standards.
See Chapter 42, of the Tex. Human Resources Code.
Child-Care, Family Home means a home that provides regular care in the caretaker's own residence for not more than six children under 14
years of age, excluding children who are related to the caretaker, and that provides care after school hours for not more than six additional
elementary school children, but the total number of children, including children who are related to the caretaker, does not exceed 12 at any given
time. The term does not include a home that provides care exclusively for any number of children who are related to the caretaker.
See Chapter 42, of the Tex. Human Resources Code.
City means the City of Cuero, DeWitt County, Texas.
City Council means City Council of the City of Cuero, DeWitt County, Texas.
Clinic means a facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an outpatient basis, including
diagnostic services, treatment, training, administration, and services to outpatients, employees, or visitors. The term clinic includes immediate
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/438
care facilities, where urgent care treatment is the dominant form of care provided at the facility, but does not include hospital, freestanding
emergency medical care facility, or state-designated trauma center.
Commercial Amusement, Indoor means uses that provide commercial amusement indoors, including, but not limited to:
1. Bowling alleys and pool rooms;
2. Movie theaters and live theaters;
3. Indoor skating rinks (ice or roller);
4. Indoor velodromes;
5. Video arcades; and
6. Local area network computer gaming centers (not including “Internet cafes/sweepstakes”).
The phrase “commercial amusement, indoor” does not mean “sexually oriented businesses.”
Commercial Amusement, Outdoor means uses that provide commercial amusement outdoors, including, but not limited to:
1. Amusement or water parks;
2. Batting cages;
3. Fairgrounds;
4. Miniature golf establishments;
5. Golf course/club;
6. Golf driving ranges; and
7. Stadiums/arenas/drive-in theaters.
The phrase “commercial amusement, outdoor” does not mean “sexually oriented businesses.”
Commercial Outdoor Sales Event means the periodic outdoor sales of merchandise on-site by occupants of a commercial lot or parcel.
Community Garden means a private or public area of land that is used for the noncommercial cultivation of fruits, herbs, flowers, vegetables, or
ornamental plants by more than one person or family.
Computerized Sweepstakes Device means a computer, machine, game or apparatus which upon insertion of a coin, token, access number,
magnetic card or similar object, or upon payment of anything of value, may be operated by the public generally for use in a contest of skill,
entertainment, amusement or chance whether or not registering a score, and which provides the user with a chance to win anything of value, on
a per play basis, or any cash payout or anything that could be redeemed, directly or indirectly for any cash payout and which is not gambling
under state or local laws.
The phrase “computerized sweepstakes device” does not include machines designated for use by the State Lottery Commission.
Concept Plan means an approved plan that is required of all multi-phased developments so that the Planning and Zoning Commission can
render a determination on each preliminary and/or final plat in context of how the entire project will be developed as a whole.
Conditional Use means a use, which because of its potential impacts, may be permitted in a given zoning district (as specified in Division 2.100,
Permitted, Limited, Conditional, Temporary, and Prohibited Uses), only after public hearing review and issuance of a conditional use permit.
Conditional uses are subject to general standards (see Section 14.402, Conditional Use Permits) and specific standards (see Division 2.200,
Limited and Conditional Use Standards), which are intended to improve compatibility for abutting properties and the community as a whole.
Conditional Use Permit means a discretionary approval granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission for conditional uses.
Condominium means a set of legal interests in real property consisting of:
1. An undivided interest in common in real property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination thereof,
together with
2. A separate interest in real property, in an interest or interests in real property, or in any combination thereof.
Cottage means a small single-family detached dwelling unit with ground level gross floor area of less than 1,000 square feet which is intended for
small lots in specified zoning districts.
Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions means a restriction on the use or development of land, or which requires affirmative actions to be
performed (e.g., the payment of dues to a property owners' association, maintenance of common open space, etc.), that is set forth in a recorded
agreement, and that runs with the land (i.e., it is binding upon subsequent owners of the property).
Cut-off Fixture means an outdoor lighting fixture, or luminaire, with shields, reflectors, or panels that direct and cut off the light at an angle that is
less than 90 degrees.
D Terms
Department, where not used in reference to a specific department (e.g., “Utilities Department”), means the Planning and Development
Department (or title as amended).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/438
Developer means a person seeking to construct buildings or structures, or otherwise improve a parcel proposed for development as defined in
this UDC.
Development means the construction of a new building or other structures on a lot, the relocation of an existing building on another lot, or the use
of open land for a new use. In addition, it also means any man-made change to improved or unimproved land, buildings, or structures, including,
but not limited to, parking, fences, pools, signs, temporary uses, and any land disturbing activities, including, but not limited to clearing of land,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, or excavation.
Drilling means digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing oil and/or gas or other hydrocarbons, or for
the purpose of injecting gas, water, or any other fluid or substance into the earth to develop, produce or improve the production of oil and/or
natural gas or other hydrocarbons (see also “oil/gas operations”).
Drive-in/Drive-Through Facility means a facility used by an approved use to provide service to customers in vehicles who either:
1. Drive up to a window or station; or
2. Drive through the building for purchases.
Driveway means a private accessway, primarily for vehicles, leading from a street to a parking or loading area.
Dry Hydrant means an unpressurized, permanently installed pipe that has one end below the water level of a pond or container.
Duplex means a single-family attached building which contains two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by:
1. An unpierced wall extending from foundation to roof (“side-by-side” duplex); or
2. A ceiling/floor that extends from exterior wall to exterior wall, pierced only by a stairway that is not inside of either dwelling unit
(“over-under” duplex).
Industrialized duplex housing shall be required to have similar exterior siding, roofing, roofing pitch, foundation fascia, fenestration, and a value
equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each duplex dwelling unit located within 500 feet of the lot in on which the industrialized
housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for the county.
See Tex. Occ. Code Section 1202, Industrialized Housing and Buildings.
Dwelling Unit means one or more rooms physically arranged so as to create an independent housekeeping establishment for occupancy by one
family, with separate facilities for all of the following: sanitation, living, sleeping, cooking, and eating.
The term dwelling unit may also means industrialized housing.
E Terms
Easement means any portion of a lot subject to an agreement between a private property owner and another party which grants the other party
the right to make limited use of that portion of the property, whether on, over, or under the property, for a specified purpose.
Effective Date means the date that this UDC is adopted, amended, or the date land areas became subject to the regulations contained in this
UDC as a result of such adoption or amendment. As the UDC is amended, the effective date may be different for different Sections.
Elevated Building means a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above the base flood elevation by foundation walls,
shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns to comply with local, state, and/federal floodplain management regulations.
Encroachment means:
1. Generally:
a. A building or structure, or part thereof, that is located:
i. Between a lot line and the nearest required setback line for the building or structure; or
ii. In an easement which does not allow for the building or structure; or
b. A part of a building or structure that crosses a lot line:
i. Into another lot under separate ownership; or
ii. Onto a right-of-way.
2. As referred to in Division 6.200, Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention, an addition to or change to the physical
condition of a specified type of flood hazard area that results in the blockage, diversion or displacement of floodwaters.
Erosion means the process by which the land surface is worn away by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity.
Event Facility means a facility that may temporarily hold a large number of persons that attend a special use such as a conference, ceremony,
exhibit, etc. (e.g., banquet hall or lodge). Meals may or may not be served or made available in such facilities.
Excavation means any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or other earthen material is cut into, dug, uncovered, displaced, or relocated.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/438
Existing Structure means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1,
1975, for FIRMs effective before that date.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) means an unincorporated area that is contiguous to the corporate boundaries of the municipality which
potentially allows the municipality to extend some regulatory provisions (e.g., the subdivision of property less than five acres in size) in the
unincorporated area as a means to protect the general health, safety, and welfare of persons residing in and adjacent to the municipality, and as
a means to define future growth and service boundaries.
F Terms
Family means one person living alone, or group living together as a single nonprofit household unit in a dwelling unit, as follows:
1. Two or more persons where they are all related to one another by blood, marriage, or legal adoption;
2. Up to two persons not related by blood, marriage or legal adoption.
Fill means a deposit of materials of any kind placed by artificial means.
Floatable Materials means any material that is not secured in place or completely enclosed in a structure, so that it could float off-site during the
occurrence of a flood and potentially cause harm to downstream property owners, or that could cause blockage of a culvert, bridge or other
drainage facility. This includes, without limitation, lumber, vehicles, boats, equipment, trash dumpsters, tires, drums or other containers, pieces of
metal, plastic or any other item or material likely to float.
Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry lands areas from:
1. The overflow of waters; and/or
2. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Elevation Study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface
elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood Fringe means the portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway covered by floodwaters during the regulatory flood.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has
delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study. See the phrase “flood elevation study.”
Floodplain or Floodprone Area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See the term “flood or flooding.”
Floodplain Management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including
but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodproofing or Floodproofed means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which
reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodway (or “Regulatory Floodway”) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Floor Area Ratio (“FAR”) means a measure of the intensity of development of a lot or parcel.
Footcandle means the unit of illuminance equal to one lumen per square foot.
Fraternal Organization means a group of people formally organized for a common interest (e.g., culture, religion, or public service), with regular
meetings and formal written membership requirements.
Frontage means the total length of the line or curve of a lot boundary that is coterminous with a street right-of-way line. For corner lots, frontage
may be calculated for each street.
Functionally Dependent Use means a use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to
water.
G Terms
Garage Sale means all sales which are open to the public and conducted from or on residential property, which are for the purpose of selling
items of the residents' tangible personal property. Garage sales are also commonly known as “lawn,” “yard,” “attic,” “porch,” “room,” “back yard,”
“patio,” or “rummage” sales. In some cases, multiple households, or entire neighborhoods may organize a single day or group of consecutive
days to host a neighborhood garage sale.
Glare means the sensation produced by luminance with the visual field that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are
adapted to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/438
Golf Course/Club means a tract of land that is designed for the game of golf, including tees, fairways, greens, and hazards, and/or a tract of land
on people drive golf balls from a central driving tee (e.g., a driving range). Such uses may also include a clubhouse, pro shop, golf equipment
rental, and incidental food vending.
The phrase “golf course/club” subsumes the uses “recreation/personal fitness, indoor,” and “recreation/personal fitness, outdoor,” when those are
uses are present and incorporated into an overall golf course/club facility.
Gross Floor Area (GFA) is the sum of the total horizontal areas of every floor of every building on a lot.
Ground Cover means low growing plants that are planted [in] landscape areas in such a manner as to form a continuous cover over the ground,
such as turf, liriope, ground cover jasmine, or like plants that can be maintained at or below two feet in height. The phrase “ground cover”
includes grasses, ornamental grasses, vines, and other herbaceous material.
H Terms
Hazardous Waste Management Facility means all contiguous land, including structures, appurtenances, and other improvements on the land,
used for processing, storing, or disposing of hazardous waste. The phrase includes a publicly or privately owned facility consisting of processing,
storage, or disposal operational hazardous waste management units such as one or more landfills, surface impoundments, waste piles,
incinerators, boilers, and industrial furnaces, including cement kilns, injection wells, salt dome waste containment caverns, land treatment
facilities, or a combination of units.
See Tex. Health and Safety Code Section 361.003.
Heavy Industry means:
1. Any use that is classified as a “high hazard” occupancy by the City; or
2. Primary processing or manufacturing or repair operations not specifically defined elsewhere in this Section, which involve:
a. An outside storage area that is larger than the area of the first floor of buildings on the same lot;
b. A material risk of environmental contamination, explosion, or fire;
c. Perceptible ground vibration;
d. Excessive noise or dust;
e. Emission of objectionable odors; or
f. More than 12 trips by semi-trailer trucks per day; or
3. Processing of minerals (except precious and semi-precious stone cutting for jewelry or precision instruments such as lasers or
watches), ores, or fossil fuels; or
4. Industries that are required to undergo New Source Review under the Federal Clean Air Act, or are subject to construction or
operation permits pursuant to the Title V of the Federal Clean Air Act; or
5. For illustrative purposes, heavy industrial uses include, but are not limited to:
a. Coal cleaning plants with thermal dryers; coke oven batteries; carbon black plants (furnace process); petroleum refineries;
petroleum storage and transfer units (except retail gasoline stations); and bulk fuel dealers;
b. Facilities used in the primary or secondary production of metals (e.g., primary zinc, copper, or lead smelters; primary
aluminum ore reduction plants; iron and steel mills; sintering plants; secondary metal production plants; and blacksmith shops);
c. Portland cement plants (not temporary batch plants);
d. Sawmills and pulp mills;
e. Incinerators with the capacity to charge more than 250 tons of refuse per day;
f. Lime plants; phosphate rock processing plants; sulfur recovery plants; and hydrofluoric, sulfuric, or nitric acid plants;
g. Fossil fuel combustion (boilers or electricity generation) totaling more than 250 million BTUs per hour of heat input;
h. Fabrication of building materials such as countertops, drywall, and cut stone;
i. Fabrication of vehicles, manufacturing equipment, durable goods, or pre-fabricated homes or home components;
j. Dry-cleaner processing plants that use PERC or comparable petrochemical solvents;
k. Meat or seafood processing plants;
l. Manufacture of glass products (e.g., window panes, bottles and jars), except hand-blown products;
m. Manufacture of plastic products (except assembly of parts that are manufactured elsewhere);
n. Plasma arc welding, cutting, gouging, surfacing, or spraying; gas welding (but not brazing); arc welding with equipment that
is rated at more than 200 amps;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/438
o. TIG welding; and other heavy welding procedures (e.g., for structural steel, automotive body, or heavy equipment
manufacture or repair);
p. Hot mix asphalt plants; and
q. Fossil fuel power plants, waste-to-energy plants, and biomass plants that produce more than 100 megawatts of electricity.
Heavy Retail/Home Center means retail and/or service activities that have regular outside service or outside storage areas, exceptionally large
floor areas, or partially enclosed structures, as listed below:
1. Permanent retail operations that are located outside of enclosed buildings, except nurseries;
2. Home centers;
3. Lumber and other building materials;
4. Lawn, garden equipment, and related supplies stores;
5. Warehouse clubs and super stores; and
6. Manufactured home sales.
Helistop means an area used for the take-off and landing of private helicopters for the purpose of picking up and discharging of passengers or
cargo. The use of the helistop is restricted to specific users or purposes (e.g., tenants of a corporate park, a hospital trauma center, etc.), and the
term does not include facilities for general helicopter aviation use.
Highest Adjacent Grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic Structure means
1. For floodplain management purposes, any structure that is:
a. Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
b. Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
c. Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been
approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
d. Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or;
b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
2. For all other purposes, any structure that contributes to the historic value of a heritage property or landmark property.
Home Occupation means a lawful business, occupation or activity conducted for financial gain from within a dwelling unit, where:
1. Such use is incidental and accessory to the use of the building as a residence by the person engaged in the home occupation;
and
2. Such use does not involve any of the following:
a. Sale of goods to customers on the premises;
b. Opening of the home to the public for the sale of goods or services without an invitation or appointment;
c. Mechanical equipment that is not normally associated with domestic household use;
d. Modification of the exterior of the home; or
e. Outside storage of equipment used for business purposes.
The phrase “home occupation” does not include any type of “child-care facility” as defined by this UDC.
Hospital means a “general hospital” or a “special hospital,” as defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code Section 241.003, and includes all
subclassifications thereof, or a “freestanding emergency medical care facility” as defined in Tex. Health and Safety Code Section 254.001.
I Terms
Illuminance means a measure of how much light is falling onto a surface, typically measured in footcandles.
Impervious Surfaces means an area that do not allow significant amounts of water to infiltrate into the ground. Examples of impervious surfaces
are blacktop and concrete.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/438
Improved Hard Surface means any street, driveway, alley, or parking lot surface paved with asphalt, concrete, brick pavers, or other approved
uniform, hard material so as to provide a durable and dust-free surface for vehicular traffic.
Improvement means any building, structure, bridge, parking area, public facility, fence, gate, wall, landscaping, or other object constituting a
physical addition to real property, or any part of such addition, or the process of installing such additions.
Industrialized Building means a nonresidential structure that is constructed off-site as one or more modular components (including the installation
of plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems), bearing an approved decal or insignia, and then transported to the site to be
affixed to a permanent foundation. To approve a building permit for an industrialized building, the Building Official shall review the designs, plans,
and specifications, whereby each page must be stamped by the Texas Industrialized Building Code Council (which is the state-designated
authority that ensures that all preconfigured modular components are in compliance with state-mandated building codes). On-site building code
inspections are to be made by the state-designated authority and witnessed by the Building Official.
See Tex. Occ. Code Section 1202, Industrialized Housing and Buildings.
Industrialized Housing means a residential structure that:
1. Includes the structure's plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems and is:
a. designed for the occupancy of one or more families;
b. constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular components built at a location other than
the permanent site; and
c. designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the module or the modular component is transported to the
permanent site and erected or installed on a permanent foundation system.
2. Industrial housing does not include:
a. a residential structure that exceeds three stories or 49 feet in height;
b. housing constructed of a sectional or panelized system that does not use a modular component; or
c. a ready-built home constructed in a manner in which the entire living area is contained in a single unit or section at a
temporary location for the purpose of selling and moving the home to another location.
To approve a building permit for industrialized housing, the Building Official shall review the designs, plans, and specifications, whereby each
page must be stamped by the Texas Industrialized Building Code Council (which is the state-designated authority that ensures that all
preconfigured modular components are in compliance with state-mandated building codes). On-site building code inspections are to be made by
the state-designated authority and witnessed by the Building Official.
See Tex. Occ. Code Section 1202, Industrialized Housing and Buildings.
Internet Cafe/Sweepstakes means any premises upon which a computerized sweepstakes device is located for the use or entertainment of the
public, whether or not such premises has other business purposes of any nature whatsoever.
J Terms
K Terms
L Terms
Land Disturbing Activity means clearing, grading, excavating, filling, dumping, grubbing, stripping, or other alteration of the earth's surface where
natural or human made ground cover is destroyed and which may result in, or contribute to, erosion and sediment pollution.
Landscape Area means that portion of a lot or parcel proposed for development which is required to contain landscape materials such as grass,
ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees, and berms. Impervious surfaces are not counted as landscaped areas.
Landscape Surface Area means the surface area of land not covered by any buildings, storage areas, or impervious surfaces. These areas shall
be maintained as lawn, formally or informally landscaped areas, or natural areas, and may be left undisturbed.
Landscape Surface Ratio (“LSR”) means the ratio of landscaped surface to a unit of land area.
Light Fixture/Luminaire means the physical unit that holds a lamp and that may include parts to redirect the light produced by the lamp.
Light Industry means uses that involve assembly, compounding, packaging, or treatment of products from previously prepared materials, with
limited outside storage and limited external impacts or risks. For illustrative purposes, light industrial uses include:
1. Assembly or refurbishing of products, instruments, electronics, office and computing machines, and fixtures from premanufactured
components;
2. Offices of general contractors, specialty subcontractors, or tradesmen which include:
a. Bay door access to indoor storage of tools, parts, and materials;
b. Parking of commercial vehicles; or
c. Outdoor storage areas that are smaller than the area of the first floor of the building that are used for storage of materials or
vehicles that are less than 12 feet in height;
3. Communications facilities, except wireless telecommunications facilities;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/438
4. Data centers, server farms, telephone exchange buildings, and telecom hotels;
5. Food production and packaging other than meat and seafood processing, restaurants, or produce packing that does not involve
other processing;
6. Furniture making or refinishing;
7. Manufacture of textiles or apparel;
8. Screen printing of apparel;
9. Printing and publishing, except copy centers, and except printing presses that require a Texas Clean Air Act Permit or a Federal
Clean Air Act Permit (these are heavy industry);
10. Disassembly of consumer electronics and/or appliances into component parts, where all operations and storage are within an
enclosed building;
11. Manufacture or compounding of pharmaceutical products, dietary supplements, health and beauty products, and herbal
products; and
12. Packaging of consumer products.
Limited Use means a use that is allowed in a zoning district, subject to special standards that mitigate its impact on the environment or other
uses in the district or that prevent a concentration of the use in a particular area. In some cases, the special standards may prohibit the use from
being developed on every property in a district.
Live-Work Unit means a dwelling unit that provides space that is designed for one or more commercial or office uses that are allowed in the
zoning district. Access between the dwelling unit and the commercial or office space is provided within the unit or from an exterior stairwell.
Lot means a contiguous area of land with boundaries established by a legal instrument such as a recorded deed, court order, or a recorded plat,
which is recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title. The term “lot” does not include areas within rights-of-way and shall
not be construed to allow the creation of lots that are not lawfully created in conformance with the provisions of this UDC (see also lot of record).
Lot Area means the area of a lot taken at its perimeter exclusive of any portion within a public or private street right-of-way.
Lot[,] Corner is a lot situated at the junction of two or more streets.
Lot Coverage means the ratio of gross floor area of all buildings and structures and all areas that are associated with driveways and parking lots
on a lot to the total lot area, expressed as a percentage.
Lot Depth is the length of a line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines.
Lot, Double Frontage is any lot, not a corner lot, with frontage on two streets which are parallel to each other or within 45 degrees of being
parallel to each other.
Lot, Interior is a lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, Irregular is any lot not having equal front and rear lot lines or equal side lot lines; a lot, the opposite lot lines of which vary in dimension and
the corners of which have an angle of either more or less than 90 degrees.
Lot Line means the boundary of a lot separating it from an abutting lot, or the dividing line between lots, pieces or parcels of land, without regard
to any recorded subdivision plat.
1. “Front Lot Line” means the lot line which abuts a public street, private street, or easement of access. The lot owner shall
designate the front lot line for any corner lot or through lot and such designation may not be changed after the principal building is
erected.
2. “Rear Lot Line” means:
a. For a quadrangular lot, the lot line which is not tangent to any point on the front lot line.
b. For a polygonal or irregularly shaped lot, the course, whether straight or curved, along the lot line, the center point of which
is most remote, in linear distance, from the center point of the front lot line.
c. For a triangular lot, the junction point of the two side lines which point shall be treated as the rear lot line.
3. “Side Lot Line” means the lot lines that run generally perpendicular or at angles to the street or any lot line which is not a front or
rear lot line.
Illustrative Lot Lines
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/438
Lot of Record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the DeWitt County Clerk or parcel of
land the deed (including metes and bounds description) for which was recorded in the office of the DeWitt County Clerk prior to January 1, 1986.
Lot Width means the distance across the lot (side lot line to side lot line).
Lowest Floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely
for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Low Impact Development means a comprehensive land planning and engineering design approach with the goal of maintaining, as a minimum,
the pre-development hydrologic regime on the site without solely using traditional storm drainage conveyance systems (e.g., detention/retention
basins) to satisfy drainage and flood mitigation requirements. LID integrates small-scale measures scattered throughout the development site,
including such things as constructed green spaces, native landscaping, and a variety of innovative bioretention (e.g., bioswales) and infiltration
techniques to capture and manage stormwater on-site. LID reduces peak runoff by allowing rainwater to soak into the ground, evaporate into the
air, or collect in storage receptacles for irrigation and other beneficial uses. In areas with slow drainage or infiltration, LID captures the first flush
before excess stormwater is diverted into traditional storm conveyance systems.
M Terms
Manufactured Home (also known as a “HUD-code manufactured home”):
1. means a structure:
a. constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development;
b. built on a permanent chassis;
c. designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required
utilities;
d. transportable in one or more sections; and
e. in the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when erected on-site, at least
320 square feet;
2. includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home; and
3. does not include a recreational vehicle as defined by 24 C.F.R. Section 3282.8(g).
See Tex. Occ. Code Section 1201, Manufactured Housing.
Manufactured Home Lot or Space means a part of a parcel of land located within a manufactured home park or subdivision designed to meet the
minimum provisions set out in this UDC for the placement of a single manufactured home, which can be further classified as follows:
1. Manufactured Home Lot. A part of a parcel within a manufactured home subdivision which is owned in fee-simple by the owner
of the property; or
2. Manufactured Home Space. A undivided space within a manufactured home park which is established for identification
purposes, used to calculate the minimum requirements as set out in this UDC, and is under common ownership.
This term does not apply to manufactured homes that are located on lots or parcels not associated with a manufactured home park or
subdivision.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for
rent (“Manufactured Home Park”) or sale (“Manufactured Home Subdivision”).
Manufactured Home Sales means a business engaged in the sales or rental of manufactured homes.
Mayor means the Mayor of the City of Cuero, DeWitt County, Texas.
Mean Sea Level, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, means the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other
datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) are referenced.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/438
Medical Lab means a facility offering diagnostic or pathological testing and analysis of blood, blood fluids, pathological specimens, DNA
sampling and analysis, and any other diagnostic test generally recognized in the health care industry.
Meeting Hall means a building that is designed for public gatherings or meetings.
Mining/Extraction means uses that involve extraction of minerals and fossil fuels from the ground, including surface and subsurface mining,
drilling (excluding oil and gas operations), and quarrying facilities.
The phrase “mining/extraction” does not mean “oil/gas operations.”
Mixed-Use means development in which a combination of residential and commercial uses (e.g., residential-over-retail), or several classifications
of commercial uses (e.g., office and retail), are located on the same parcel proposed for development.
Mobile Home:
1. means a structure:
a. constructed before June 15, 1976;
b. built on a permanent chassis;
c. designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the structure is connected to the required
utilities;
d. transportable in one or more sections; and
e. in the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length or, when erected on-site, at least
320 square feet; and
2. includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home.
See Tex. Occ. Code Section 1201, Manufactured Housing.
Mobile Home Park means unified development of mobile homes that has been a nonconforming use in the City since November 8, 1984.
Model Home/On-Site Real Estate Office means a dwelling unit temporarily used as a sales office for on-site sales of individual units in a
residential subdivision or condominium development under construction.
1. Model homes are used to display the layout and finishes of other dwelling units that are or will be available for sale within a
subdivision or condominium development.
2. Sales offices can be located in a model home, condominium unit, or in a separate modular unit located on-site in the subdivision
or condominium development.
Multi-family means buildings that contain three or more dwelling units that:
1. Are accessed by from interior elevators or hallways, or from individual exterior entrances (e.g., an apartment complex);
2. Are separated by interior walls and/or floors; and
3. Are intended to be rented, leased, or owned as a condominium by a family.
The term multi-family does not include boarding houses, dormitories, fraternities, sororities, single-family attached, or overnight accommodations
(e.g., hotels and motels).
N Terms
Neighborhood Special Event means a temporary outdoor use of private property in a district zoned residential that is sponsored by the
subdivision and is likely to generate visitors sufficient in quantity to obstruct, delay, or interfere with the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic (e.g., a subdivision-wide yard sale).
New Construction means:
1. For the purpose of determining flood insurance rates, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
2. For floodplain management purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on
or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
3. For all other purposes, “new construction” means construction in a location where no buildings or structures existed at the time a
permit is sought pursuant to this UDC, except where such construction is a modification or expansion of an existing building or
structure into an additional land area.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/438
Nonconforming Use means a use of land or use of a building or structure lawfully existing at the time this UDC or a subsequent amendment to
this UDC became effective which does not conform to the use requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
Nonresidential means any use, building or structure (or portion of a building or structure) occupied or intended to be occupied, in whole or in part,
for a use other than a dwelling unit, home, residing place, or permanent living space or sleeping space for one or more human beings.
Nursery/Greenhouse, Retail means an enterprise that conducts the sale of plants grown off of the premises. The terms also include, as an
accessory use, the sale of a limited selection of items (e.g., soil, planters, pruners, mulch, lawn or patio furniture, garden accessories, etc., but
not power equipment) that are directly related to the care and maintenance of landscapes. The term “nursery/greenhouse, retail” does not
include the cultivation of trees (or other vegetation normally associated with landscaping) where the principal use is growing nursery stock for
sale at off-site retail businesses, as this is more appropriately classified as agriculture.
Nursery/Greenhouse, Wholesale means an enterprise that conducts the sale of plants grown on the premises. The terms also include, as an
accessory use, the sale of a limited selection of items (e.g., soil, planters, pruners, mulch, lawn or patio furniture, garden accessories, etc., but
not power equipment) that are directly related to the care and maintenance of landscapes.
Nursing/Convalescent Home means an establishment that
1. Furnishes, in one or more facilities, food and shelter to four or more persons who are unrelated to the proprietor of the
establishment; and
2. Provides minor treatment under the direction and supervision of a physician licensed by the Texas Medical Board, or other
services that meet some need beyond the basic provision of food, shelter, and laundry.
O Terms
Obstruction means any physical barrier, structure, material or impediment in, along, across or projecting into a watercourse that may alter,
impede, retard or change the direction or velocity of the flow of water, or that may, due to its location, have a propensity to snare or collect debris
carried by the flow of water or to be carried downstream. Obstruction shall include, but not be limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment,
levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill,
structure, and vegetation in, along, across or projecting into a watercourse.
Office, General means uses in which professional, business, information processing, or financial services are provided. The term includes such
uses as:
1. Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping;
2. Administration of businesses (e.g., corporate headquarters);
3. Advertising and graphic design;
4. Architectural, engineering, geo-technical, urban planning, and surveying services;
5. Attorneys and court reporters;
6. Banks, mortgage companies; and financial services;
7. Call centers;
8. Computer programming;
9. Counseling services;
10. Data processing and word processing services;
11. Detective agencies;
12. Government offices;
13. Insurance;
14. Interior design;
15. Real estate sales;
16. Research and development that does not include on-site manufacturing;
17. Retail catalog, Internet, and telephone order processing, but not warehousing; and
18. Virtual office services.
Office, Medical means office space used for the examination and/or treatment of patients on an outpatient basis (with no overnight stays by
patients), generally by appointment, by such professionals as:
1. Medical doctors (e.g., physicians, pediatricians, obstetricians, gynecologists, radiologists, geriatricians, general and specialist
surgeons, podiatrists, ophthamologists, anesthesiologists, etc.) and nurses;
2. Dentists, endodontists, orthodontists, and periodontists;
3. Optometrists;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/438
4. Midwives;
5. Physical therapists, occupational therapists, and speech therapists;
6. Chiropractors, licensed massage therapists, and acupuncturists;
7. Nutritionists and homeopaths;
8. Psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, clinical social workers, and marriage and family therapists;
9. Physiatrists, physiotherapists, orthotists, prosthetists, recreational therapists, audiologists, respiratory therapists, rehabilitation
counselors, prosthetic technicians, and personal care assistants; and
10. Other comparable health care professionals.
The phrase “medical office” includes the phrase “medical lab” to the extent necessary to carry out diagnostic services for the medical office's
patients. The phrase “medical office” does not include the phrase “clinic.”
Official Zoning Map means the map showing the location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this UDC. This map is entitled, the
“Official Zoning Map of the City of Cuero, Texas.”
Oil/Gas Operations include but is not limited to exploration, construction, site preparation, operation, maintenance, or use of any installation,
facility or structure, directly or indirectly, to carry out or facilitate one or more of the following functions: repair, development, drilling, re-working,
re-drilling, production, storage, processing, plugging, extraction, enhanced recovery, fracturing, pressurizing, stimulation, abandonment or
shipping of oil or gas from the subsurface of the earth, including site development.
The phrase “oil/gas development” does not mean “mining/extraction.”
On-site Recreation and Leisure Area means an outdoor common open space area within a parcel proposed for development which is designed
and designated for use by residents of the development for recreation or leisure activities. Such areas may include playground equipment, play
courts, swimming pools, formal plazas with seating areas, community gardens, or other comparable features. The phrase “on-site recreation and
leisure area” does not include trails.
Opacity means the measurement of the screening effectiveness of a bufferyard or fence, expressed as the percent of view across the bufferyard
or fence that may be blocked to a height of 35 feet, based on the spacing of fence slats or expected volume of landscape material at a variety of
heights that is likely to result from a given planting program.
Open Space means land areas that are left undeveloped from ground to sky in order to meet the open space ratio or other landscaping
requirements (e.g., bufferyards, parking lot landscaping, etc.) of this UDC.
Common Open Space means areas of a parcel proposed for development that are used for open space, landscape areas
(provided that the area of landscaping is not less than five feet in any dimension), on-site recreation and leisure areas and
naturalized stormwater best management practices.
Open Space Ratio (OSR) means the proportion of a development required to be set aside and preserved as open space. Minimum OSRs for
residential development are set out in Section 3.101, Development Standards for New Residential Neighborhoods.
Overnight Accommodations means places that offer overnight accommodations for short-term rental in increments of not less than 20 hours,
including hotels, motels, and commercial inns.
Owner/Operator means the person who owns the property, or a person who operates on or manages the property, including any employees or
outside contractors who are engaged to work on or from the property.
P Terms
Parcel Proposed for Development means any legally described parcel of land which is designated by the owner or developer as land to be used
or developed as a single unit, or which has been developed as a unit as determined by the Building Official. Parcels proposed for development
oftentimes go through the subdivision process to create individual lots.
Parking Aisle means the area of a parking lot or parking structure which provides for vehicular access to off-street parking stalls. The phrase
“parking aisles” does not include the word “driveway” or the phrase “access point.”
Parking Lot means an area of land that is designated for parking spaces for automobiles and light trucks, the related parking aisles, the
landscaped areas that are surrounded by the parking lot's paved areas, and the landscaped areas at the corners of the paved areas insofar as
their inclusion in the parking lot area gives it a regular shape. The phrase “parking lot” does not include driveways on individual residential lots,
nor does it include individual garages or carports. Parking lots that are principal uses of property are not related to a specific land use on the
same parcel.
Parking Row means a row of parking spaces that are parallel to each other and take access to a parking aisle or street. Parking rows may exist
as singular rows, or may be located back-to-back to each other providing access to different, but parallel parking aisles.
Parking, Shared means parking lots or spaces which is shared by tenants, visitors, and the general public.
Parking Space means an area of land designated for the parking of motor vehicles, and connected to a street, parking aisle, or other accessway.
Parking, Stand-Alone means parking lots or parking structures that are not provided as required parking for a specific use, and where a fee for
use is typically charged. The phrase “parking, stand-alone” also includes facilities that provide both parking for a specific use and regular fee
parking for people not connected to the use. The phrase includes small structures intended to shield attendants from the weather.
Parking Structure means a structure that is composed of one or more levels that are used exclusively for parking spaces for motor vehicles. A
parking structure may be totally below grade (underground parking structure); or partially or totally above grade (above-ground parking
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/438
structure); and may be separate from or integrated into a building that is used for other purposes. Parking structures include parking lifts. Parking
structures that are principal uses of property are not related to a specific land use on the same parcel.
Pattern Book means a guide for the development of buildings that establishes standards for the form, proportion, massing, architectural styles,
color, materials, and detail requirements of buildings.
Pawn Shop means an establishment that is engaged in the business of:
1. Lending money on the security of pledged goods; or
2. Purchasing goods on condition that the goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed
period.
See Tex. Finance Code Section 371.003.
Permanent Foundation means permanent masonry, concrete, or a footing or foundation to which a manufactured home or industrialized housing,
industrialized building, building, or structure may be affixed.
Permit means one or more documents issued by the City allowing a person to begin an activity provided for in this UDC or other codes,
ordinances, and regulatory provisions administered by the City. A permit allows only the activity (e.g., temporary uses), work, or development
specified in the permit.
Permitted Use means a use that is allowed by right in a zoning district after the issuance of a permit (in most cases), provided such use is
authorized as a permitted use by this UDC and the Building Official determines compliance with all applicable provisions of this UDC and other
applicable ordinances and regulations.
Place of Public Assembly means a building in which people assemble for civic, educational, religious, or cultural purposes. This use includes
facilities used for the following:
1. Event Facilities;
2. Fraternal Organizations;
3. Meeting Halls; and
4. Places of Worship.
The phrase “place of public assembly” does not include the phrase “recreation/personal fitness, indoor” or “commercial amusement, indoor” or
“school, private” or “school, public.”
Place of Worship means a facility where persons regularly assemble for religious purposes and related social events.
Planned Cluster means a type of residential neighborhood in which single-family detached and single-family attached dwelling units are
concentrated on a portion of the parcel proposed for development, in order to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, open space, or
preservation of sensitive land areas.
Planning and Zoning Commission means the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Cuero, DeWitt County, Texas.
Plat means a document, prepared by a registered land surveyor or engineer, which delineates property lines and shows monuments and other
landmarks for the purpose of identifying property. Once approved by the applicable decision-making authority, plats are submitted to the DeWitt
County Clerk for recording and create legal lots of record.
Plat, Amending means a replat that addresses minor changes, corrections of clerical errors, or limited modifications affecting a limited number of
property owners or lots.
Plat, Final is a subdivision plat which is a complete and exact subdivision plan prepared in conformity with the provisions of this UDC and in a
manner suitable for recording with the DeWitt County Clerk.
Plat, Minor means a subdivision plat or plan that involves four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any
new street or the extension of public utilities. Minor plats are approved administratively by the Building Official and are submitted to the DeWitt
County Clerk for recording, as appropriate.
Plat, Preliminary is a subdivision plat that includes a plan of a subdivision or of a land development, including all required supplementary data,
showing the approximate proposed street and lot or site layout, or a plan of existing private streets to be dedicated to public use, as a basis for
consideration prior to the preparation of a final plat. Preliminary plats are not submitted to the DeWitt County Clerk for recording.
Plat, Replat means a plat that is recorded and controls over the preceding plat over a subdivision or portion of a subdivision in conformance with
the provisions set out in Texas Local Government Code.
See Tex. Local Gov't Code Section 212.014, et seq.
Plat, Subdivision is a plat that depicts the subdivision of land into lots and blocks (and sometimes the combination of land), and is the product of
a process that simplifies legal property descriptions and dedicates lands for public use. For the purposes of the UDC, subdivision plats can be
further classified as:
1. Amending Plats;
2. Final Plats;
3. Minor Plats;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/438
4. Preliminary Plats; and
5. Replats.
Plat, Vacating means a replat to eliminate the subdivision of property reflected by a prior plat.
Portable Storage Unit means an enclosed storage container less than 20 feet in length that may be used to transport goods, but may then also
be stationary on a single site for any period of time before or after transport. The term includes, but is not limited to:
1. A truck container, with or without the chassis attached to it;
2. A moving van;
3. A portable on demand (POD) moving container;
4. A pre-assembled storage structure; or
5. A shipping container.
Power Generation, Small Scale (Renewable/Noncombustible) means facilities that generate electricity from renewable noncombustible sources
(e.g., wind, water, geothermal, or solar, but not alcohol or biodiesel) and deliver it to the power grid as either base load or peak load, also known
as a “power plant” or “peaker power plant”; that are scaled to serve more than one building, but are not utility scale. The capacity rating of small
scale power generation does not exceed two megawatts.
The phrase “power generation, small scale (renewable/noncombustible)” does not mean “small wind energy system,” which is permitted as an
accessory structure as set out in Section 11.105, Solar Arrays and Small Wind Energy Systems (SWES).
Power Generation, Utility Scale means utility scale power plants that generate electricity using fossil fuels or renewable fuels, such as biomass,
biodiesel, alcohol, wind, water, geothermal, or solar and delivers it to the power grid as either base load or peak load, also known as a “power
plant” or “peaker power plant.”
Principal Building means a building in which the principal use of a lot or parcel is conducted.
Principal Structure means, if there is no principal building the structure in which the principal use of a parcel is located, or the largest structure on
a parcel. Fences and garden walls are not principal structures.
Principal Use means the main use to which a parcel, lot, or premise (e.g., a leased space in a shopping center) is put.
Private Restrictions means easements (also known as servitudes), covenants, conditions, and/or restrictions on property which are enforceable
between private parties.
Prohibitive Use means a use that is not allowed in the specified zoning district and in some cases the entire City.
Property Lines. See Lot Line.
Property Owners' Association means an incorporated nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which:
1. Each lot, unit, or home or business owner in a planned cluster subdivision (or other described land area) is automatically a
member;
2. Each lot, unit, or homeowner or business owner is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expense of
the organization's activities (e.g., maintaining open space, common open space, or other commonly owned property such as entrance
monuments and landscaping); and
3. The charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property.
Property owners' associations may also be called such things as “community associations,” “condominium associations,” “homeowner
associations,” “neighborhood associations,” etc.
Protected Tree means:
1. Individual Trees. Any tree (including historic street trees) of at least eight inches in diameter at breast height (DBH) measured 24
inches above grade which is on the approved plant list (see Appendix A, Plant Lists) or established for at least five years and not on
the prohibited plant list.
2. Required Trees. Any tree that is shown on an approved landscape plan that is necessary to:
a. Meet the planting requirements of this UDC; or
b. Meet a condition of approval of the development to which the landscape plan applies.
3. Trees on Historic Properties. Any tree with a DBH of five inches or more on a property which is:
a. Designated as an historic landmark; or
b. Within a local historic district.
4. Exceptions. Trees which meet the above criteria are not considered protected trees if they are:
a. Overmature;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/438
b. Diseased;
c. Poor in form; or
d. Leaning heavily over buildings.
Public Special Event means any planned special event or gathering held on private property, regardless of whether a fee is charged, which
invites the general public to an identifiable place and at a specified time and is likely to generate visitors sufficient in quantity to obstruct, delay, or
interfere with the safe and orderly movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. Public special events could include outdoor gatherings; auctions;
art sales; outdoor festivals, concerts, or parades; auctions; carnivals; circuses; outdoor meetings; special athletic activities (e.g., running races),
and special entertainment at commercial properties, etc.
Public Utilities mean utility substations or transmission and local distribution facilities, including electric, gas, telephone, sewer, water, and
stormwater. Whether a substation or transmission facility, the transmission lines shall either be in road rights-of-way, adjacent to the rights-ofway,
or in easements or separate rights-of-way 20 feet or less in width.
Q Terms
R Terms
Rail Yard means an area of land, a portion of which is covered by a system of tracks, that provides for the making up of trains by one or more
railroads or private industry concerns. Necessary functions of a rail yard include but are not limited to the classifying, switching, storing,
assembling, distributing, consolidating, moving, repairing, weighing, or transferring of cars, trains, engines, locomotives, and rolling stock.
Recreation/Personal Fitness, Indoor means uses that provide active indoor recreation opportunities, on a subscription or membership basis, on a
per unit of time basis, or free of charge, for the public or for residents of a subdivision or development. The phrase “recreation/personal fitness,
indoor” includes but is not limited to:
1. Subdivision, neighborhood, or community recreation centers or athletic clubs;
2. Gymnasiums;
3. Indoor swimming pools; or
4. Indoor tennis, basketball, racquetball, handball or other play courts.
The phrase “recreation/personal fitness, indoor” does not include the phrase “commercial amusement, indoor,” nor does it include indoor
playgrounds that are accessory to restaurants. The phrase “recreation/personal fitness, indoor” is subsumed by the phrases “amusement or
water park” when such facilities include indoor recreation activities.
Recreation/Personal Fitness, Outdoor means uses that provide active or passive outdoor recreation opportunities, on a subscription or
membership basis, on a per unit of time basis, or free of charge, for the public or for residents of a subdivision or development. The phrase
“recreation/personal fitness, outdoor” includes but is not limited to:
1. Jogging, cycling, tot-lots, fitness trails, playing fields, playgrounds, outdoor swimming pools, and tennis courts;
2. Arboretums, wildlife sanctuaries, forests, and other natural areas which may be used for walking or hiking; or
3. Other passive recreation-oriented areas, including picnic areas and community garden plots.
The phrase “recreation/personal fitness, outdoor” does not include “commercial amusement, outdoor” or “shooting range, outdoor.”
Recreational Vehicle (RV) means a portable structure designed to be transported over the highways, and containing living or sleeping
accommodations, such structure being designed and actually used as a temporary dwelling during travel for recreation and pleasure purposes,
and not exceeding eight feet in width.
Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park means a unified development of recreational vehicle spaces, community facilities, and permitted permanent
buildings which are combined to support two or more recreational vehicles used as living or sleeping quarters by the day, week, or month,
whether a charge is or is not made.
Recreational Vehicle (RV) Space means a specific part of a lot or area in a RV park that has been reserved for the placement of one recreational
vehicle.
Redevelopment means any of the following:
1. The complete demolition of a principal building, followed by the construction of a new building which occupies a different footprint
than the original principal building; or
2. The destruction of a principal building to an extent that is equal to or greater than 50 percent of its assessed value, followed by
reconstruction and repurposing of the building for a type of use for which the original building was not designed; or
3. Expansion of a principal building by more than 50 percent of its gross floor area.
Rendering Plant means a facility that processes waste materials originating from animals and vegetables, including animal parts and scraps,
offal, paunch manure, and waste cooking grease.
See Tex. Health and Safety Code Section 361.093.
Residential means any use, building or structure (or portion of a building or structure) that is used for premises that contain habitable rooms for
nontransient occupancy, designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. Residential uses are typically contained within single-family
detached, single-family attached, and multi-family dwelling units.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/438
The term “residential” does not mean “overnight accommodations.”
Restaurant means an establishment that serves prepared meals to customers for consumption on-site or off-site. A restaurant can include the
sale of alcoholic beverages, provided however, that if more than 75 percent of the restaurant's gross revenue comes from alcohol beverage
sales, it is classified as a “bar or nightclub.”
Restaurants that include a “drive-in, drive-through facility” are limited to those areas where a drive-in, drive-through is a permitted use.
Retail Sales and Services means the sale of goods and/or services directly to a consumer that are not specifically defined elsewhere in this
UDC, and which do not include regular outside storage or sales. The phrase includes uses that are comparable to the following:
1. Branch banking and check cashing;
2. Clothing, clothing accessory, and jewelry stores;
3. Computer and small appliance repair;
4. Copy centers, parcel service drop-off locations, and mailbox services;
5. Electronics and appliance stores;
6. Florist, card, and gift shops;
7. Food and beverage stores (but not alcohol beverage sales);
8. Furniture and home furnishings stores;
9. General merchandise stores;
10. Hair and nail salons;
11. Hardware stores, plumbing supplies, electrical supplies, lighting stores;
12. Health and personal care stores;
13. Laundromat, retail dry cleaning, tailoring, shoe repair, and clothes restoration;
14. Miscellaneous store retailers;
15. Music, dance, martial arts, yoga, and other similar instruction;
16. Paint and wallpaper stores;
17. Pet stores (not including animal boarding and veterinarian services, small animal);
18. Secondhand stores and pawn shops;
19. Sporting goods, hobby, book, and music stores;
20. Tattoo parlors;
21. Tanning facilities (see Tex. Health and Safety Code Section 145.002) and day spas; and
22. Tutoring.
“Retail sales and services” that include a “drive-in, drive-through facility” are limited to those areas where a drive-in, drive-through is a permitted
use.
Right-of-Way means an area of land not on a lot that is dedicated for public or private use to accommodate a transportation system. In no case
shall a right-of-way be construed to mean an easement.
Riverine means a watercourse relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
S Terms
Sample Well Site means the installation of a vertical riser of four inches in circumference, extending four to six inches above grade, used for the
purpose of detecting the presence of non-biodegradable materials at or near the lot line where the owner/operator's on-site wastewater collection
system connects to the City's off-site wastewater system.
Sanitary Sewage Disposal System, On-Lot means a system in which sanitary sewage and wastewater is collected from a single use or dwelling
unit, by a system of pipes, and carried to a septic tank and tile disposal field located within the boundaries of an individual lot.
Schools, Private means an educational institution which provides fee-based instruction and may include:
1. Early Learning Centers (e.g., pre-schools) or Elementary School:
a. A facility which provides daily care with educational services for children not yet attending elementary school (i.e.,
kindergarten); or
b. A school that provides general full-time educational curriculum for grades one through five, and which may include a
kindergarten.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/438
2. Middle School. A middle school means a school that provides general full-time educational curriculum for grades six through
eight.
3. High School. A high school means a school that provides general full-time educational curriculum for grades nine through 12.
4. Boarding School. Boarding school means an elementary or secondary school at which some or all of the pupils receive board
and lodging during the school term.
5. Special Education Facilities.
The term “private school” does not include schools which focus on specialty instruction (e.g., dancing, music, beauty, swimming, etc.).
Schools, Public means an institution that provides full-time instruction for students from pre-kindergarten to 12th grade. There are four types of
schools for the purposes of this UDC:
1. Pre-Kindergarten means a school in which children are enrolled in a structured educational program prior to kindergarten. Pre-
Kindergarten does not mean “child-care facility, day-care.”
2. Elementary School means a school that teaches students from kindergarten through grade 5.
3. Middle School means a school that teaches students from grades 6 to 8.
4. High School means a school that teaches students from grades 9 to 12.
Seasonal Sales means the temporary outdoor sale of merchandise from private property that permit[s] either temporary seasonal retail sales or
outdoor display or sale of goods related to a holiday event (e.g., sale of holiday trees or Fourth of July fireworks, etc.), particular seasonal activity
(e.g., sale of pumpkins in the Fall), or other similar merchandise or other articles of arts and crafts related to the seasonal sales activity.
Sediment Pollution means failure to use management (including stormwater management) or conservation practices to abate wind or water
erosion of the soil or to abate the degradation of the waters of the state by soil sediment in conjunction with land grading, excavating, filling, or
other land disturbing activities on land used or being developed or built upon for commercial, industrial, residential, or other non-agricultural
purposes.
Septic Tank means a multiple compartment, watertight receptacle which receives sewage from a building and is designed and constructed so as
to permit settling of solids from the sewage, digestion of the organic matter, and discharge of the liquid portion into a disposal area.
Setback means a minimum distance that is required from a lot line to a building, structure, or sign, as the context requires.
Sexually Oriented Business. See the definition of “sexually oriented business” in Chapter 111, Amusements, [Article 5.08, Sexually Oriented
Businesses] of the Cuero Code of Ordinances.
Shooting Range, Outdoor means the use of land for archery and/or the discharging of firearms for the purposes of target practice, skeet and trap
shooting, mock war games, or temporary competitions, such as turkey shoots.
Shopping Center means a group of retail, service, or restaurant establishments that are planned, developed, owned, or managed as a unit, with
an off-street parking lot that serves all of the uses in the center located on the same parcel proposed for development. The term “shopping
center” does not include outparcels which may be separated (by lot lines or easements) from the main center and which are intended for
separate uses consisting of buildings and their associated parking lots.
Shrub means any of the following:
1. A woody plant of less size than an small tree, and usually with several stems from the same root;
2. Perennial plants that reach at least three feet in height; and
3. Ornamental grasses that reach at least three feet in height.
Sidewalk means an improved facility that is ADA accessible and is intended to provide for pedestrian movement:
1. Along Streets. Provides pedestrian connections along, parallel to, and within the right-of-way of a public or private street or an
abutting easement.
2. Access to Lots. Provides pedestrian connections from the right-of-way to the principal building.
3. Access Around Buildings. Provides pedestrian connections to the main entrance.
Sidewalk Amenities means accessory features such as sidewalk furniture (e.g., benches), planters, railings, bicycle racks, canopies, and
specialized lighting.
Sidewalk Sale means a temporary, special outdoor sale conducted on public or private sidewalks immediately adjacent and contiguous to
commercial establishments; provided, the merchandise being sold is consistent with the merchandise of the adjacent and contiguous business.
Sight Distance Triangle means the triangular area formed by a diagonal line connecting two points located on intersecting street right-of-way
lines, or a right-of-way line and the curb or edge of a driveway (see Section 8.102E., Sight Distance Triangle Requirements).
Sign means any writing (including letter, word, or numeral), pictorial presentation (including illustration or decoration), emblem (including device,
symbol, or trademark), flag (including banner or pennant), or any other figure of similar character, that:
1. Is a structure or any part thereof; or is attached to, painted on, or in any other manner represented on a building or other
structure; or is displayed in a building window in a manner that is discernible from public rights-of-way or abutting property; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/438
2. Is used to display noncommercial information; or announce; or direct attention; or advertise.
Sign Area means the entire advertising area of a sign, excluding any framing, trim or molding and the supporting structure.
Banner Sign means any temporary sign intended to be hung with or without frames, characters, letters, illustrations, or
ornamentations applied to paper, plastic or any fabric of any kind.
Billboard Sign means any outdoor sign, description, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster, structure or
thing, which directs the attention of the public to a business, entity, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located. See also off-premise signs.
Sign, Changeable Copy means a sign whose informational content can be changed or altered by manual or electric, electromechanical,
or electronic means. Changeable copy signs include the following types:
1. Manual Changeable Copy. Signs that have alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic informational content which must be changed or
altered by manual means.
2. Electronically Changeable Copy. Signs capable of displaying words, symbols, figures or images that can be electronically or
mechanically changed by remote or automatic means.
Directional Sign means a sign which contains only information designed to direct pedestrian or vehicular traffic to the location of
a facility on the property on which such sign is located. Such signs may include but are not limited to arrows, words or logos. No
goods or services may be listed on a directional sign.
Sign, Double-Faced means any sign with copy on two faces that are back to back, facing in opposite directions.
Sign Face means the area or display surface used for the message on a sign.
Sign, Flag (Official) means a duly adopted flag or seal of the United State, State of Texas, DeWitt County, or the City of Cuero.
Sign, Flag (Unofficial) means any mottos, emblems, designs, shapes, or symbols placed or printed on cloth, fabric, plastic,
canvas, vinyl, or other rigid or non-rigid devices or materials that are intended to convey an unofficial message or to identify a
person, place, business, idea, or thing other than duly adopted flags or seals of nations, states, counties, or municipalities.
Freestanding Sign means a sign that is not attached to a building (e.g., a monument sign)
Sign, Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure constructed of rigid materials that is supported by and extending from the
facade of a building and which is designed to include (manual or electronic) changeable copy.
Sign, Monument means a freestanding sign which is separate from buildings and the entire bottom of which is in contact with or
in close proximity to the ground.
Off-Premise Sign means a sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event,
place, service, or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises on which the sign is located.
On-Premise Sign means a sign identifying or advertising a business, person, or activity, and installed and maintained on the
same premises as the business, person, or activity. Note: For the purposes of removal of signs, the state requirements further
classify “on-premise signs” as freestanding signs (see also Section 9.104, Sign Maintenance and Removal).
Sign Permit means a permit issued by the Building Official for the construction or modification of a sign.
Sign, Pole means a sign that is mounted on one or more freestanding poles or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign
face is not in direct contact with a solid base or the ground.
Projecting Sign means a sign other than a flat wall sign which is attached to and projects from a building wall or other structure
not designed primarily to support the sign.
Sign Structure means the supports, uprights, bracing, or framework of any building or structure exhibiting a sign.
Temporary Sign means any sign (e.g., a banner) or advertising device or display constructed of cloth, fabric, plastic, canvas,
vinyl, cardboard, wallboard, plywood, paper, or other rigid or non-rigid materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed
for a limited period of time. Temporary signs are not permanently affixed to sign structures, structures or buildings.
Wall Sign means a sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the
supporting structure for or forms the background surface of the sign and which does not project more than 12 inches from such
building or structure.
Window Sign means any sign, poster, or other similar material affixed on nonresidential properties or that is painted directly on a
window, affixed to the inside of a window, or hung within 12 inches of a window promoting any message, including but not
limited to, grand openings and special events (commercial and noncommercial), provided the sign or signs do not exceed 25
percent of each window area, is not illuminated, or within three feet of a public door.
Single-Family Attached means dwelling units located in a single building where each unit is constructed on an individual lot or land that is
designated as a limited common element in a declaration of condominium; and contains:
1. Two but not more than seven dwelling units that are designed so that individual units have individual ground-floor access and are
separated from each other by unpierced common walls from foundation to roof (e.g., side-by-side duplexes, triplexes, and
townhouses); or
2. Two dwelling units that are designed so that individual units:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/438
a. May or may not have individual exterior doors, but provide no direct access between the first floor and second floor unit
(access may be through a common interior foyer that provides access to both units or through separate exterior doors); and
b. Are separated from each other by a floor (e.g., over-under duplexes).
Single-family attached does not include apartments.
Single-Family, Detached means dwelling units that are:
1. Located in individual buildings that are constructed on:
a. Individual lots; or
b. Land that is designated as a limited common element in a declaration of condominium;
2. Separated from each other by outside walls; and
3. Intended for the use of a single housekeeping unit and for a single family.
The phrase “single-family, detached” does not include “duplexes, triplexes, townhouses, live/work units, or multi-family apartments”[.]
Site Plan means a plan showing proposed improvements for a parcel proposed for development. It may be required as part of an application for
a rezoning, conditional use permit, or variance. More detailed development plans are required for all nonresidential and mixed-use development
(i.e., commercial site and building plan review). It does not mean a plat, or a site plan that is normally required for building permits or sign
permits.
Small Wind Energy System (SWES) means equipment that converts and then stores or transforms kinetic energy from the wind into usable
forms of energy, which has a rated capacity that does not exceed 10 kw, and is installed to reduce the on-site energy consumption. Equipment
includes, but is not limited to, an anchor base, airfoil, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane, wiring, inverter,
batteries, or any other components used in the system. A SWES may be a freestanding or attached to a building that supports the wind turbine.
Solar Arrays (also known as photovoltaic systems) convert sunlight into electricity which are used to generate renewable energy. Solar arrays
can be mounted on the ground as its own individual structure, or as an accessory structure on a building or other structure (e.g., water tower).
Solid Waste Facility means all contiguous land, including structures, appurtenances, and other improvements on the land, used for processing,
storing, or disposing of solid waste. The phrase “solid waste facility” includes a publicly or privately owned facility consisting of several
processing, storage, or disposal operational units such as one or more landfills, surface impoundments, or a combination of units.
See Tex. Health and Safety Code Section 361.003.
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). See also the term “area of special flood hazard.”
Stadium/Arena/Drive-In Theater means:
1. Stadium or Arena means an outdoor area surrounded by tiered rows of seats or benches, designed for the viewing of sporting
events, rodeos, equestrian events, livestock exhibitions, concerts, or other organized entertainment.
2. Drive-In Theater means an area of land that includes one or more large outdoor screens or other structure for the display of
motion pictures and an area for parking automobiles from which the motion pictures are viewed. Drive-in theaters may also include a
concession stand and outdoor seating areas.
Standard Residential Neighborhood means a non-agricultural residential subdivision or condominium that consists of single-family detached
housing and is not a planned cluster, mixed-use, or manufactured home park or subdivision.
Start of Construction means:
1. For floodplain management purposes, includes substantial improvement and means:
a. The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition[,] placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.
b. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
c. Permanent construction does not include the land disturbing activity needed to prepare the land for development (e.g.,
clearing, grading and filling); nor does it include the installation of streets, sidewalks, and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on
the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the principal
structure.
d. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
2. For other purposes, that a building permit or other written permit required to be issued by the City has been issued, and
authorized work has commenced under such permit. This is recognizable upon an inspection of the property and which work is of a
nature and character that reflects a good faith intention to continue the construction until completion, such as the clearing of rights-ofway,
rough-grading of the roadway, the installation of a drainage system or stormwater management facilities, and the placement and
active maintenance of erosion and sediment control measures. Control of weeds and cutting of vegetation, without more, do not
qualify as “start of construction.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/438
State means the State of Texas.
Self-Storage means a building or group of buildings that are used for the storage of personal property or records, where individual owners or
tenants control individual storage spaces.
Storage Yard means outdoor storage of operable equipment and building or infrastructure construction materials for off-site projects. The phrase
“storage yard” does not include outdoor storage areas that are associated with an on-site heavy industry.
Stormwater Management means the mitigation of the hydrologic impacts of lost natural runoff storage by the use of conventional storm
conveyance systems or low impact development.
1. For water quantity control, a system of vegetative, structural, and other measures that may control the volume and rate of
stormwater runoff which may be caused by land disturbing activities or activities upon the land; and
2. For water quality control, a system of vegetative, structural, and other measures that control adverse effects on water quality that
may be caused by land disturbing activities or activities upon the land.
Street means a strip of land, comprising the entire area within a street right-of-way, which is intended for use as a means of vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, which provides access to more than one abutting lot.
Street, Alley means a public or private minor way which are used primarily as a secondary means of access to the back or the side of properties
otherwise abutting on a street.
Street, Arterial means a street that is primarily for through traffic, carrying heavy loads and large volumes of traffic, usually on a continuous route.
Arterials are comprised of:
1. Principal Arterials. Principal arterials which are streets where:
a. Mobility is primary;
b. Access is secondary; and
c. Connects (typically) to other arterials.
2. Minor Arterials. Minor arterials which are streets where:
a. Mobility is primary;
b. Access is secondary; and
c. Connects principal arterials (typically) to lower classification roadways.
Street, Collector means a street that serves or is designed to serve as the connection from local streets to arterial streets, such as the main
entrance street of a residential development. Collector streets may also serve as a secondary connection between arterial streets.
Street, Cul-de-sac means a short, independent, local street having only one point of ingress and egress, terminating in a circular turnaround
called a cul-de-sac.
Street, Dead-End means a local street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one means of ingress and egress.
Street, Half (or “Street, Partial”) means a street, generally parallel and adjacent to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than
normally required for improvement and use of the street, with the intent that the abutting property will provide the other half of the right-of-way
when it is developed.
Street, Local means a street which serves or is designed to serve primarily as access to abutting properties.
Street, Marginal Access means a local street, parallel and adjacent to an arterial street, but separated from it by a long strip, which provides
access to abutting properties and control of intersections with the major street.
Street, Median means an area in the approximate center of a street or state highway that is used to separate the directional flow of traffic, may
contain left-turn lanes, and is demarcated by curb and guttering, having painted or thermally applied stripes, landscaping, or other means of
distinguishing it from the portion of the roadway used for through traffic.
Street, Private means any street right-of-way that is not dedicated to public use, and which is maintained by a private entity, such as a property
owners' association.
Street, Public means any street right-of-way that is publicly owned by deed, right-of-way dedication, prescription, or any other conveyance, and
maintained by a federal, state, or local unit of government.
Street Tree means a species of tree that the City has determined is appropriate for planting within public rights-of-way. Street trees are identified
in Appendix A, Plant Lists.
Historic Street Trees are protected trees with a trunk diameter at four and a half feet when measured 24 inches from ground
level and which are located within City rights-of-way located in the 300 Block of North Terrell Street, 200 Block of North Hunt
Street, 300 Block of North Hunt Street, 300 Block of East Live Oak Street, 200 Block of West Live Oak Street, 300 Block of East
Main Street, 1200 Block of North Clinton Street, 300 Block of East French Street and 100 Block of East Reuss, all being located
in the City of Cuero, Texas.
Street Tree Grate means a small planting area that is integrated into a sidewalk in order to provide a planting medium for street trees where there
is an insufficient area for a street tree lawn, e.g., in the C-2 district. Street tree grates are located within the right-of-way lying between the public
or private street and private property.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/438
Street Tree Lawn means the land (or landscape area) within the right-of-way lying between the public or private street and private property
(excluding such portion that is covered by a sidewalk) which is where street trees (and sometimes, other landscaping) are planted.
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground (e.g., a shed), above the ground
(e.g., a tree house), or below the ground (e.g., a pool), or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground including but not
limited to fences, trash enclosures, signs, kiosks, or similar uses. A “structure” may sometimes be subsumed by the phrase “building.”
Subdivider means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, acting as a unit, subdividing or proposing to subdivide land.
Subdivision means the division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of land, by any means, including by means of a plat or a description by metes
and bounds, into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, of the transfer
of ownership, or for development. The term “subdivision” includes “resubdivision” and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the
process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
Subdivision, Major means any subdivision or development that does not qualify as a minor subdivision because it is more intensive or involves
public dedication. Generally, a major subdivision is a plan that proposes one or more of the following:
1. Subdivision of more than five lots, with extension of utilities accommodated to serve said subdivision, and with compliance with
additional pavement section, sidewalk, lighting, fire protection and all other City requirements; or
2. Subdivision or development that proposes a new public or private street or dedication to public use of an existing street.
Subdivision, Minor means a subdivision plat, not involving a new street, that proposes subdivision of four lots or less, having a frontage of no less
than 100 feet, all utilities are available to serve said development or extension of utilities can be accommodated to serve said subdivision, and
the subdivision complies with additional pavement section, sidewalk, lighting, fire protection and all other City requirements.
Substantial Damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of the improvement. This phrase includes structures which
have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The phrase does not, however, include either:
1. Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe
living conditions; or
2. Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
“historic structure.”
T Terms
Temporary Conditional Use Permit means a temporary approval of a conditional use permit for something that is designated as “T” in Table
2.106, Temporary Uses. Since these types of uses can be longer in duration than many temporary uses, and because they can have larger
impacts (e.g., an asphalt or concrete batching plant), these uses require review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approval by the
City Council. These applications follow the same procedures as a normal conditional use permit, but are just approved for a maximum not to
exceed duration.
Temporary Construction Building means a stick-built or modular building that is used as an administrative office for construction related activities
occurring on the same lot under an active building permit.
Temporary Construction Dumpster means a large trash or recycling receptacle located on private property (i.e., outside the public right-of-way)
which is used to collect construction debris and other development related materials for transport off-site.
Temporary Construction Yard means a temporary fenced enclosure used for the storage and maintenance of contractor supplies and operational
equipment used for and located on the same lot of an active building permit.
Temporary Use means a use that is established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such time.
Thoroughfare Plan means the official Thoroughfare Plan as adopted in the Cuero Comprehensive Plan, which may be amended from time to
time. The Thoroughfare Plan is designed to ensure that adequate rights-of-way are preserved with a general alignment and sufficient width to
allow for orderly and efficient expansion, improvement, and connectivity of the street transportation system.
Townhouse means a single-family attached building which contains four to seven dwelling units arranged in a linear form, each of which is totally
separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from foundation to roof and has totally exposed front and rear walls that are used for
individual unit access, light, and ventilation. There are three types of townhouses (based on design) for the purposes of this UDC, to which
different requirements may apply:
1. Standard townhouses, which are generally two- or three-story buildings;
2. Weak link townhouses, which have a one-story and a two-story component in each unit, and are typically wider than standard
townhomes; and
3. Roof deck townhouses, which provide a usable outdoor space on the roof of each unit.
Tree, Evergreen means a broadleaf evergreen tree or cone-bearing evergreen tree that, at maturity, typically has a height of greater than 35 feet.
For the purposes of this UDC, evergreen trees that typically have a height of 12 to 35 feet at maturity are considered small trees, and evergreens
that typically have a height of less than 12 feet at maturity are considered shrubs. See Appendix A, Plant Lists.
Tree, Large means a tree with a canopy that, at maturity, would occupy the upper level of a forest in a natural ecological situation. These trees
are commonly called shade trees. They typically reach heights of more than 50 feet at maturity. See Appendix A, Plant Lists.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/438
Tree, Palm means any plant of the family Palmae having an unbranched trunk crowned by large pinnate or palmate leaves. See Appendix A,
Plant Lists.
Tree, Small means a tree with a canopy that would occupy the intermediate level of a forest in a natural ecological situation. They are also found
as dominant species in old field succession. These trees are commonly called ornamental trees. Small trees are deciduous trees that typically
reach heights of 12 to 44 feet at maturity, and evergreen trees that typically reach heights of 12 to 35 feet at maturity. See Appendix A, Plant
Lists.
Triplex means a single-family attached building which contains three dwelling units arranged in a linear form, each of which is totally separated
from the other by an unpierced wall extending from foundation to roof and has totally exposed front and rear walls that are used for individual unit
access, light, and ventilation.
Truckload Sale means the temporary sale of merchandise outdoors from the back or bed of a truck or trailer by persons who are not employed
by the owners or managers of the lot or parcel on which the sale occurs, or tenants of buildings on the lot or parcel on which the sale occurs.
U Terms
UDC means the City of Cuero Unified Development Code.
Unduly means improperly or unjustly. As used in Section 6.102, Use of Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA), Flood Fringe, and Floodways,
subsection D.1., Performance Standards for Use of Floodplains and Floodways, “unduly” is used to mean that floodplain use shall not improperly
or unjustly restrict the capacity of any channels or floodways.
V Terms
Variance means a development order that provides relief from the standards of this UDC (see Section 14.406, Variances).
Vehicle Gas and Fueling Station means a gasoline service station or fuel stations (e.g., hydrogen, compressed natural gas, or liquefied
petroleum gas) for alternative fuel vehicles, which may include a convenience store as an accessory use.
Vehicle Sales, Rental, and Service means a use that sells, rents, or performs services on automobiles, trucks, boats, construction equipment, allterrain
vehicles, and motorcycles, where the inventory is new or used and is stored for any length of time on-site. The use may also include
“vehicle fueling or charging stations,” or “vehicle washes,” when such use is an accessory use to the principal use (i.e., fueling or washing the
vehicles being rented, sold, or serviced on the property). The use does not include body shops (e.g., collision repair), paint booths, or
reupholstering unless they are approved as principal uses on the same site.
Vehicle Wrecking and Salvage Yard; Junkyard means:
1. Vehicle Wrecking and Salvage Yard. Vehicle wrecking and salvage yard means an outdoor place where a person stores three or
more vehicles for the purpose of dismantling or wrecking the vehicles to remove parts for sale or for use in automotive repair or
rebuilding.
2. Junkyard. Junkyard means a place where a business that owns junk, and is operated to store, buy, or sell junk, keeps all or part
of the junk outdoors until the business disposes of the junk.
See Tex. Transportation Code Section 396.001.
W Terms
Warehousing and Logistics means indoor warehousing, distribution, or logistics facilities; retail distribution centers; order fulfillment centers; and
moving and storage services (including full-service moving and storage and indoor storage of shipping containers). The phrase does not include
self-storage; wholesale; or warehousing and distribution that are accessory to a light industrial or heavy industrial facility, nor parcel service dropoff
locations that are not accessory to a parcel service processing facility.
Waste Transfer Station/Recycling Collection Facility means:
1. Waste Transfer Station. A waste transfer station means the use of land or a facility, regardless of name or title, to unload waste
of any kind or type from vehicles, and, with or without intermediate processing such as compaction, sorting, or shredding,
subsequently reload the waste onto other vehicles for delivery to another transfer site or solid waste facility.
2. Recycling Collection Facility. A recycling collection facility means a building or site that is used for the collection and processing
of recyclable materials (e.g., waste paper, motor oil, scrap metal, polystyrene foam, porcelain, batteries, electronic components,
textiles, plastics, discarded shoes, cardboard, and other discarded household materials), where the materials are sorted, temporarily
stored, and then shipped in bulk to other locations for processing. The facility may also process recyclable materials for efficient
shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing,
mechanical sorting, shredding, or cleaning, but not melting down.
The phrase “waste transfer station/recycling collection facility” does not mean a wastewater treatment facility.
Waterbody means any watercourse, lake, or pond that is defined by a bank or shore, in which water can be found on a year-round basis.
Watercourse means a stream channel (perennial, intermittent, mapped, or unmapped) with banks and a bed within which water regularly flows.
Water Surface Elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
Wetland means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally
include swamps, marshes, bogs, bayous, and similar areas.
Wholesale means the business of:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/438
1. Selling goods, equipment, or food to retailers, generally in larger quantities than they are sold to final consumers, but often in
smaller quantities than they are purchased from manufacturers; or
2. Selling specialized equipment and supplies to businesses, but not to the general public.
The term “wholesale” includes warehousing and/or showrooms. It does not include wholesale clubs that offer memberships to the general public
(which are classified as “heavy retail/home centers”) nor “nurseries/greenhouses, wholesale.”
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (WTF), Attached means facilities that are affixed to an existing structure (including buildings, water tanks,
and communications towers) and consist of the equipment and structures involved in receiving telecommunications or radio signals from a
mobile radio communications source and transmitting those signals to a central switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the landbased
telephone lines, and also means a broadcast tower.
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (WTF), Freestanding Non-Stealth are lattice towers, monopole towers, guyed towers, or other
freestanding facilities that do not meet the definition for “WTF, freestanding stealth” and consist of the equipment and structures involved in
receiving telecommunications or radio signals from a mobile radio communications source and transmitting those signals to a central switching
computer which connects the mobile unit with the land-based telephone lines, and also means a broadcast tower.
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (WTF), Freestanding Stealth are facilities that have been designed to be architecturally compatible with
the surrounding area. They camouflage or conceal the presence of the tower and the antennas that are mounted on it; and include, but are not
limited to: artificial rocks and trees, freestanding clock towers and bell steeples, light poles, flagpoles, and artistic structures); and consist of the
equipment and structures involved in receiving telecommunications or radio signals from a mobile radio communications source and transmitting
those signals to a central switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the land-based telephone lines, and also means a broadcast
tower.
Woodland means an area covered by a canopy of woody plants (trees) that qualifies as mature and/or young. It may also be a forest, wood lot,
grove, or stand of trees meeting the specifications of the forest type.
X Terms
Y Terms
Yard means an unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with a building or structure. A required yard is the distance between the lot
line and the setback that is required from that lot line.
Yard, Front means a yard that extends across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the required front setback line.
Yard, Rear means a yard extending the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the rear setback line. For a corner lot, the rear yard does
not extend beyond the side street setback line.
Yard, Side means a yard between the principal building and the side line of the lot, extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
Yard, Side Street means a yard extending from the front setback line to the rear lot line, located between the side street lot line and the side
street setback line.
Z Terms
Zoning District or District means an area of the City delineated on the official zoning map, designated by name or abbreviation as provided in the
regulations of this UDC.
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance 2016-25, sec. 6, adopted 1/11/17)
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A - PLANT LISTS
A. Generally. The following tables set out the recommended (and prohibited) types of plants that may be used in landscape areas within the
City.
B. Recommended Large Trees. Table A-1, Recommended Large Trees, sets out the large trees that may be used to satisfy the landscaping
requirements of Article 7, Landscaping, Buffering, and Tree Protection.
Table A-1
Recommended Large Trees
Common Name Scientific Name Remarks
Anaqua*, Sandpaper tree Ehretia anacua Evergreen broadleaf; white flower clusters
Arizona Cypress Cupressus arizonica Evergreen conifer; gray green foliage
pyramidal shape
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/438
Texas Ash*, Green Ash Fraxinus sp. Deciduous; fast growing
Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum Deciduous conifer; fine textured foliage; fall
color
Black Willow* Salix nigra Deciduous; riparian species
Bur Oak* Quercus macrocarpa Deciduous; large acorns and leaves, good
shade tree
Cedar Elm* Ulmus crassifolia Deciduous; narrow canopy, good shade for
ROWs
Chinquapin Oak* Quercus muhlenbergii Deciduous; round-topped tree; bold foliage
Cottonwood* Populus deltoides Deciduous; large leaves, females fluffy
seeds
Deodar Cedar Cedrus deodara Evergreen; spreading pyramidal shape
Escarpment Black Cherry* Prunus serotina var. eximia Deciduous; sun to shade; fall foliage
Eve's Necklace Sophora affinis Deciduous; sun-shade; white to pink flowers
Hackberry* Celtis spp. Deciduous; prolific; wildlife favorite
Live Oak* Quercus virginiana Evergreen-like; good shade tree
Pecan* Carya illinoensis Deciduous; needs lots of space; sensitive to
root impact
Red Oak, Shumard* Shumard Quercus shumardii Deciduous; fall color, good shade tree
Sycamore, Mexican Platanus mexicana Deciduous; large leaves, good shade tree
Sycamore, Texas* Platanus glabrata Deciduous; large leaves, good shade tree
Western Soapberry* Sapindus drummondii Deciduous; full to partial sun; good shade
tree, cluster large yellow flowers
Table Notes:
* Denotes Texas native plant.
B. Recommended Small Trees. Table A-2, Recommended Small Trees, sets out the small trees that may be used to satisfy the landscaping
requirements of Article 7, Landscaping, Buffering, and Tree Protection.
Table A-2
Recommended Small Trees
Common Name Scientific Name Remarks
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/438
Anacacho, Orchid Tree Bauhania congesta Semi-Evergreen, tree-shrub, white flower
clusters
Ashe Juniper* Juniperus ashei Evergreen conifer; green foliage, females
fruit
Carolina Buckthorn* Rhamnus caroliniana Semi-Evergreen; sun-shade, glossy leaves,
reddish fruit
Condalia, Brazil Tree,
Bluewood Condalia*
Condalia hookeri, C. viridis Evergreen; delicate foliage; very drought
tolerant; sun-shade, good shade tree
Crabapple, Texas* Mollis texana Deciduous; full to partial sun, spring
flowering tree
Desert Willow Chilopsis linearis Deciduous; pink tubular flowers; willow-like
foliage, very drought tolerant
Ebony, Texas* Pithecellobium flexicaule Evergreen; sun; white flowers
Goldenball Lead Tree* Leucaena retusa Deciduous; delicate foliage; fragrant yellow
flowers
Honey Locust Gleditsia triacanthos Deciduous; thornless varieties available
Huisache* Acacia farnesiana Deciduous; delicate foliage; fragrant yellow
flowers
Kidneywood* Eysenhardtia polystachya Deciduous; delicate tree-shrub; fragrant
white flowers
Lacy Oak* Quercus laceyi Deciduous; sun-partial shade; hill country
native; good shade tree
Mesquite* Prosopis glandulosa Deciduous; lacy spreading form
Monterrey Oak Quercus polymorpha Evergreen-like; good shade tree
Mexican Buckeye* Ungnadia speciosa Deciduous; pink-red spring flowers
Persimmon, Texas* Diospyros texana Deciduous; sun-shade, smooth bark;
females has black pulpy fruit
Plum, Mexican* Prunus mexicana Deciduous; sun to shade; white flowers, fruit
Possum Haw* IIex decidua Deciduous; sun-shade; female has red fruit
Retama, Paloverde* Parkinsonia texana Deciduous; fast growing, yellow flowers
Red Oak, Texas* Quercus texana Deciduous; fall color, good shade tree
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/438
Redbud, Texas, Oklahoma,
Mexican*
Cercis canadensis var texana Deciduous; sun-shade, red/pink or white
flowers
Rusty Blackhaw* Viburnum rufidulum Deciduous; fall color, white flower clusters
Silk-tassle* Garrya ovata Evergreen; sun-shade
Spiny Hackberry* Celtis pallida Evergreen; greenish white flowers, yellow
orange fruit
Texas Mountain Laurel* Sophora secundiflora Evergreen, part shade to full sun; fragrant
purple flowers
Texas Pistache* Pistacia texana Semi-Evergreen; full sun to part-shade; red
fruit
Wafer Ash, Hop tree* Ptelea trifoliata Semi-Evergreen; sun-shade; light green
foliage
Wild Olive* Cordia boisserieri Semi-Evergreen; large white flowers,
Vitex, Chaste Tree, False
Hemp Tree, Lavender Tree
Vitexagnus-castus Deciduous; purple, pink, or white flower
spikes
Yaupon Holly* IIex vomitoria Evergreen; sun-shade; female has red fruit
Table Notes:
* Denotes Texas native plant.
C. Recommended Palms. Table A-3, Recommended Palms, sets out the palms that may be used to satisfy the landscaping requirements of
Article 7, Landscaping, Buffering, and Tree Protection.
Table A-3
Recommended Palms
Common Name Scientific Name Remarks
California Fan Palm Washingtonia filifera Tree-like palm; sun. Hybrids with W. robusta
can be taller
Dwarf Palmetto* Sabal minor Trunkless, bushy palm; sun, part shade
Texas Palmetto* Sabal texana Tall, native Texas palm; sun
Windmill Palm Trachycarpus fortunei Tree-like; sun; not considered a canopy; good
foundation plant
Mexican Blue Palm Brahea armata Fan palm with blue-green leaves; sun
Butia or Jelly Palm Butia capitata Feather palm with blue-green leaves; sun
European Fan Palm Chamaerops humilis Tough, clumping fan palm with spiny petioles
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/438
Mazari Palm Nannorrhops ritchiana Slow growing fan palm with blue-green leaves
Canary Island Date Palm Phoenix canariensis Beautiful feather palm; may be damaged in
very cold winters
Needle Palm Rhapidophyllum hystrix Clumping shrub-like palm foliage for sun to part
shade
Silver Saw Palmetto Sorenoa repens Clumping low palm in both blue and green
forms
Table Notes:
* Denotes Texas native plant.
D. Recommended Shrubs. Table A-4, Recommended Shrubs, sets out the shrubs that may be used to satisfy the landscaping requirements of
Article 7, Landscaping, Buffering, and Tree Protection.
Table A-4
Recommended Shrubs
Common Name Scientific Name Remarks
Large Shrubs
Bay Laurel noblis Evergreen, sun-part sun, fragrant leaves
Buckeye* Aesculus pavia Deciduous (even in dry weather), shade,
yellow or red flowers
Evergreen Sumac* Rhus virens Evergreen, sun-shade, red fruit
Flameleaf Sumac* Rhus lancelota Sun-partial shade; deciduous; red berries in
fall; fall color
Texas Mountain Laurel* Sophora secundiflora Tree-like evergreen shrub; purple spring
flowers; sun, part shade
Texas Pistache Pistacia texana Semi-evergreen, sun
Medium Shrubs
Glossy Abelia Abelia grandiflora Bronze evergreen foliage; white or pink; sun,
part shade
Agarita* Mahonia trifoliata Holly-like evergreen foliage; yellow spring; red
edible berries; sun-shade
Cenizo, Texas Sage* Leucophyllum sp. Dusty gray evergreen foliage; sun; blooms
throughout summer; purple-pink flowers;
several new varieties: including compact
Elbow Bush* Forestiera pubescens Deciduous; sun-shade, small white flowers,
black fruit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/438
Fragrant Sumac* Rhus aromatica Deciduous; part shade, fall color
Hogplum* Colubrina texensis Part shade, full sun; fragrant blooms
Juniper Juniperus sp. Tough evergreen; many varieties; sun, part
shade
Mutabilis Rose, Butterfly Rose,
Old Blush
Rosa chinensis x
(Mutabilis)
Sun, large single petal flowers change color as
ages
Pomegranate Punica granatum Sun, upright shrub; orange blooms; edible fruit;
dwarf variety
Primrose Jasmine Jasminum mesnyi Evergreen, sun-shade, sprawling, yellow
flowers
Southern Wax Myrtle Myrica cerifera Evergreen, sun-shade, compact variety,
available
White Brush* Aloysia gratissima Delicate; fragrant white flower; suckers, can be
used as a hedge
Small Shrubs
American Beautyberry Callicarpa americana Deciduous, fruit in fall and winter, purple; part
shade
Agave, century plant Agave americana Sun, rosette, spine-tipped leaves
Barbados Cherry Malpighia glabra Evergreen, pink flowers, red fruit, sun-shade
Barberry Berberis thunbergii atro
purpurea
Evergreen; sun-part shade, color foliage
Grayleaf Cotoneaster Cotoneaster glaucophylla Sprawling evergreen shrub; dusty gray foliage;
sun, part shade
Juniper Juniperus sp. Evergreen shrubs; many varieties available;
sun
Mexican Butterfly Weed Asclepias tuberosa Broad clusters of orange flowers
Mexican Oregano Poliomentha longiflora Evergreen, sun, pink flowers
Rock rose* Pavonia lasiopetala Deciduous; sub-shrub, pink or purple flowers
Rosemary, Upright Rosmarinus officinalis Evergreen, sun-part shade; blue flowers
Red Yucca* Hesperaloe parviflora Sun, rosette, narrow leaves
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/438
Yucca* Yucca spp. Sun, rosette, narrow leaves, white flowers
Table Notes:
* Denotes Texas native plant.
E. Recommended Ground Cover, Ornamental Grasses, and Perennials. Table A-5, Recommended Ground Cover, Ornamental Grasses, and
Perennials sets out the shrubs that may be used to satisfy the landscaping requirements of Article 7, Landscaping, Buffering, and Tree
Protection.
Table A-5
Recommended Ground Cover, Ornamental Grasses, and Perennials
Common Name Scientific Name Remarks
Ground Cover
Asiatic Jasmine Trachelospermum
asiaticum
Evergreen; green or variegated foliage;
sun, part shade, no flowers
Columbine Hinckley
Columbine*
Aquilegia spp., A.
hinckleyana
Evergreen, gray/green foliage, yellow
flowers
Confederate Jasmine Trachelospermum
jasminoides
Evergreen; fragrant, white spring
flowers; sun, part shade
Frogfruit* Phyla incise (nodiflora) Semi-evergreen, creeper, sun-part sun,
white flowers
Lantana purple, gold Lantana sp. Deciduous, sun, purple, white or yellow
flowers
Pigeonberry* Rivina humilis Semi-evergreen shrub
Rosemary, prostrate Rosmarinus officinalis Evergreen sub-shrub, sun to part sun,
blue flowers
Santolina Santolina sp. Species with green or silver foliage; sun
Trailing Juniper Juniperus sp. Several varieties available; not suitable
for wet, humid areas; sun
Verbena* Verbena spp. Evergreen, pink, purple, white, red
flowers
Yarrow Achillea millefolium Gray or green gray leaves; many
varieties
Ornamental Grasses
Big Bluestem* Andropogon gerardi Sun, clump grass
Eastern Gamagrass* Tripsacum dactyloides Dense, part shade, full sun
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/438
Inland Seaoats* Chasmanthium latifolium Shade, dappled shade, part shade
Little Bluestem * Schixachyrium scoparium Evergreen, part shade, full sun
Maiden Grass Miscanthus sinensis Full sun, part shade, specimen or
screening
Muhly Grass* Muehlenbergia lindheimeri Evergreen, part shade, full sun
Purple Fountain Grass Pennisetum setaceum
‘Rubrum'
Delicate color accent; full sun
Sideoats Grama* Bouteloua curtipendula Dappled shade, part shade, full sun
Switchgrass* Panicum virgatum Part shade, full sun
Perennials
Butterfly Weed Asclepias spp. Semi-hardy perennial, orange flowers
Cigar Plant Cuphea micropetala Red, yellow; summer to fall flowers; sun
Fall Aster Aster spp. Semi-evergreen, sun-part sun, blue or
white
Firebush Hamelia patens Reddish orange; summer to fall flowers;
sun
Hinckley's Columbine* Aquilegia hinckleyana Yellow; spring flowers; shade
Indigo Spires Sage Salvia spp. Semi-evergreen, sun, dark blue flowers
Lantana Lantana sp. Many colors; spring to fall flowers; sun
Mealy Cup Sage* Salvia farinacea Sun, part shade; blue, white, purple
flowers
Mexican Oregano Poliomentha longiflora Evergreen; pink; summer flowers; sun
Mexican Petunia Ruellia sp. Evergreen; tolerates shade; purple,
pink, white flowers, suckers
Mexican Sage Salvia leucantha Semi-evergreen; blue; spring to fall
flowers; sun
Mist flower, Boneset Eupatorium spp. and
Ageratum spp.
Hardy perennial, white to blue flowers
Muhly Grass* Muehlenbergia lindheimeri Evergreen; hardy perennial; sun
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/438
Pigeonberry* Rivina humilis Semi-evergreen shrub
Purple Cone Flower* Echinacea purpurea Hardy perennial, rosette with pink or
white flowers
Perennial verbena* Glandularia bipinnatifida Many colors; spring to fall flowers; sun
Rock rose* Pavonia lasiopetala Deciduous; sub-shrub, pink or purple
flowers
Rosemary Rosmarinus officinalis Sun, part shade; blue flowers
Shrimp Plant Justicia spp. Hardy perennial, sun-part sun; orange,
red flowers
Skullcap* Scutellaria frutescens Evergreen sub-shrub; pink or purple
flowers
Texas Betony* Stachys coccinea Evergreen, gray-green; red tubular
flowers
Tropical Sage* Salvia coccinea Evergreen, red, pink blooms; part
shade to full sun
Turk's Cap* Malvaviscus drummondii Shade; red flowers
White Rain Lily* Zephyranthes candida Ephemeral; sun, part shade; white
Table Notes:
* Denotes Texas native plant.
E. Recommended Turf Grasses. Table A-6, Recommended Turf Grasses sets out the turf grasses that may be used to satisfy the landscaping
requirements of Article 7, Landscaping, Buffering, and Tree Protection.
Table A-6
Recommended Turf Grasses
Common Name Scientific Name Remarks
Bermuda grass Cynodon dactylon Excellent drought tolerance; poor
shade tolerance; sun
Buffalograss* Buchloe dactyloides Excellent drought tolerance; poor
shade tolerance; sun
Prarie mix n/a Mixture of Texas native Bunch, can add
wildflowers
St. Augustine grass Stenotaphrum secundatum Produces dense turf; shade areas only;
poor drought tolerance; sodded
Table Notes:
* Denotes Texas native plant.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/438
F. Prohibited Plants. Table A-7, Prohibited Plants, sets out a list of plants that are prohibited in City in all landscape areas, and which should be
removed if identified.
Table A-7
Prohibited Plants
Common Name Scientific Name
Alligatorweed Alternanthera philoxeroides
Balloon vine Cardiospermum halicacabum
Brazilian peppertree Schinus terebinthifolius
Broomrape Orobanche ramosa
Camelthorn Alhagi camelorum
Chinese tallow tree Triadica sebiferum
Deep rooted sedge Cyperus entrerianus
Distaff thistle Carthamus lanatus
Eurasian watermilfoil Myriophyllum spicatum
Giant duckweed Spirodela oligorrhiza
Giant reed Arundo donax
Hedge bindweed Calystegia sepium
Hydrilla Hydrilla verticillata
Itchgrass Rottboellia cochinchinensis
Japanese dodder Cuscuta japonica
Kudzu Pueraria montana
Lagarosiphon Lagarosiphon major
Paperbark Melaleuca quinquenervia
Purple loosestrife Lythrum salicaria
Rooted water hyacinth Eichhornia azurea
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/438
Saltcedar Tamarix spp.
Salvinia Salvinia spp.
Serrated tussock Nassella trichotoma
Torpedograss Panicum repens
Tropical soda apple Solanum viarum
Water spinach Ipomoea aquatica
Water trumpet Cryptocoryne beckettii
Water hyacinth Eichhornia crassipes
Water lettuce Pistia stratiote
(Ordinance 2015-30 adopted 10/30/15)
CHAPTER 10
STREETS, PARKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS AND PLACES
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.02.001 Planting trees in right-of-way
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any tree or trees between the sidewalks and curb line within the right-of-way of any public street.
(b) If any person shall plant any tree within the right-of-way of any public street, the chief of police of the city may declare the same to
constitute a public nuisance and summarily abate the same.
(c) The word “tree” as used in this section shall be construed to mean any tree, shrub or bush which commonly attains a maximum height of
12 feet or greater.
(1966 Code, ch. 19.2, art. III, secs. 1, 3, 4; 1994 Code, sec. 100.01)
Sec. 10.02.002 Moving heavy machinery over streets and sidewalks
No person shall move any steam roller, steam plow, steam shovel, threshing machine or any other vehicle which is calculated to injure any
pavement, sidewalk, crosswalk or crossing over any paved street, brick or concrete sidewalk or crosswalk in the city, without first securing a
written permit from the city manager. When the permit is secured, the person shall provide for the adequate protection of the paved street,
sidewalk, crosswalk or crossing from injury by reason of the moving of the vehicle over the same. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. I, sec. 10; 1994
Code, sec. 100.02)
Sec. 10.02.003 Billboards prohibited within 30 feet of street or alley
(a) The term “billboard,” as herein used, includes all structures erected or placed in a horizontal [sic] position and upon which advertising
matter may be placed, whether it is painted on the structure or whether printed matter is pasted thereon, and which is to be used as a medium
for advertising.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct or maintain or to be interested in the construction, erection or
maintenance of any billboard where the same is erected, constructed or maintained on any space within 30 feet of the property line of the public
streets and alleys of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/438
(c) Any and all billboards hereafter erected, constructed or maintained within 30 feet of the property line of the streets and alleys of the city
shall be deemed to be public nuisances, and it shall be the duty of the city police chief when that fact is ascertained to remove the same at the
expense of the owner of the billboard.
(1966 Code, ch. 1.1, art. II, secs. 1–3; 1994 Code, sec. 150.02)
Sec. 10.02.004 City authority
(a) The city has the authority to manage and permit the attachment of wires and other facilities on city property within the defined right-of-way,
easement, public street, side walk, alley, or other property owned or otherwise controlled by the city.
(1) The city may develop and implement, at its discretion, policies, manuals, and applications or other documents governing the
permitting relating to the attachment to city facilities and property with in the right-of-way.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, contractor, or entity/agent to attach to city property within the defined right-of-way, easement,
public street, sidewalk, alley, or other property owned or otherwise controlled by the city without first obtaining a permit via the
appropriate mechanisms provided by the city.
(b) The city has the authority to manage and permit the placement of poles, wires, and other facilities on city property within the defined rightof-
way, easement, public street, sidewalk, alley, or other property owned or otherwise controlled by the city.
(1) The city may develop and implement, at its discretion, policies, manuals, and applications or other documents governing the
permitting relating to the placement of new facilities and property with in the right-of-way.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, contractor, or entity/agent to place property within the defined right-of-way, easement, public
street, sidewalk, alley, or other property owned or otherwise controlled by the city without first obtaining a permit via the appropriate
mechanisms provided by the city.
(Ordinance 2017-25 adopted 12/1/17)
Secs. 10.02.005–10.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Excavations
Sec. 10.02.031 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Excavate or excavation. Any excavation, cut, probe, digging in or disturbance of the surface in any manner or by any means whatsoever.
Person. Any person, firm or corporation.
(1966 Code, ch. 19.2, art. I, sec. 7; 1994 Code, sec. 100.15)
Sec. 10.02.032 Permit required
No person shall excavate, cut, probe, dig in or disturb the surface of any street, alley, public way or easement within the city or any property of
the city without having first applied for and obtained a permit to do so, as provided in section 10.02.033. (1966 Code, ch. 19.2, art. I, sec. 1; 1994
Code, sec. 100.16)
Sec. 10.02.033 Application for permit; fee; issuance
(a) Any person wishing to make any excavation shall file with the city manager a written application for a permit to do the work. The application
shall state the name and address of the applicant, the name of the street and the location therein at which the excavation is to be made, the
depth of the proposed excavation, the purpose thereof, and the other information as the city manager may from time to time require. The
application shall be filed in triplicate and shall be accompanied by a deposit in the amount set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code
to cover the cost of processing the application and of inspecting the excavation; provided, however, that no fee or deposit shall be required of
persons holding a valid and lawful franchise to use the public streets, granted by the city, and who are not in default in the performance of any
obligations imposed by the franchise. If the city manager determines that the application is in proper form and that the purpose of the excavation
is lawful and that the applicant is not in default in its obligations on account of previous applications, then the city manager shall issue a permit
for the work. One copy of the permit and application shall be delivered to the applicant, and one copy to the superintendent of public streets, and
one copy shall be retained in the permanent records of the city for not less than one year.
(b) If any person shall apply for a permit after having already made the excavation, he shall be required to deposit a fee as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code.
(1966 Code, ch. 19.2, art. I, secs. 2, 6; 1994 Code, sec. 100.17; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 10.02.034 Notifications; public convenience; restoration of site
(a) Notification of police, fire and emergency agencies. Upon issuing the permit, the city manager shall notify the police and fire departments
and other operators of emergency vehicles. If any thoroughfare is to be blocked, the fact shall be stated in the application.
(b) Restoration of site; performance of work; public convenience. All work done in connection with the authorized excavation shall be done in
accordance with specifications established by the city, and shall be subject to inspection by the superintendent of public streets or the city
manager. All work shall be done in a manner as to give the least inconvenience to the public; all work shall be done speedily; and all excavations
and openings shall be restored in good condition and back to the original condition as it was just prior to the excavation, cut, probe, dig in and/or
disturbance of the surface, at the cost and expense of the holder of the permit, and to the satisfaction of the superintendent of public streets or
the city manager. If the place so excavated and restored shall sink, become depressed or otherwise fail within a period of one year after the date
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/438
of the work, it shall be the duty of the city manager to cause the same to be satisfactorily repaired, and to charge the cost of the repair to the
person to whom the permit was granted. No further permits shall be granted to the person until all the charges shall have been paid in full.
(1966 Code, ch. 19.2, art. I, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 100.18; Ordinance 2014-02 adopted 1/28/14)
Sec. 10.02.035 Indemnification of city
The person to whom a permit is granted shall be responsible for and shall save and hold the city harmless from all claims for loss due to property
damage or personal injuries arising from the making of the excavation or from any act of the permit holder, his servants, agents or employees in
exercising the rights granted by the permit. (1966 Code, ch. 19.2, art. I, sec. 4; 1994 Code, sec. 100.19)
Sec. 10.02.036 City control over public ways and property
The city reserves the exclusive control over all its streets, alleys, public ways, easements and property, and the granting of a permit as herein
provided shall not abridge the exclusive control in any way. The permit to excavate shall not be deemed to grant any right, privilege or franchise
whatsoever other than the mere right to make the designated excavation at the prescribed location in the named street. (1966 Code, ch. 19.2,
art. I, sec. 5; 1994 Code, sec. 100.20)
Secs. 10.02.037–10.02.070 Reserved
Division 3. Street Improvements
Sec. 10.02.071 Installation of curbs and gutters required
No street shall be paved unless at the same time provision is made for the installation of curbs and gutters. (1966 Code, ch. 19.2, art. II, sec. 1;
1994 Code, sec. 100.30)
Sec. 10.02.072 Improvements to be done by city
Whenever the city council determines to improve any street, the same shall be paved and curbs and gutters laid by city crews and with city
equipment insofar as practicable at the time of making the improvements. (1966 Code, ch. 19.2, art. II, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 100.31)
Sec. 10.02.073 Portions improved must connect with other improved street
No street or portion of street [shall] be improved as herein provided unless it connects with at least one other improved street. (1966 Code, ch.
19.2, art. II, sec. 4; 1994 Code, sec. 100.32)
Sec. 10.02.074 Order by city council; priority of improvements
No street or portion of street [shall] be improved as herein provided without the prior approval of the city council at which a quorum is present,
and the city council [shall] order the improvements of the streets in the order in which proper requests are received and as materials become
available; provided, however, that the city council may give priority to any street or portion of street which is in the opinion of the council
necessary for the improvements of the city's drainage or traffic conditions. (1966 Code, ch. 19.2, art. II, sec. 6; 1994 Code, sec. 100.33)
Secs. 10.02.075–10.02.100 Reserved
Division 4. Sidewalks
Sec. 10.02.101 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Contractor. The person, partnership, corporation or other entity which undertakes or contracts to construct driveways, sidewalks, curbs and
gutters, and setbacks in city streets and alleys.
Council. The city council of the City of Cuero, Texas.
Manager. The city manager of the City of Cuero, Texas, or his authorized representative.
Owner. The property owner, occupant, or user, individual or firm having the work done by the contractor.
(Ordinance 65-6 adopted 5/12/65; 1966 Code, ch. 19.1, art. I, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 100.50)
Sec. 10.02.102 Sidewalks to be maintained and kept free of obstruction
It is the duty and obligation of all owners, occupants and users of real property abutting upon streets within the city at their own cost and expense
to keep and maintain the sidewalks (and paving laid thereon) bordering their property level at curb grade, and free of depressions, excavations,
elevations, inequalities, obstacles, obstructions or encroachments, natural or artificial, above or below ground level, or which overlap, impinge
upon or appropriate any part of the sidewalk area or the space up to eight feet above it, and to allow no oils, greases, ice, snow or water to
collect or remain thereon, and generally, in every manner, to keep the sidewalks in a safe, adequate and in defective condition so that they are
easily accessible to and may be freely and safely used by the public for travel by foot. (Ordinance 65-6 adopted 5/12/65; 1966 Code, ch. 19.1,
art. I, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 100.51)
Sec. 10.02.103 Liability for injury or damage caused by defective sidewalk
Where and when, by reason of a violation of any of the foregoing sections, injury or damage is occasioned to or inflicted upon any person,
whether on the sidewalk or in the street, primary liability for all the injury or damage shall rest upon the owner, occupant and user of the property
abutting upon the defective sidewalk. (Ordinance 65-6 adopted 5/12/65; 1966 Code, ch. 19.1, art. I, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 100.52)
Sec. 10.02.104 Permit required for construction or repair
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/438
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk, setback, driveway, curb, gutter or
work incident thereto in the streets and alleys of the city without first obtaining a permit for the work from the city manager, applications for which
permits shall be made on forms furnished by the city. (Ordinance 65-6 adopted 5/12/65; 1966 Code, ch. 19.1, art. I, sec. 4; 1994 Code, sec.
100.53)
Sec. 10.02.105 Transfer of permit; responsibility for work
No permit issued under this division, or any construction to be done thereunder, shall be assigned, transferred or sublet, but the permittee shall
remain in personal charge of all work done thereunder. (Ordinance 65-6 adopted 5/12/65; 1966 Code, ch. 19.1, art. I, sec. 5; 1994 Code, sec.
100.54)
Sec. 10.02.106 Construction to be in accord with lines and grades
The manager or some city street or building official or engineer designated by the manager shall furnish information establishing lines and
grades for the construction, reconstruction or repair of any improvement covered by this division after a permit has been granted for the
construction, and all the construction shall be in accordance with the lines and grades and subject to approval of the city manager or the official
designated by him. Stakes shall be set by or at the expense of the contractor. (Ordinance 65-6 adopted 5/12/65; 1966 Code, ch. 19.1, art. I, sec.
6; 1994 Code, sec. 100.55)
Sec. 10.02.107 Inspection and approval of materials
No materials shall be used in any construction mentioned in this division until the same has been inspected and approved by the city manager,
and any material which is not approved by the city manager shall be removed from the streets and sidewalks at the expense of the contractor.
No concrete mixture shall be poured until forms and excavations have been inspected and approved by the city manager or his authorized
representative. (Ordinance 65-6 adopted 5/12/65; 1966 Code, ch. 19.1, art. I, sec. 7; 1994 Code, sec. 100.56)
Sec. 10.02.108 Obstruction of street by materials and equipment; barricades and lights
No more than one-third of the width of the street shall be occupied by materials, equipment or tools, and barricades shall be placed around the
equipment so as to leave at least two-thirds of the street open for traffic, which barricades and street obstructions shall be supplied with lights at
nighttime so that the same will serve as protection to the public as a result of the obstruction in the streets. (Ordinance 65-6 adopted 5/12/65;
1966 Code, ch. 19.1, art. I, sec. 8; 1994 Code, sec. 100.57)
Sec. 10.02.109 Specifications for materials and equipment
(a) Cement. Cement shall be portland cement meeting the current standard tests for commercial cement.
(b) Water. Water for concrete shall be clean and free from injurious amounts of oil, acid, alkali, organic matter or other deleterious substances.
In general, city water will be required.
(c) Fine aggregate. Fine aggregate shall be clean, sharp natural sand, graded from coarse to fine within the following limits (using laboratory
sieves with square openings):
Sieve Size
Total Passing
(percentage by
weight)
3/8 inch 100
No. 4 95 to 100
No. 16 45 to 80
No. 50 5 to 30
No. 100 0 to 8
No. 200 0 to 3
Not more than 2% of clay or loam by volume shall show at the end of one hour's settlement of the water in which a sample of the sand has been
thoroughly washed. Sand shall contain not more than 1/2% by weight of organic or other deleterious matter.
(d) Coarse aggregate. Coarse aggregate shall consist of clean, hard, tough gravel or broken stone, and shall contain not more than 1/2% by
weight of soft, friable, thin, elongated or laminated pieces, and alkali, organic or other deleterious matter. Material for coarse aggregate shall be
graded from coarse to fine within the following limits (using laboratory sieves with square openings):
Sieve Size Total Passing
(percentage by
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/438
weight)
2 inch 100
1-1/2 inch 95 to 100
3/4 inch 35 to 70
3/8 inch 10 to 30
No. 4 0 to 5
(e) Pit-run materials. Pit-run materials may be used if they meet the requirements of this section.
(f) Measurement of materials. Materials shall be measured in accurate measuring boxes, buckets or wheelbarrows in a manner that the
quantities can be closely controlled during the progress of the work. Shovel measurement will not be permitted.
(g) Concrete quality. It is the intent of this section to secure, for every part of the work, concrete of homogeneous structure which, when
hardened, will have the required strength and resistance to weathering. To this end the strengths of concrete will be as follows:
(1) 2000 pounds per square inch for curbs, gutters, sidewalks and residential driveways.
(2) 300 pounds per square inch for setbacks and commercial driveways.
(3) These strengths to be obtained in 28 days by tests on 6-inch by 12-inch cylinders. The tests shall be made at the expense of
the city except that the contractor shall furnish the concrete.
(h) Prior test records. In the event that the contractor furnishes reliable test records of concrete made with materials from the same sources
and of the same quality and mixed in the same proportions in connection with current work, all or a part of the strength tests specified herein may
be waived by the manager.
(i) Workability of concrete. The concrete shall be of the consistency and composition that it can be worked readily into the corners and angles
of the forms and around the reinforcement without permitting the materials to segregate or free water to collect on the surface. The contractor
shall adjust the proportions of cement and aggregate as may be necessary to produce a mixture which will be easily placeable at all times, due
consideration being given to the methods of placing and compacting used on the work.
(j) Slump. The slump as measured by a standard slip cone shall in no case exceed six inches.
(k) Mixing equipment. The mixing equipment shall be capable of combining the aggregates, cement and water within the specified time into a
thoroughly mixed and uniform mass, and of discharging the mixture without segregation.
(1) Machine mixing. The mixing of concrete shall be done in a batch mixer of approved type which will insure a uniform distribution
of the material throughout the mass. The equipment at the mixing plant shall be so constructed that all materials, including the water,
entering the drum can be accurately proportioned and be under control. The entire batch shall be discharged before recharging. The
volume of the mixed material per batch shall not exceed the manufacturer's rated capacity of the mixer. The mixing period shall be not
less than one minute and shall be measured from the time when all of the solid materials are in the mixer drum, provided that all of
the mixing water shall be introduced before one-fourth of the mixing time has elapsed.
(2) Truck mixing. Truck mixers shall be of the revolving drum type, watertight, and so constructed that the concrete can be mixed to
insure a uniform distribution of materials throughout the mass. Except as subsequently provided, the truck mixer shall be equipped
with a tank for carrying mixing water. Only the prescribed amount of water shall be placed in the tank unless the tank is equipped with
a device by which the quantity of water added can be readily verified. The mixing water may be added directly to the batch, in which
case a tank shall not be required. The maximum size of batch in truck mixers shall be in accordance with the specified rating of the
mixer.
(3) Hand mixing. Hand mixing of concrete will not be allowed.
(l) Retempering. The retempering of concrete or mortar which has partially hardened, that is, mixing with or without additional cement,
aggregate, or water, will not be permitted.
(m) Protection.
(1) All concrete shall be protected so that the temperature at the surface will not fall below 40° F or that there will be no loss of
moisture from the surface for 24 hours after the concrete is poured.
(2) Protection against loss of moisture from the surface of the concrete shall be accomplished by keeping the surface continuously
wet for one day. This may be done by any one of the following methods:
(A) The surface of slab protected by ponding;
(B) Covering concrete with burlap or cotton mats kept continuously wet;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/438
(C) Covering concrete with paper of suitable type;
(D) Covering concrete with a one-inch layer of earth or sand kept wet;
(E) Continuous sprinkling.
(n) Field tests of concrete.
(1) During the progress of construction, the manager may have tests made to determine whether the concrete as being produced
complies with the standards of quality specified. The contractor shall cooperate in the making of the tests to the extent of allowing free
access to the work for the selection of samples and storage of specimens, and in affording protection to the specimens against injury
or loss through his operations.
(2) Three cylinders will generally be made for each class of concrete used in any one day's operation.
(3) Samples of concrete for test specimens shall be taken at the mixer, or, in the case of ready mixed concrete, from the
transportation vehicle during discharge. When, in the opinion of the manager, it is desirable to take samples elsewhere, they shall be
taken as directed by him.
(o) Failure to meet requirements. Should the strengths shown by the test specimens fall below the values required, the manager shall have the
right to require changes in proportions on future work or shall have the right to require the removal and replacement of those sections which
failed to develop the required strength.
(p) Foundation and preparation of subgrade.
(1) The foundation shall consist of firm, hard soil from which all vegetable matter and other loose material have been removed.
(2) All soft and spongy places must be dug out and the resulting holes filled with solid materials, thoroughly tamped. Exceptionally
hard, compacted spots in the sub-grade must be loosened and tamped to provide a uniform bearing.
(3) If, in the opinion of the manager, the soil in the foundation is of a character that it will swell or shrink with changes in its moisture
content to an extent that the concrete may be damaged, the soil shall be excavated four inches below sub-grade and refilled with
sand.
(4) Material for fills shall be placed and tamped in six-inch layers. The top of all fills shall extend at least one foot beyond the edges
of the walk or other structure, and the slopes of fills shall be at least two feet horizontal to one foot vertical to prevent undue erosion.
(q) Forms.
(1) Forms shall conform to the shape, lines, grades and dimensions of the concrete as called for.
(2) Lumber used in forms for exposed surfaces shall be dressed to a uniform thickness, and shall be free from loose knots or other
defects. Joints in forms shall be horizontal or vertical where appearance of the finished surface is of importance. For unexposed
surfaces and rough work, undressed lumber may be used. Lumber once used in forms shall have nails withdrawn, and surfaces to be
in contact with concrete thoroughly cleansed before being used again.
(3) Forms shall be sufficiently tight to prevent leakage of mortar. They shall be properly braced or tied together so as to maintain
the desired position and shape during and after placing concrete.
(4) The inside of metal forms shall be coated with non-staining mineral oil or other approved material, or in case of wood forms they
shall be thoroughly wetted.
(5) The removal of forms shall not be started until the concrete has attained the strength necessary to support its own weight and
any construction live loads.
(r) Depositing concrete.
(1) Before beginning placement of concrete, hardened concrete and foreign materials shall be removed from the inner surface of
the mixing and conveying equipment.
(2) Water shall be removed from the space to be occupied by the concrete before concrete is deposited, unless otherwise directed
by the manager. Any flow of water into an excavation shall be diverted through proper side drains to a sump, or be removed by other
approved methods which will avoid washing the freshly deposited concrete.
(3) Concrete shall be handled from the mixer, or in the case of ready-mixed concrete from the transporting vehicle, to the place of
final deposit as rapidly as practicable by methods which shall prevent the separation or loss of the ingredients. Under no
circumstances shall concrete that has partially hardened be deposited in the forms [and concrete shall be deposited] as nearly as
practicable in its final position to avoid rehandling. It shall be deposited so as to maintain, until the completion of the unit, a plastic
surface approximately horizontal.
(4) Concrete, regardless of the type of transporting vehicle, shall have, when deposited in the forms, the quality required.
(5) Concrete, during and immediately after depositing, shall be thoroughly spaded, rodded and compacted.
(6) Accumulation of water on the surface of the concrete due to water gain, segregation or other causes during placement and
compacting shall be prevented as far as possible by adjustments in the mixture. Provision shall be made for the removal of the water
as may accumulate so that under no circumstances will concrete be placed in the accumulations.
(7) Concrete shall be deposited continuously, or in layers of the thickness that no concrete will be deposited on concrete which has
hardened sufficiently to cause the formation of seams and planes of weakness within the section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/438
(8) Before depositing new concrete on or against concrete which has hardened, the forms shall be retightened. The surface of the
hardened concrete shall be roughened as required by the manager in a manner that will not leave loosened particles of aggregate or
damaged concrete at the surface. It shall be thoroughly cleaned of foreign matter and laitance, and saturated with water. To insure an
excess of mortar at the juncture of the hardened and the newly deposited concrete, the cleaned and saturated surfaces, including
vertical and inclined surfaces, shall first be thoroughly covered with a coating of mortar or neat cement ground against which the new
concrete shall be placed before the ground has attained its initial set.
(9) Sidewalks, driveways, setbacks, and all other flat work are to be of one-course concrete construction.
(s) Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks shall be of concrete and have a minimum thickness of four inches. In the residential portions of the city, sidewalks
shall be four and one-half feet in width. In case greater widths are desired, special authorization shall be secured from the engineer. In
business districts, the walks shall occupy the entire width from property line to curb. The walk shall be sloped 1/4 inch in one foot
above the curb.
(2) An entrance sidewalk for a residence in a residential area may vary from the four and one-half foot standard sidewalk width if
the requirements of the particular location are such as to warrant a narrower or a wider walk; however, no entrance walk shall be less
than three feet nor more than six feet in width.
(3) Sidewalks on grades up to and including 3% shall be given a smooth float finish, and on grades over 3% shall be given a brush
finish. Immediately after the concrete is placed it shall be tamped and then struck off with a template. The surface shall then be
“floated” or “darbied” and dusted. This dry dust, consisting of one part portland cement to one and one-half parts sand, must be
sprinkled on the wet concrete not more than 20 minutes after the concrete is placed; and not more than ten minutes after the first coat
of dust is applied, the work is to be struck off with a straight edge or darby and the second coat applied. As soon as the concrete has
become firm, it shall be floated with a wood float and then be troweled with a steel trowel to a uniform, smooth surface. Following this
the walk shall be edged and grooved.
(4) To obtain a suitable brush finish a fine-haired brush not less than four inches in width shall be used. The brush is to be swept
lightly the surface of the concrete with a sweeping, circular motion. The entire surface shall be brushed until a uniform appearance is
obtained, care being taken that the edges and jointer tool marks are not obliterated.
(5) To obtain a suitable smooth float finish, the concrete, as soon as it has become firm, shall be floated with a wood float to a
uniform smooth surface. Following this the walk shall be edged and grooved. The walk shall then be floated transversely or
longitudinally, care being taken that the edger and jointer tool marks are not obliterated.
(6) That portion of the sidewalk in the driveway shall be placed as a driveway, but finished as sidewalk.
(7) The edger shall be of steel three inches wide with a 1/4 inch radius and shall be used on the edges against the forms,
expansion joints and old work in order to give the work a finished appearance. The spacing of the jointer marks shall not exceed five
feet and shall conform to the jointer marks in the curb. The jointer shall leave a mark 3/16 of an inch in width and 3/8 of an inch in
depth. The marks formed by the edger and the jointer shall be on a true line. The marks left by these tools on the flat surface of the
walk shall be troweled out.
(t) Special sidewalks. Sidewalk surfaces constructed of materials other than concrete may be installed only on written approval of the
engineer. Request for the approval shall be made by the owner in writing with a sketch indicating the work to be done. Any sidewalk surface
constructed of a material other than concrete shall be laid on a four-inch concrete base and shall be constructed so that it will form an integral
part with the base. Approval for a special sidewalk will include specifications for the construction of the type of sidewalk to be installed.
(u) Curb and gutter.
(1) A separate gutter, where curbs are in place, or combined curb and gutter shall be constructed in accordance with the standards
shown on the attached plans [attached to Ordinance 65-5]. Construction of curb without gutter will not be permitted. The radius of the
curb return at a street intersection will be designated by the engineer.
(2) In not more than one hour after the concrete has been placed, the curb form shall be removed and a thin coating not over 1/4
inch thick of finish mortar, composed of one part cement to two parts fine aggregate, shall be worked into the exposed faces of the
curb and gutter by means of a trowel and “mule.” Curb and gutter shall be finished true to line and grade with the aid of a straight
edge, steel trowel, steel “gooseneck” and fine-haired brush. The straight edge is to be used on the face of the curb and in the gutter.
The curb and gutter is to be worked with a steel trowel and “gooseneck” to give the work the appearance of a trowel finish. It is to be
edged and jointed in the same manner as specified for a sidewalk, and after the work has become firm it is to be brushed lightly
longitudinally with a final crosswise brushing.
(3) Curbs and gutters constructed of material other than concrete may be installed only with written approval of the engineer.
Request for the approval shall be made by the owner in writing with a sketch indicating the work to be done. Approval for the curbs
will include specifications for the construction of the type of curb to be installed.
(v) Driveways.
(1) Driveways shall be classified as residential, light commercial and heavy commercial and shall be constructed in accordance
with the standards indicated on the attached plans [attached to Ordinance 65-5].
(2) Driveway flat work shall be of one-course construction and given a smooth wood float finish.
(3) Driveway curbs shall be given the finish specified for curb and gutter.
(4) Driveways shall be marked in rectangular squares not over five feet wide by cutting through the finished surface as specified for
sidewalks.
(w) Residential driveways.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/438
(1) A residential driveway shall include any driveway leading into residential or other private property where no heavy wheel loads
may be expected.
(2) The minimum width shall be 10 feet, 0 inches.
(3) The curb return shall have a minimum radius of 2 feet, 6 inches.
(4) Residential driveways shall be of concrete five inches thick including the sidewalk and gutter section.
(x) Commercial driveways.
(1) All driveways into places of business which serve or are served by automobile traffic shall be classified as light commercial
driveways. All driveways which shall be subject to other types of commercial use, including (but without limitation) filling stations and
warehouses, shall be classified as heavy commercial driveways. Special permission must be obtained from the engineer before a
light commercial or heavy commercial driveway may be built. Request for the approval shall be made by the owner in writing with a
sketch indicating the location and dimensions of the commercial driveway.
(2) Light commercial driveways, including the sidewalk and gutter sections, shall be of plain concrete five inches thick. Any
sidewalk which is free from cracks on the proper grade and in good condition may remain in place when a light commercial driveway
leading thereto is installed, but if any the sidewalk shall become dangerous to the public it shall be removed and replaced by the
property owner with concrete of the required thickness. Heavy commercial driveways, including the sidewalk and gutter sections, shall
be of reinforced concrete five inches thick, and where a sidewalk exists within the limits of the driveway, the sidewalk shall be
replaced with reinforced concrete five inches thick.
(3) Three-eighths-inch round deformed bars of reinforcing steel on 18-inch centers both ways shall be placed in heavy commercial
driveways two inches from the finished surface, and shall be securely tied at each intersection. Wire mesh consisting of six-gauge
wire on six-inch centers, both ways, or an approved equal, may be used as an alternate to bars of reinforcing steel.
(4) Metal reinforcement shall be accurately positioned and secured against displacement by using annealed iron wire ties or
suitable clips at intersections, and shall be supported by concrete or metal supports, spacers or metal hangers.
(5) The reinforcing steel shall be placed so as to have one bar three inches from and parallel to the outside edges of the driveway
slab and adjacent to expansion joints. All splices in the steel shall be lapped at least 40 times the diameter of the steel. Where wire
mesh is used, the outside wire shall be not more than 1-1/2 inches from the outside edge of the concrete.
(6) The curb returns shall have a radius of not more than the distance from the front edge of the sidewalk to the face of the curb
and not less than two feet six inches.
(7) In case a driveway, due to development of the abutting property, has become obsolete and of no further use to the property, the
owner may be required by the city council to remove the driveway and replace it with a standard curb and gutter and, where
necessary, a sidewalk, all at his own expense.
(y) Setbacks.
(1) A setback is that additional area formed by setting the curb back from the regular curb alignment toward the property line to
obtain a more convenient parking space in the street abutting a commercial establishment.
(2) In no case shall a setback be constructed where the additional depth obtained is less than eight feet.
(3) A setback may be installed only on written approval of the manager. Request for the approval shall be made by the owner in
writing accompanied by a sketch indicating the work to be done.
(4) The property owner shall be required to maintain the setback area in a clean, presentable condition at his own expense. In case
the setback area is not maintained properly the owner may be required by the city council to remove the setback within a reasonable
length of time and replace it with a standard curb and gutter and, where necessary, a sidewalk, all at his own expense.
(5) In case a setback, due to development of the abutting property, has become obsolete and of not further use to the property, the
owner may be required by the city council to remove the setback and replace it with a standard curb and gutter and, where necessary,
a sidewalk, all at his own expense.
(6) The setback shall be of plain concrete five inches thick, and shall be given a smooth wood float finish and be marked in
rectangular squares as specified for sidewalks. Setback curbs shall be given the finish specified for curb and gutter.
(z) Expansion and contraction joints.
(1) Transverse expansion joints one-half inch in thickness and to the full depth and width of the work shall be spaced not over 25
feet apart in curb gutters, driveways, setbacks and sidewalks. These joints shall be placed on dividing lines between lots where
practicable. A one-half inch expansion joint shall be installed where a sidewalk intersects, joins or abuts a stormwater inlet or other
structure, another walk or a curb. Where the sidewalk occupies the entire space between the curb and sidewalk and between the
sidewalk and building or wall. [sic]
(2) Expansion joint material at least one-half inch in thickness shall be placed in a concrete driveway where the driveway slab or
curb abuts the pavement, gutter, curb and sidewalk, as indicated on the attached standard plan [attached to Ordinance 65-6].
Expansion joint material shall be neatly trimmed to the surface of the finished work.
(3) The expansion joint material used shall completely fill the space required.
(4) Scrap pieces of joint material that cannot readily be assembled without open seams shall not be used.
(aa) Repair work.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/438
(1) Repair work shall comply with the provisions of this section, except that sections of structures being replaced shall in general
conform as nearly as possible in dimensions, shape and appearance with the structure in place.
(2) Sections of sidewalks, driveways, curbs and gutters to be repaired shall be cut out and replaced to the jointer marks.
(3) The contractor shall be required to backfill his work properly to the full depth of the structure. He shall be required to remove
from the site all surplus excavated material and debris and put the work into a neat and presentable condition.
(4) In case the surplus excavated material on the site is not sufficient to backfill the structure to its full required depth, the contractor
shall be required to obtain the additional material and backfill the structure properly as indicated on the attached standard plans
[attached to Ordinance 65-6], which are made a part of this division.
(Ordinance 65-6 adopted 5/12/65; 1966 Code, ch. 19.1, art. I, sec. 10; 1994 Code, sec. 100.58)
ARTICLE 10.03 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.03.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Manager. The person immediately in charge of any park area and its activities and to whom other park attendants in the area are responsible.
Park. Any park, playground, swimming pool, recreation center, or any other area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to active or
passive recreation.
Person. A person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
Vehicle. Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered or not. The term includes any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description.
(1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 99.01)
Sec. 10.03.002 Enforcement
The manager and park attendants shall diligently enforce the sections of this article and shall have authority to eject from the park any person
acting in violation of this article. (1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 7; 1994 Code, sec. 99.45)
Sec. 10.03.003 Use of park property
(a) Buildings and other structures and equipment.
(1) No person in a park shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any building, bridge, table,
bench, fireplace, railing, paving material, water line or other public utility, or any parts or appurtenances thereof, any sign, notice,
placard, monument, stake, post, other boundary market, or any other structure or equipment, facilities, property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.
(2) No person in a park shall fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person
over the age of five years shall use the restrooms or washrooms designated for persons of the opposite sex.
(3) No person in a park, except the manager and the park attendants and other persons acting under and by direction of the
manager, shall dig or remove any sand, gravel, rock, soil, stones, trees, shrubs, plants, wood, or materials or make any excavation by
tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
(4) No person shall erect or construct any building or structure of any kind, whether permanent or temporary, in any park, except
with the prior written permission of the manager and city council. All permanent buildings or structures so erected shall be the
property of the city.
(b) Trees, shrubbery and lawns.
(1) No person in a park, except the manager and the park attendants and other persons acting under and by direction of the
manager, shall damage, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or
plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant. No person, except the manager and the
park attendants and other persons acting under the direction of the manager, shall dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas or in any
way injure or impair the natural beauty and usefulness of any park area.
(2) No person in a park shall climb any tree or walk, stand, or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences or gun
carriages or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for the purposes.
(1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 99.02)
Sec. 10.03.004 Sanitation requirements
(a) Pollution of waters. No person in a park shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain,
pond, lake, stream, swimming pool, or other body of water any substance, matter or thing, either liquid or solid, which will or may result in the
pollution of the waters.
(b) Refuse and trash. No person in a park shall dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish,
waste, garbage, refuse or other trash. No refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/438
grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles provided for the purposes, and where receptacles are not so provided all the
rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for bringing it there and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere.
(1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 99.03)
Sec. 10.03.005 Traffic and parking control
(a) No person in a park shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws and of the city ordinances in
regard to the equipment and operation of motor vehicles.
(b) No person in a park shall fail to obey all traffic officers and park employees, the persons being hereby expressly authorized and instructed
to direct traffic whenever and wherever necessary in the parks in accordance with any applicable provisions of this code and any other
ordinances of the city and the supplementary regulations as the manager may issue from time to time.
(c) No person in a park shall fail to obey all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking and all other signs posted for
the proper control of traffic and to safeguard life and property.
(d) No person in a park shall drive a vehicle at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour.
(e) No person in a park shall drive a vehicle on any area except the designated park roads and parking areas.
(f) No person shall park a vehicle in any park except in the established or designated parking areas and in accordance with the instructions of
any park attendant who may be present and with the posted parking directions at the place. No person shall park any vehicle in or on any street
or road in any park except at the places as may be designated by the manager as parking area.
(g) No person shall leave any vehicle standing or parked in a park after the closing hours of the park at night and before the opening hour of
the park in the morning.
(h) All parks are closed to through truck traffic, and no truck, except emergency vehicles and trucks which have as their destination some point
within the park, and trucks smaller than one-ton rating, shall be operated within any park or upon any street or road traversing the park.
(i) The foregoing traffic and parking regulations do not apply to the manager, other park attendants and other persons acting under and by
direction of the manager while engaged in necessary park business.
(j) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, park or place any vehicle through, in along, upon, or across any public park belonging to the city
except upon designated streets, alleys, or driveways located in the park.
(1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 4; ch. 20.2, art. II, sec. 20; 1994 Code, sec. 99.04)
Sec. 10.03.006 Closing hours for Cuero Municipal Park
(a) Cuero Municipal Park, being the city park located at the east end of Main Street, shall be closed from 11:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. each day,
and the park manager or his representative shall erect gates or barriers at all entrances of the park so that entry shall be barred during the hours.
However, when events at the park club house, rodeo arena, Little League field, softball fields, baseball park or other facilities in the Cuero
Municipal Park are scheduled at times which extend into the “closed hours,” one or more gates shall be left open until the conclusion of the event
so that participants may have free entrance and exit to and from the event.
(b) No person shall enter or remain in Cuero Municipal Park during the hours when the park is closed unless the person shall be in attendance
at an event at the park club house, rodeo arena, Little League field, softball field, baseball park or other facilities which is scheduled to extend
into the “closed hours.”
(1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, secs. 11, 12; Ordinance 82-15 adopted 12/2/82; 1994 Code, sec. 99.05)
Secs. 10.03.007–10.03.040 Reserved
Division 2. Recreational Activities
Sec. 10.03.041 Swimming; rules for swimming pool
(a) No person shall swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways of a park except in the swimming pools provided for the purposes. No
person shall swim in any park swimming pool except in compliance with the regulations as are herein set forth or as may hereafter be adopted by
the manager and except after having paid the reasonable admission fee as is now or may hereafter be prescribed by regulation or ordinance.
(b) No person shall swim or bathe in any park swimming pool or frequent or congregate at any swimming pool except during the hours of the
day as may be designated by the manager for the purposes.
(c) No person shall appear at any park in any bathing costume which indecently exposes his or her person. No person shall appear in bathing
costume at any place in the park other than designated swimming pools and lakes and the areas immediately surrounding the swimming pools
and lakes as may be designated by the manager. No person shall appear at or in any club house or recreation hall in a bathing costume.
(d) No person shall enter a swimming pool in any park without first having taken a cleansing shower bath in the shower facilities provided at
the park.
(e) No person having any skin eruptions or abrasions, sore or infected eyes, a cold, nasal or ear discharges, or any communicable disease
shall use any swimming pool in any park. Spitting, spouting water or blowing the nose in the swimming pool shall be strictly prohibited. No person
shall swim in the city swimming pool who is vomiting or has diarrhea, fever, or any condition that makes swimming a health hazard to that person
or to other swimmers.
(f) No spectators shall enter the enclosure surrounding the swimming pool in any park.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/438
(g) No person in a park shall dress or undress except in the bathhouses as may be provided for that purpose.
(h) No alcoholic beverage shall be possessed or consumed within the enclosure surrounding the swimming pool in any park, nor in the
bathhouse, nor on the sidewalks adjacent to the swimming pool, the swimming pool enclosure or the bathhouse.
(i) The swimming pool in any park shall not be used outside of regularly scheduled open hours except for school-sponsored outings properly
scheduled in advance with the manager and with proper arrangements made to the satisfaction of the manager for proper adult supervision and
lifeguards. No private parties or private swimming lessons may be held in the pool area of any park outside of the regular open hours of the pool
without the permission of the city manager and a fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for any private party plus
lifeguards' salary at 1-1/2 times their regular rate. For private parties there shall be a minimum of two lifeguards, over 35 swimmers three
lifeguards, and over 50 swimmers four lifeguards. Private swimming lessons shall be provided at the actual cost of instruction.
(j) The charge for admission to the pool in a park shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. No family plans shall be
offered. When public swimming classes for children are being conducted, participants in the classes shall be admitted to the pool on payment of
a fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A. Adults or children taking private swimming lessons shall be charged the regular admission
price as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A. For city/Lions Club-sponsored swimming lessons, the fee shall be as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A.
(k) (1) No parent, guardian or other person having custody of a child who is unable to swim shall allow the child to go into any
swimming pool owned or operated by the city unless the child is accompanied by the parent, guardian or person having custody or
some other person 14 years of age or older who is capable of supervising and caring for the child and who has agreed with the
parent, guardian, or person having custody of the child to be responsible for the safety of the child. A child under 12 years of age is
prohibited from going into any swimming pool owned by the city unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or person having custody.
(2) This subsection (k) shall not apply to children while they are participating in swimming classes being conducted by qualified
swimming instructors.
(3) For the purpose of this subsection (k), the term “a child who is unable to swim” is defined as a child under the age of 12 years
who is unable to complete with reasonable ease the beginner's swimming tests set forth as items 19 and 20 in the American National
Red Cross Water Safety Instructor's Manual on Swimming and Lifesaving, 1961 edition, which is adopted by and made a part of this
subsection, to wit:
National Red Cross Swimming and Lifesaving (1961):
(A) Safety skills. Interspersed throughout the course, the student demonstrates the skills listed under personal safety and
elementary forms of rescue. These skills and a basic knowledge of water safety are an important phase of the course.
(B) Combined skills. The student jumps into deep water, levels off and swims 15 yards. Without touching the bottom, he
changes direction and starts swimming back to the starting point. Approximately halfway back, he rotates to the back position
and rests either motionless or with gentle paddling movements for one-half a minute. He then rotates to the prone position and
swims back to starting point.
(l) No person(s) shall display any type of improper affectionate, inappropriate or lewd behavior while swimming in or on the adjacent grounds
of the city swimming pool, which includes but is not limited to hugging, kissing, fondling, petting and holding hands.
(m) All lifeguards and any person employed by the city responsible for maintaining the safety of persons swimming in the city swimming pool
shall be treated with respect at all times by persons admitted into the city park swimming pool, and all directives made by the lifeguards will be
adhered to by all swimmers and their parents, guardians and custodians. Any individual who intimidates or touches a lifeguard in a threatening
manner shall be immediately removed and not allowed to return for the remainder of the swim season.
(1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 5a; Ordinance 82-5 adopted 5/6/82; Ordinance 83-12 adopted 7/7/83; 1994 Code, sec. 99.15; Ordinance 99-30
adopted 11/4/99; Ordinance 2013-13 adopted 3/28/13; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 10.03.042 Boating
(a) No person shall bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether motor powered or not, upon any waters in a park except at
the places designated for boating by the manager. All boating shall be in accordance with the regulations which are now in effect or which may
hereafter be promulgated by the manager.
(b) No person shall launch or operate any boat, raft, or other watercraft, whether motor powered or not, upon any waters in any park without
first having registered with the manager and paid the reasonable charge as is now or may hereafter be provided by regulations promulgated by
the manager.
(c) No person shall navigate, direct or handle any boat in a manner as unnecessarily to annoy, frighten or endanger the occupants of other
boats.
(d) No person shall launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind in a park between the closing hours of the park at night and the opening
hours thereof the following morning, nor shall any person be on or remain in any boat during the closing hours of the park.
(e) No person in any park shall fail to comply with the applicable provisions of the state Water Safety Act.
(1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 5b; 1994 Code, sec. 99.16)
Sec. 10.03.043 Fishing
(a) No person shall engage in commercial fishing in the waters of any park.
(b) No person shall fish in the waters of any park except in the areas designated for the purposes by the manager and under the rules and
regulations as may be prescribed by the manager.
(1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 5c; 1994 Code, sec. 99.17)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/438
Sec. 10.03.044 Hunting and firearms
No person in a park shall hunt, trap, or pursue any wildlife other than poisonous snakes. No person in a park shall use, carry, or possess firearms
of any description or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slingshots, or any other form of weapon potentially inimical to wildlife or dangerous
to human safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with the [or] fire blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas
from beyond park boundaries is also prohibited. (1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 5d; 1994 Code, sec. 99.18)
Sec. 10.03.045 Picnic areas
(a) No person in a park shall picnic or lunch in a place other than those places designated for such purposes. Attendants shall have the
authority to regulate the activities in picnic areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use of picnic facilities for the
comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with all directions given to achieve this end.
(b) Use of the individual fireplaces and tables and benches generally shall follow the rule of “first come, first served,” but persons may reserve
the use of particular facilities at a particular time by making applications in advance to the manager.
(c) No person shall leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans,
bottles, garbage and other refuse is completely burned or deposited in trash receptacles that are available. If no trash receptacle is available,
then the refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park by the picnicker and properly disposed of elsewhere.
(1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 5e; 1994 Code, sec. 99.19)
Sec. 10.03.046 Golfing
(a) No person shall play on or use any park golf course except after having paid the reasonable greens fees or other charges as are now or
may hereafter be prescribed by any applicable regulation or ordinance of the city.
(b) No person shall play on or use any park golf course except in compliance with the regulations as may be prescribed by the manager or
imposed by any applicable ordinance of the city. No person shall operate any golf cart upon any part of a park golf course except where
authorized by the manager and in compliance with regulations prescribed by him.
(1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 5f; Ordinance 71-7 adopted 12/7/71; 1994 Code, sec. 99.20)
Secs. 10.03.047–10.03.070 Reserved
Division 3. Prohibited Acts and Conduct
Sec. 10.03.071 Fireworks
No person in a park shall have in his possession or set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo, rocket or
other fireworks or explosive of any kind. (1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 6a; 1994 Code, sec. 99.30)
Sec. 10.03.072 Begging or soliciting
No person in a park shall beg or solicit alms for any purpose. (1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 6b; 1994 Code, sec. 99.31)
Sec. 10.03.073 Fire and open flames
No person in a park shall build or attempt to build any fire except in the fireplaces and pits as may be provided for that purpose. No person in a
park shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars or other inflammable material within any park area or on
any highway, road, or street abutting or contiguous thereto. (1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 6c; 1994 Code, sec. 99.32)
Sec. 10.03.074 Disorderly conduct
No person in a park shall engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or
behavior tending to a breach of the peace. (1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 6d; 1994 Code, sec. 99.33)
Sec. 10.03.075 Sale, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or willfully to sell, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage on or in the Little League area of the
Cuero Municipal Park, including the playing field and practice fields, the dugout areas, the bleachers, the concession stands, the parking lots or
on the grounds adjacent to the Little League field or in any automobile parked adjacent to the Little League field. (1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec.
6g; Ordinance 83-8 adopted 5/5/83; 1994 Code, sec. 99.34)
Sec. 10.03.076 Glass beverage containers
(a) No person in a park shall possess or use any glass beverage bottle or other glass beverage container.
(b) This section shall not apply to glass beverage containers carried to and used within and not outside of a building by a person who has
rented the building or who is a guest or licensee of a person who rented the building.
(Ordinance 91-13 adopted 10/10/91; 1994 Code, sec. 99.35)
ARTICLE 10.04 LIBRARY*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.04.001 Creation
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/438
A city library, known as the Cuero Municipal Library, is hereby created. (1966 Code, ch. 12.0, art. I, sec. 1; Ordinance 82-9 adopted 8/5/82; 1994
Code, sec. 97.01)
Sec. 10.04.002 Rules and regulations
General rules and regulations for the operation and use of the Cuero Municipal Library shall be promulgated by the librarian with the advice and
recommendation of the advisory board. (1966 Code, ch. 12.0, art. I, sec. 5; Ordinance 82-9 adopted 8/5/82; 1994 Code, sec. 97.02)
Sec. 10.04.003 Injuring or defacing books or other materials
Whoever willfully injures or defaces any book, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript or other property of the Cuero Municipal Library by
writing, marking, tearing, breaking, or otherwise mutilating the same shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined
as set forth in section 1.01.009. (1966 Code, ch. 12.0, art. I, sec. 6; Ordinance 82-9 adopted 8/5/82; 1994 Code, sec. 97.03)
Sec. 10.04.004 Detaining books or other materials after notice
Whoever willfully detains any book, newspaper, magazine, pamphlet, manuscript or other property of the Cuero Municipal Library for 30 days
after notice in writing to return the same, given after expiration of the time which by the rules of the library the property may be kept, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as set forth in section 1.01.009. (1966 Code, ch. 12.0, art. I, sec. 7;
Ordinance 82-9 adopted 8/5/82; 1994 Code, sec. 97.04)
Secs. 10.04.005–10.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Administration
Sec. 10.04.031 Librarian
The library shall be under the direction and supervision of the city municipal librarian, who shall be appointed by and who shall be responsible to
the city manager. (1966 Code, ch. 12.0, art. I, sec. 2; Ordinance 82-9 adopted 8/5/82; 1994 Code, sec. 97.15)
Sec. 10.04.032 Library advisory board
(a) Membership. The city municipal library advisory board shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council for two-year terms.
The terms shall be staggered so that four members shall be appointed in even-numbered years and three members shall be appointed in oddnumbered
years. The terms of members shall commence on October 1 and terminate on September 30. Members of the board shall serve
without compensation. The mayor shall serve as an ex officio member of the board. Vacancies on the board caused by death, removal, or
resignation shall be filled by appointment by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The members of the board shall be subject
to removal by the city council for cause deemed sufficient by the council and in the interest of the public service. A majority of the members of the
board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
(b) Powers and duties. The city municipal library advisory board shall act in an advisory capacity to the librarian, the city manager, and the city
council. It shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To hold monthly meetings at regularly stated times and places, which shall be open to the public.
(2) To receive suggestions and recommendations from citizens for development of the library and library services.
(3) To make recommendations as it believes necessary for the establishment and usage of the library or libraries, and for the
manner in which library services may be coordinated with other libraries which render service to the citizens of the city.
(4) To cooperate with all other public or private groups in advancing the use and services of the library.
(5) To make periodic reports to the city council concerning the activities of the board and the progress of the library and to make the
special reports as may be requested by the city council.
(6) To recommend to the city council policies and programs for the promotion and advancement of the library and to recommend to
the city librarian the adoption of general rules and regulations for the operation and use of the library.
(7) To assist the librarian in the formulation of budget requests for presentation by the librarian to the city manager for final
preparation and presentation by the city manager to the city council.
(8) To recommend the purchase of equipment, furnishings, fixtures, and other items needed in the library.
(9) To recommend to the librarian the purchase of books for the library.
(10) To perform the other duties as may be reasonably requested of it by the city council from time to time.
(11) Generally to use its influence to promote the facilities, services and programs of the library.
(1966 Code, ch. 12.0, art. I, secs. 3, 4; Ordinance 82-9 adopted 8/5/82; 1994 Code, sec. 97.16)
ARTICLE 10.05 AIRPORT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.05.001 Airport fund
There is hereby created in the treasury of the city an airport fund. All fees, charges, rents, and money from any source derived from airport
operations shall be deposited in the airport fund. Funds shall not and cannot be diverted from the airport fund to the general fund or any other
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/438
revenue fund of the city. All expenditures from the airport fund shall be solely for airport purposes. (Ordinance 92-04 adopted 5/20/92; 1994
Code, sec. 35.10)
Secs. 10.05.002–10.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Standards of Operation
Sec. 10.05.031 Aviation activities and operation of aircraft
All aviation activities and operation of aircraft at the Cuero Municipal Airport must be in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration rules
and regulations and local field rules as set forth by the city manager. (1966 Code, ch. 1.2, art. I, sec. 6; 1994 Code, sec. 96.01)
Sec. 10.05.032 Authorization to conduct business or other activity
No one will conduct any kind of business or activity on the Cuero Municipal Airport without the written authorization of the city and city manager.
(1966 Code, ch. 1.2, art. I, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 96.02)
Sec. 10.05.033 Operation of non-aircraft vehicles prohibited in certain areas
No one will operate any kind of vehicle, excepting that type of vehicle associated with aircraft, 40 feet east of the north or south hanger line
commencing at the east wall of the hanger. (1966 Code, ch. 1.2, art. I, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 96.03)
Sec. 10.05.034 Storage of inflammable liquid or combustible material
No inflammable liquid or combustible material will be stored on the airport property unless in a proper storage approved by the state board of fire
underwriters and the city fire chief. (1966 Code, ch. 1.2, art. I, sec. 4; 1994 Code, sec. 96.04)
Sec. 10.05.035 Parking of aircraft
No aircraft shall be parked on the concrete ramp or any other portion of the airport which will in any way hinder or endanger buildings or the
movements of aircraft. (1966 Code, ch. 1.2, art. I, sec. 5; 1994 Code, sec. 96.05)
Sec. 10.05.036 Fire safety regulations
Safety regulations pertaining to fire will be in accordance with the city, state, federal and civil aeronautics authorities, and the rules and
regulations and other safety rules set forth by the city manager. (1966 Code, ch. 1.2, art. I, sec. 7; 1994 Code, sec. 96.06)
Sec. 10.05.037 Establishment of rules and regulations
Rules and regulations not in conflict with the city and civil aeronautics authorities governing the control of the Cuero Municipal Airport may be
promulgated and revised from time to time as the necessity therefor arises by the city manager. The rules and regulations shall first be approved
by the city council and be duly and prominently posted by the city manager at the Cuero Municipal Airport. (1966 Code, ch. 1.2, art. I, sec. 8;
1994 Code, sec. 96.07)
Sec. 10.05.038 Fees; lease forms
(a) The schedule of fees, charges and expenses for the lease of hangar space and tie-down space located at the Cuero Municipal Airport is as
set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) The lease application form (exhibit B) and the lease form (exhibit C) set forth as exhibits to Ordinance 2012-08 are adopted by reference
and incorporated as if set forth fully herein. Copies of these forms are available at the city offices for inspection by the public during normal
business hours.
(1994 Code, sec. 96.08; Ordinance 2012-08 adopted 2/1/12; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 10.05.039 Appeals
Any decision or ruling of the city manager and any rule or regulation promulgated by him may be appealed to the city council for a decision. The
decision of the city council shall be final on any matter appealed to it from the decision or ruling of the city manager. (1966 Code, ch. 1.2, art. I,
sec. 9; 1994 Code, sec. 96.20)
ARTICLE 10.06 HILLSIDE CEMETERY*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.06.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Cemetery. A defined area where the remains of deceased people are buried or are otherwise interred.
Concrete grave liner. A burial receptacle placed in the ground, in a cemetery, designed and built to support the weight of the earth and standard
cemetery maintenance equipment, and to prevent the grave from collapsing.
Cremated remains. The portion of a body after cremation.
Double grave space. A single grave space where the designation of two burials/casketed remains has been approved by the city manager.
Footstone. A stone marking the foot of a grave.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/438
Half-lot. Four separate, single grave spaces available for purchase.
Headstone. A memorial stone set at the head of a grave; also known as a monument.
Interment. The permanent disposition of remains by entombment or burial.
Lot. Eight separate, single grave spaces available for purchase.
Mausoleum. A chamber or structure used, or intended to be used, for entombment.
Monument. Something erected for an individual in granite, marble or bronze; can be flat, beveled or upright.
Space. A piece of property, within a cemetery, for purchase of a burial or burials.
(1994 Code, sec. 91.01; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.002 Designation of area; additional lands
Hillside Cemetery, the municipal cemetery of the city, consists of all the lands shown on the map or plat of the Hillside Cemetery with New and
Old Additions, as prepared by E.L. Miles in May, 1950, and revised in August, 1953 and August, 1957, as adopted by ordinance of the city
council on August 23, 1957, and now recorded in Volume 3, page 186 et seq., ordinance records of the city, together with the addition to the
cemetery as shown on map made by Pat Dunn, Registered Public Surveyor, designating Section H in the cemetery. Additional lands may from
time to time hereafter be subdivided into burial lots and incorporated into the cemetery, and the provisions of this article shall apply uniformly to
all the additions as may hereafter be made to the cemetery. (1966 Code, ch. 3.1, art. I, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 91.02; Ordinance 2013-49
adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.003 Information regarding lots, grave spaces, ownership and burials
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the funeral directors and others interested in the purchase and sale of lots and grave spaces in Hillside
Cemetery to obtain the necessary information from the city's offices concerning the status and availability of lots and grave spaces. Information
regarding the purchase and sale of lots and grave spaces, including ownership and burials, may be obtained online. (1966 Code, ch. 3.1, art. I,
sec. 17; 1994 Code, sec. 91.03; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.004 Size of lots; half-lots and quarter-lots
Full lots in Hillside Cemetery shall consist of eight grave spaces, half-lots shall consist of four grave spaces, and quarter-lots shall consist of two
grave spaces. Quarter-lots shall not be sold except in Section H, where walkways extending north and south through the section have reduced
lots to quarter-lot size. (1966 Code, ch. 3.1, art. I, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 91.04; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.005 Order of sale of lots in Sections H and I
(a) Blocks in Section H of Hillside Cemetery shall be opened for sale in sequence according to their numbers, the lowest numbered block first,
then the block with the next higher number, and so on. No lots shall be sold elsewhere in Block No. 1 of Section H until at least 95% of the
number of lots in the next lower numbered block shall have been sold. If additional sections are dedicated to cemetery use, the same rule shall
be applied and no lot shall be sold in any block in the new section until at least 95% of the number of lots in the highest numbered block of
Section H shall have been sold; thereupon the lowest numbered block in the new section may be opened for sale, and when 95% of the numbers
of lots in the block shall have been sold, the higher numbered block may be opened for sale and so on.
(b) The expansion of Hillside Cemetery, designated as Section I, will follow the same provisions as applicable to Section H, except that as
each block in Section I is opened in numerical order, the lots shall be sold in order from the easternmost lot, being Lot 1, of the southernmost
row, being Row 1, to the westernmost lot of Row 1, and upon being fully purchased, then moving northerly to the next row, being Row 2, and
beginning with the easternmost lot and moving westerly in that same order as the previous row, and so on to the next row until that block is filled.
Upon a block being filled, the next numerical block shall be opened.
(1966 Code, ch. 3.1, art. I, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 91.05; Ordinance 01-14 adopted 7/10/01; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.006 Sale of lots and spaces in specific parts of cemetery; lot prices
(a) Only single grave spaces shall be sold in the remaining lots of Block 2, Section 10 of Hillside Cemetery. In the event of pauper burials, the
interments shall be made in single grave spaces in the remaining lots of Block 2, Section 10. Records shall be maintained of the sale of all single
grave spaces in the block, as well as of all interments of paupers in single grave spaces in the block.
(b) Each lot in Block 3, Section H, Hillside Cemetery, shall be sold as a whole or as a half-lot. The lots in the most northerly tier of lots in the
block shall be sold first, commencing with Lot 76 and progressing easterly in order, to and including Lot 1; then the lots in the next tier shall be
sold, commencing with Lot 82 and proceeding easterly, to and including Lot 2; then the lots commencing with Lot 83 and progressing easterly, to
and including Lot 3; then the lots commencing with Lot 84 and proceeding easterly, to and including Lot 4. No lot shall be sold until the next
preceding lot shall have been sold, provided that whenever a half-lot is sold the remainder of the half-lot shall be reserved for the next purchaser
desiring a half-lot, and the next whole lot may be sold to the next purchaser desiring a whole lot.
(1) The price for each whole lot shall be in the amount set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code, and the price for
each half-lot shall be in the amount set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(2) All lots in Block 3, Section H, shall be developed and maintained as a lawn-type cemetery. No trees or shrubs shall be planted in
the block. The construction of curbs on or around lots or grave spaces is prohibited. No cradles may by constructed around any
grave(s). Monuments, headstones, surface burial vaults and mausoleums must be completely surrounded at ground level with a
concrete skirt, extending at least four inches in all directions from the base of the structure, so that a lawn mower may be run on and
over the skirt.
(3) The provisions of this article do not apply to Lot 81 in Block 3, Section H, which has been previously sold. The regulations
applying to the lot at the time of its sale shall remain in effect as to the lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/438
(4) The remaining spaces in Lots 24 and 25, Block 2, Section H, shall be sold as single grave spaces at a price set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code per grave space. Each of the remaining lots in Block 2, Section H (other than the Lots 24 and 25),
shall be divided into eight single graves, numbered from one through eight. The grave spaces shall be sold in multiples of two, at a
price set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code per grave space.
(5) Lots 85 through 5, inclusive, commencing with Lot 85 and progressing easterly, to and including Lot 5 in the southernmost tier of
lots in Block 3, shall be sold as single and quarter (multiples of two) grave spaces. No single or quarter space in any lot shall be sold
until all spaces in the next preceding lot have been sold. Single grave spaces shall be sold at a price set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code per grave space. Quarter-lots shall be sold at a price set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code
per grave space.
(6) The city manager shall have the authority to designate and/or modify the manner in which lots can be sold, such as single
spaces, quarter-lots, half-lots or whole lots, and the price to be charged for the sale of grave spaces.
(7) Any individual whose name is on a waiting list (hold status) held by the city for a space, lot, section and/or block at the time this
section takes effect shall pay the purchase price of the space, lot, section and/or block at the rate prior to the effective date of this
section, but only if the purchase price is paid within 30 days of this section. In the event the purchase price is not paid within the 30-
day period by those on the applicable waiting list, the purchase price for any space, lot, section and/or block shall be at the updated
price provided by this section. The waiting list (hold status) shall apply only to spaces, lots, sections and blocks that have been
surveyed by a registered surveyor and become open for the sale to the public.
(c) The east half of Lot 30 in Block 2, Section H of Hillside Cemetery, is designated and reserved for sale of single grave spaces, the half-lot to
be divided into four separate, single grave spaces to be sold separately as needed, at the price per single grave space in effect at the time of the
sale.
(d) Lots 70 and 80 in Block 2, Section H, shall each be subdivided into eight burial spaces, which shall be sold as single spaces only at the
rates provided by ordinance.
(e) Lot 7, Block 2, Section H, shall be subdivided into single grave spaces, which shall be sold separately by the city.
(f) Lots within Section I shall be in conformity with the provisions of this section and those of section 10.06.005.
(1966 Code, ch. 3.1, art. I, secs. 4, 4a; Ordinance 89-06 adopted 4/19/89; Ordinance 91-09 adopted 5/21/91; Ordinance 93-11 adopted 3/4/93;
Ordinance 93-28 adopted 10/7/93; 1994 Code, sec. 91.06; Ordinance 01-14 adopted 7/10/01; Ordinance 09-27 adopted 11/17/09; Ordinance
2013-49 adopted 11/15/13; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 10.06.007 Double (stacked) grave spaces
(a) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary described in this article, single grave spaces may contain two, but no more than two, interments
(burials/casketed remains), and are subject to the regulations as provided for herein.
(b) In the event a plot owner wishes to have two interments placed in the same grave space, he or she shall make a request, in writing, to the
city manager prior to the first burial in the intended double (stacked) grave space. Each request for a double (stacked) grave space shall be
reviewed on a case-by-case basis. Upon receiving the request, the city manager shall review the request within a reasonable time and determine
whether or not the double (stacked) grave site is feasible. If the double (stacked) grave site is feasible, then the city manager shall issue a permit
to the plot owner allowing a double (stacked) grave site. The decision to allow a double (stacked) grave space is fully discretionary with the city
manager. Upon approval by the city manager of the double (stacked) grave space, the plot owner(s) shall sign and execute a release/waiver in
favor of the city that releases the city from any and all liability associated with the double (stacked) grave space, and holds harmless and
indemnifies the city and its employees and agents.
(c) If a grave space is permitted to contain two interments (burials/casketed remains), then the excavation regulations in effect at the time of
the first burial shall apply.
(d) All double (stacked) grave spaces shall contain a concrete grave liner designed to hold two caskets. This will assure proper depth will be
maintained after the first interment for the second interment, and avoid the necessity of excavating soil from the grave space for the second
interment.
(e) When a grave is opened for the second interment, care shall be taken to screen off the grave site from public view.
(f) Only one headstone may be placed on any grave space. Headstones shall be placed on the west end of the grave space only.
(1994 Code, sec. 91.07; Ordinance 97-24 adopted 10/2/97; Ordinance 2004-09 adopted 6/3/04; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.008 Cremated remains
(a) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary described in this article, each urn shall hold the cremated remains of one human body. Single
grave spaces may contain up to four urns, and are subject to the regulations as provided for herein. “Urn” and “cremated remains” being as
defined in section 716.001(4) and (15) of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
(b) In the event a plot owner wishes to have multiple urns with cremated remains placed in the same grave space, he or she shall make a
request in writing to the city manager prior to the first burial in the intended grave space. Each request shall be reviewed on a case-by-case
basis. Upon receiving the request, the city manager shall review the request within a reasonable time and determine whether or not the grave
site is feasible. The determination will be based on an investigation made by the city manager, which will include discussions with persons who
have knowledge of the placement of interments in Hillside Cemetery. If the grave site is feasible for the placement of multiple urns with cremated
remains, then the city manager shall issue a permit to the plot owner allowing for a multiple-urn grave site. The decision to allow a multiple-urn
grave space is fully discretionary with the city manager. Upon approval by the city manager, the plot owner(s) shall sign and execute a
release/waiver in favor of the city, releasing it from any and all liability associated with the grave space, and holding harmless and indemnifying
the city, its employees and agents.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/438
(c) If a grave space is to contain multiple urns with cremated remains, no urn will be placed less than 24 inches from the west end (head) of
the grave site so that, upon the placement of a head monument or marker, the remains will not be desecrated. Further, there shall be at least 18
inches of topsoil between the top of the urn and the surface of the ground, and a space of at least one foot between the urns.
(d) Only one headstone will be placed on the west end of the grave space.
(1994 Code, sec. 91.08; Ordinance 2004-06 adopted 5/6/04; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.009 Record of lots sold
The city manager shall cause a record to be kept of all lots sold in Hillside Cemetery. The records shall show the section, block, lot and grave
space number of each space and/or spaces sold, the date of the sale, the name of the purchaser, the amount paid for the space(s), the name of
the buried and the space number at the time of a burial. The record shall constitute a public record of the city. (1966 Code, ch. 3.1, art. I, sec. 5;
1994 Code, sec. 91.09; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.010 Issuance of deed
Upon receipt of payment in full for any lot, part of lot or grave space, the city manager shall cause a cemetery deed to be issued to the purchaser
thereof. The deed shall be executed by the city manager, the office manager, or an officer or employee of the city as the city manager may, from
time to time, designate. The deed is to be attested by the city secretary, with the corporate seal of the city affixed thereto. The deed shall convey
the exclusive right of sepulture in the lot or part thereof. (1966 Code, ch. 3.1, art. I, sec. 6; 1994 Code, sec. 91.10; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted
11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.011 Contract with cemetery endowment association
The city, by and through its city manager, is authorized and directed to enter into a contract, on an annual basis, with the Hillside Cemetery
Endowment Association, Inc., by which the corporation shall engage to pay to the city annually all of its net income from the investment of its
perpetual care funds, and the city shall agree to keep up and maintain the cemetery spaces covered by perpetual care. The contract shall cover
an initial period from October 1, 1977, to October 1, 1978, and shall provide for automatic extension from year to year thereafter, unless either
party shall, on or before July 1 of any year, give notice to the other of its intention to terminate the contract at the expiration of the current year.
The contract shall provide that the endowment association shall annually furnish to the city a full accounting of its assets, receipts and
disbursements. (1966 Code, ch. 3.1, art. I, sec. 9; 1994 Code, sec. 91.11; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.012 Opening and closing of graves; filling operations
All graves shall be opened and closed by a professional company approved by the city. The city shall have no responsibility therefor. Within one
day after the date of burial, the funeral director shall remove from the cemetery all excess dirt remaining after the burial. The dirt shall not be
spread or broadcast over the burial plot or elsewhere in the cemetery. After the grave is closed, the city will be responsible for future filling-in of
the grave; neither the funeral director nor the plot owner shall conduct filling operations except with express permission of the city. (1966 Code,
ch. 3.1, art. I, sec. 15; Ordinance 81-2 adopted 2/5/81; 1994 Code, sec. 91.12; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.013 Floral designs, vases, plantings and other decorations
(a) Lawn-type cemetery areas. In those sections of Hillside Cemetery designated in Sections H and I as a “lawn-type” cemetery, not more than
two containers of flowers may be placed on each grave. The containers shall be placed on or beside the headstone of the grave or the family
monument. Additional flowers may be placed thereon on Decoration Day (being the third Sunday in April), Memorial Day, Easter, Mother's Day,
Father's Day, Veterans Day and Christmas. All the additional flowers shall be removed within 20 days after their placement on the special days
mentioned.
(b) Removal authorized. The city manager, by and through his or her subordinates, employees and contractors, is authorized to remove all
floral designs, flowers, flags, vases, other decorations, trees, shrubs and other plantings from the cemetery as soon as they become, in his or her
judgment, unsightly, dangerous, detrimental or diseased, or when they fail to conform to the regulations governing the cemetery. The city shall
not be liable for floral pieces, baskets or frames in which or to which floral pieces may be attached, nor for lost, misplaced or broken vases or
receptacles. The city reserves the right, acting through its city manager, to regulate the method of decorating cemetery plots so as to maintain a
uniform appearance. In reference to the term “unsightly” as applied herein, same shall be defined as “unpleasant to sight, ugly, unappealing,
unattractive or faded.”
(1966 Code, ch. 3.1, art. I, sec. 11; 1994 Code, sec. 91.13; Ordinance 2005-24 adopted 12/1/05; Ordinance 09-08 adopted 6/4/09; Ordinance
2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.014 Park or garden area
The unoccupied section of Hillside Cemetery, which lies along the west boundary line of the cemetery, between a paved drive on the east and
the western fence of the cemetery on the west, and between the two entrance gates and drives that open onto Valley Street, is hereby
designated and shall be maintained as a park or garden area. No interments shall be made therein, and no lots or burial spaces shall be sold
therein, unless and until the city council shall so determine by ordinance. (1966 Code, ch. 3.1, art. I, sec. 13; 1994 Code, sec. 91.14; Ordinance
2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.015 Prohibited acts
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearms in or across Hillside Cemetery, except the firing of a salute incident to a burial
or memorial service.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to deface or remove any tombstone or memorial erected to commemorate the dead in the cemetery.
(c) With prior approval by the parks superintendent, the owners of lots and/or grave spaces may maintain trees or shrubs on their property.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any personal property on any lot that is not deeded to them.
(1966 Code, ch. 3.1, art. I, sec. 16; 1994 Code, sec. 91.15; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/438
Sec. 10.06.016 Sexton
It shall be the duty of the city manager to appoint the sexton of the cemetery. The city manager may, at any time and from time to time, designate
one or more persons to perform the city's duties in connection with the operation and maintenance of Hillside Cemetery, and the sale of lots and
spaces therein. (1966 Code, ch. 3.1, art. I, sec. 18; 1994 Code, sec. 91.16; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.017 Grave site requirements
(a) All grave sites located anywhere in Hillside Cemetery shall have either a headstone, monument, surface burial vault or mausoleum placed
on the grave site within one year of burial. With written request to the city, an extension may be given. All headstones, monuments, surface burial
vaults or mausoleums shall be made of concrete, granite, stone or similar material by a professional company approved by the city. No burial
markers made of any other material shall be allowed on any grave site.
(b) There shall be no more than two permanent flower placement containers located at the head of each grave space. Funeral home metal
markers shall not be used as permanent headstones. Mementos appropriate for cemetery memorials shall be allowed when placed on the
concrete skirt, as required in subsection (c), to allow for proper maintenance of the cemetery. The city manager, by and through his or her
subordinates, employees and contractors, is authorized to remove all floral designs, flowers, flags, vases, other decorations, trees, shrubs and
other plantings, and solar lights from the cemetery as soon as they become, in his or her judgment, unsightly, dangerous, detrimental or
diseased, or when they fail to conform to the regulations governing the cemetery.
(c) All headstones, monuments, surface burial vaults or mausoleums shall be completely surrounded at ground level with a concrete skirt
extending out at least four inches in all directions from the base of the monument, headstone, surface burial vault or mausoleum, so that a lawn
mower may be run on and over the skirt.
(1994 Code, sec. 91.17; Ordinance 2005-24 adopted 12/1/05; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Secs. 10.06.018–10.06.050 Reserved
Division 2. Cemetery Trust Fund
Sec. 10.06.051 Purpose
There is hereby created a trust fund, to be known as the City of Cuero Cemetery Trust Fund, for the purpose of receiving, holding, managing,
preserving and investing gifts and grants of money for the maintenance, improvement and beautification of the public cemetery of the city, known
as Hillside Cemetery. (Ordinance 88-04 adopted 3/15/88; 1994 Code, sec. 91.30; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.052 Investment of donations and grants
All donations and grants to the trust fund shall be invested and reinvested in bonds and notes of the United States and of instrumentalities of the
United States, the principal and interest of which are guaranteed by the full faith and credit of the United States, and in time deposits or
certificates of deposit of banks and savings and loan associations insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or by the Federal
Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. The city council may, from time to time, enter into agreements with the Hillside Cemetery Endowment
Association, Inc., for the investment of such funds by the association in securities having the qualifications mentioned above. (Ordinance 88-04
adopted 3/15/88; 1994 Code, sec. 91.31; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.053 Use of income; preservation of principal
The income of the trust fund shall be used exclusively for the maintenance, improvement and beautification of Hillside Cemetery. The principal of
the trust fund shall remain intact and shall be preserved as a perpetual endowment. Any income of the trust fund that is not expended or
authorized for purposes during a current year shall be deemed an addition or accretion to the principal of the trust fund. (Ordinance 88-04
adopted 3/15/88; 1994 Code, sec. 91.32; Ordinance 2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
Sec. 10.06.054 Administration
The city manager, for the time being, and his successors in office as such, is appointed as administrator of the trust fund. The city manager shall
keep the assets of the trust fund entirely separate and apart from all other funds of the city, and shall never commingle the same. He shall report
to the city council at least once in each fiscal year, stating fully the condition of the trust fund, and showing all contributions made thereto, all
earnings thereon and all expenditures from the income of the trust fund. (Ordinance 88-04 adopted 3/15/88; 1994 Code, sec. 91.33; Ordinance
2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
CHAPTER 11
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 11.01.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Authorized emergency vehicle. Vehicles of the fire department, police vehicles and the ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal
departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the chief of police.
Crosswalk. That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation of curb and property lines at intersections, or any other portion of
a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/438
Hand signals. All signals made by the operator by use of the hand and forearm for the purpose of indicating his intention of turning, stopping, or
changing the course of the vehicle.
Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two or more streets
or highways which join one another at an angle, whether or not one street or highway crosses the other.
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
Official traffic signs. All signals, not inconsistent with this article, placed or erected by the authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction
for the purpose of directing, warning or regulating traffic.
Operator. Any person who is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
Parking. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a roadway, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading, or in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs and signals.
Pedestrian. Any person afoot.
Police officer. Every officer of the city police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
Private road or driveway. Every road or driveway not open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
Right-of-way. The privilege of the immediate use of the street or highway.
Roadway. That portion of a street or highway between the regularly established curb lines or that part devoted to vehicular travel.
Safety zone. That area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone.
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curb lines and the adjacent property lines.
Street or highway. Every way set apart for public travel, except foot paths.
Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of
travel.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, excepting devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. I, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 70.01)
Sec. 11.01.002 Obedience to traffic officers
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer or fire department official
given, as authorized by this chapter, to direct, control or regulate traffic. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. I, sec. 5; 1994 Code, sec. 70.02)
Sec. 11.01.003 Applicability of chapter to drivers of government vehicles
The sections of this chapter shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the government of the United States or
this state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any operator to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in
this chapter. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. I, sec. 11; 1994 Code, sec. 70.03)
State law reference–Applicability of traffic laws to drivers of government vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 542.002.
Sec. 11.01.004 Exceptions for authorized emergency vehicles
(a) The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles,
except that the driver of a vehicle, when operating the same in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police officer, may:
(1) Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation.
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property.
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions so long as he does not endanger life or
property.
(b) The exceptions hereinbefore granted in reference to the movement of any authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver
of the vehicle sounds a siren, bell, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary, and the vehicle displays a lighted red lamp visible from
the front as a warning to others.
(c) The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard of the
safety of others.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. I, sec. 12; 1994 Code, sec. 70.04)
State law references–Operation of authorized emergency vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 546; permissible conduct, V.T.C.A., Transportation
Code, sec. 546.001.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/438
Sec. 11.01.005 Procedure in case of accident
In case of injury or damage to person or property due to the operation of a vehicle, the operator or driver thereof shall stop and, upon the request
of the person injured or of any other person present, give his name and address and that of the owner of the vehicle. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. I,
sec. 6; 1994 Code, sec. 70.40)
State law reference–Duty to give information and render aid, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 550.023.
ARTICLE 11.02 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 11.02.001 Traffic engineer
(a) The chief of police shall serve as city traffic engineer in addition to his other functions and duties and without additional compensation and
he shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided by this chapter.
(b) The city traffic engineer shall have the duty of determining the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, of
conducting engineering analysis of traffic accidents and devising remedial measures, of conducting engineering investigations of traffic
conditions, of recommending appropriate traffic regulations to the city council, and of cooperating with other city officials in the development of
ways and means to improve traffic conditions.
(c) The city traffic engineer shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals, and devices as may be required by this chapter and any
applicable ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of the same, and he may place and maintain the additional traffic-control
devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter or any applicable ordinances of the city under the laws of the state, or to
guide and warn traffic.
(d) The city traffic engineer may place signs prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any street within the city
where, in the opinion of the city traffic engineer, the stopping, standing, or parking is dangerous to those using the street or where stopping,
standing, or parking would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic on the street.
(e) The city traffic engineer is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter and any
applicable ordinances of the city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions;
provided that no temporary or experimental regulations shall remain in effect for longer than 90 days. The city traffic engineer is empowered to
test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. V, secs. 1–5; 1994 Code, sec. 70.50)
Sec. 11.02.002 Enforcement of traffic laws by police officers
It shall be the duty of the police department of the city to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. I, sec. 2; 1994 Code,
sec. 70.51)
Sec. 11.02.003 Authority to direct traffic
Officers of the police department are hereby authorized to direct all traffic, either in person or by means of visible or audible signal, in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, officers
of the police or fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2,
art. I, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 70.52)
Sec. 11.02.004 Temporary regulations; temporary closing of streets
(a) The chief of police is hereby empowered to make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions.
(b) The chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered to temporarily close streets located within the city limits, except for main
thoroughfares, including but not limited to Esplanade Street, Main Street, Broadway Street, Morgan Avenue, Terrell Street, and Reuss Boulevard.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. I, sec. 4; 1994 Code, sec. 70.53; Ordinance 97-14 adopted 6/5/97)
Sec. 11.02.005 Towing of vehicles
The towing of vehicles in the city limits shall be governed by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 545.409. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. II, sec.
25; 1994 Code, sec. 70.54)
ARTICLE 11.03 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES*
Sec. 11.03.001 Conformance with state manual and specifications
All traffic-control devices including signs, signals and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the purpose of directing and
controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the manual and specifications adopted by the state transportation commission as provided in
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001. All signs, signals and markings erected or used by the city must conform to the manual and
specifications adopted under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001. All existing traffic-control devices and those erected in the future by
the city being consistent with the manual and specifications, state law and this section shall be official traffic-control devices. (1966 Code, ch.
20.2, art. III, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 70.15; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
Sec. 11.03.002 Obedience
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to disobey the instruction of any official traffic sign or signal placed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. Refer to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.004. (1966 Code, ch.
20.2, art. III, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 70.16)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/438
State law reference–Compliance with traffic-control device, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.004.
Sec. 11.03.003 Location, placement and maintenance
The city council shall, by resolution, designate the location of traffic-control signs, signals and devices within the city, and the chief of police shall
place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, all the traffic signs, signals and devices so designated. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. III,
sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 70.17)
Sec. 11.03.004 Traffic-control signal legend
(a) Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the words “Go,” “Caution,” or “Stop,” or exhibiting different colored lights
successively, one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and the terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of
vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
(1) Green alone, or “Go”:
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at the place prohibits
either turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal is exhibited.
(B) Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Yellow alone, or “Caution,” when shown following the green or “Go” signal:
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or “Stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter
and the vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or “Stop” signal is exhibited.
(B) No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway until green or “Go” is shown alone, unless authorized so to do by a
signal indicating walking is permissible.
(3) Red alone or “Stop”:
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none,
then before entering the intersection; and shall remain standing until green or “Go” is shown alone; provided, however, that, after
making the stop, the driver of a vehicle may proceed to make a right turn on the red or stop signal at intersections where signs
permit the turns, as authorized by resolution of the council, if the turn can be made in safety without interfering with other traffic.
(B) No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway until green or “Go” is shown alone, unless authorized so to do by a
signal indicating that walking is permissible.
(4) Red with green arrow:
(A) Vehicular traffic facing the signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the move indicated by the arrow but
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(B) No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway until green or “Go” is shown alone, unless authorized so to do by a
signal indicating that walking is permissible.
(b) In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this article shall
be applicable except as to those provisions which, by their nature, can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but, in the absence of any sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. III, sec. 5; 1994 Code, sec. 70.18)
State law reference–Traffic-control signals in general, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.007.
Sec. 11.03.005 Designation of crosswalks and safety zones; marking of traffic lanes
(a) The chief of police is hereby authorized to establish and to designate and maintain, or cause to be maintained, by appropriate devices,
marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians
crossing the roadway, and at the other places as he may deem necessary.
(b) The chief of police is hereby empowered to establish, mark and maintain safety zones of the kind and character and at the places as he
may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians.
(c) The chief of police is authorized to mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at places as he may deem advisable consistent with the
provisions of this chapter.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. III, sec. 8–10; 1994 Code, sec. 70.19)
Sec. 11.03.006 Installation of traffic lights
The chief of police shall install and maintain electric traffic-control signals or lights at the intersections and other places as may be designated by
resolution of the city council. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. III, sec. 4; 1994 Code, sec. 70.20)
Sec. 11.03.007 Pedestrian walk and wait signals
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting words indicating that it is permissible to walk or that pedestrians should wait are in place,
the signals shall indicate as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/438
(1) Signals indicating walking is permissible. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the
signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
(2) Signals indicating it is necessary to wait. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the wait
signal is showing. Refer to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sections 552.002 and 552.009.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. III, sec. 6; 1994 Code, sec. 70.21)
State law references–Applicability of traffic-control devices to pedestrians, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.001; pedestrian right-of-way if control
signal present, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.002.
Sec. 11.03.008 Flashing signals
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:
(1) When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk
at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
(2) When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past
the signal only with caution. Refer to V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.008.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. III, sec. 7; 1994 Code, sec. 70.22)
State law reference–Flashing signals, V.T.C.A, Transportation Code, sec. 544.008.
Sec. 11.03.009 Rumble strips
In addition to the other traffic-control devices as the traffic engineer may deem necessary under the traffic laws of the city, he is expressly
authorized and empowered to install “rumble strips,” in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the state department of
transportation, to extend not more than one inch above the surface of the pavement, at the locations in the city as he shall deem necessary in
order to direct the attention of the motorist to a reduction in the prima facie speed limit on account of school zones, public parks or playgrounds,
or other special conditions. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. V, sec. 3-A; 1994 Code, sec. 70.23)
Sec. 11.03.010 Enforcement if sign not in place
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, the sign herein required is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinary observant person. Whenever a
particular section does not state that signs are required, the section shall be effective without signs being erected to give notice thereof. Refer to
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 542.203. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. III, sec. 11; 1994 Code, sec. 70.24)
State law reference–No enforcement against alleged violator if traffic-control device not in proper position or sufficiently legible, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code,
sec. 544.004(b).
Sec. 11.03.011 Unauthorized signs and signals
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or to display upon or in view of any street any unofficial sign, signal or device which purports to be or
is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign or signal or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view or
interferes with the effectiveness of any official sign or signal. Every prohibited sign, signal or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance,
and the chief of police is hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed, without notice. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. III, sec.
12; 1994 Code, sec. 70.25)
State law reference–Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.006.
Sec. 11.03.012 Injury or interference
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure, move, obstruct, or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal. (1966 Code, ch.
20.2, art. III, sec. 13; 1994 Code, sec. 70.26)
State law reference–Interference with traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.005.
ARTICLE 11.04 OPERATION OF VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 11.04.001–11.04.050 Reserved
Division 2. Speed Regulations*
Sec. 11.04.051 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of Schedule I (section 11.08.001) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined in any sum not more than $200.00. (1994 Code, sec. 71.99(B); Ordinance 09-10 adopted 6/18/09)
Sec. 11.04.052 Speed limit in school zones
(a) Every street in the city abutting any block in which a public or parochial school may be situated is hereby designated a “school zone.”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/438
(b) No person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle in any designated school zone within the city at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour,
except as otherwise provided in this code.
(c) It shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to place and maintain appropriate signs on all streets within school zones designating the
school zones and the speed limit therein, and it shall be his duty to remove the signs at times when the school located in the school zone is not
in session. No person shall be convicted for violation of this chapter on any street where a sign or signs giving notice of the school zone and
speed limit is not in place at the time of the violation.
(Ordinance adopted 10/10/63; 1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. VI, secs. 1–3; 1994 Code, sec. 71.25; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
ARTICLE 11.05 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Sec. 11.05.001 Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this article for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to section 1.01.009. (1994 Code, sec.
71.99(A); Ordinance 09-10 adopted 6/18/09)
Sec. 11.05.002 Truck routes
(a) All federal and state highways, including farm-to-market highways, in the city are designated as truck routes. Except as herein otherwise
permitted, it shall be unlawful for any truck of more than two tons carrying capacity to traverse any street in the city other than the designated
truck routes.
(b) Any truck of more than two tons carrying capacity may leave the established truck routes and traverse the other streets of the city for any
one or more of the following purposes: to secure food or lodging for the operator of the vehicle, or to load or unload. Operation of any truck off of
the established truck routes for any authorized purpose shall be by the most direct route to and from the designated truck route.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. II, sec. 26; Ordinance 80-9 adopted 10/2/80; 1994 Code, sec. 71.36)
Sec. 11.05.003 Police escort for oversized vehicles or oversized loads
(a) Findings and intent.
(1) The city council finds that it is in the best interest of the public who utilize the city streets, including pedestrians and other motor
vehicles, for there to be a police escort provided upon proper written request for any oversized vehicles and/or oversized loads
traveling through the city;
(2) The city council finds that a proper written request for the police escort shall be made in the form set out in exhibit A on file in
the offices of the city; and
(3) The council finds that a fee is proper for the police escort.
(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
Oversized load. Any type of load, trailer, boat, equipment and the like, hitched, attached and/or placed upon and transported by a motor vehicle,
that exceeds 12 feet in width, 14 feet in height and/or 110 feet in length as prescribed by Texas Transportation Code section 623.071.
Oversized motor vehicle. Any motorized vehicle that exceeds eight and one-half feet in width, 14 feet in height and/or 45 feet in length as
prescribed by Texas Transportation Code sections 621.201, 621.203 and 621.207, excluding antennas, luggage racks and mirrors.
(c) Police escort. Any person, firm or entity transporting an oversized motor vehicle and/or oversized load through the city or its escort service
provider may request a police escort while traveling through the city. The request for a police escort must be made in writing in the form as found
in exhibit A on file in the offices of the city and made at least 24 hours in advance of the vehicle and/or load traveling through the city. Any
person, firm or entity requesting a police escort shall pay a fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code in advance for any
police escort.
(1994 Code, sec. 71.59, ch. 71, app. A; Ordinance 09-09 adopted 6/4/09; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
State law references–General provisions relating to vehicle size and weight, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 621; municipal regulation of loads and
equipment, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 621.303.
ARTICLE 11.06 MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Sec. 11.06.001 Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this article for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to section 1.01.009. (1994 Code, sec.
71.99(A); Ordinance 09-10 adopted 6/18/09)
Sec. 11.06.002 Reckless driving
(a) Prohibited acts.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon a roadway carelessly and heedlessly in willful or wanton disregard
of the rights or safety of others, or without due caution or circumspection and at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely
to endanger any person or property.
(2) It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle within the city limits in a manner calculated to draw attention to the vehicle or
alarm other drivers or pedestrians nearby by unnecessary acceleration or braking.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/438
(3) It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle on any roadway or in any city park or other city property in a reckless manner
driving the vehicle in circles while accelerating causing the vehicle to break traction, skidding.
(4) It shall be unlawful to accelerate rapidly from a stop in a manner causing the front of the vehicle to leave the surface of the road
surface or ground creating an exhibition of acceleration by a wheel stand.
(5) It shall be unlawful to drive a motorcycle in such a manner as to cause the front wheel to leave the ground, continuing to travel
by balancing the weight of the motorcycle on the rear wheel.
(6) It shall be unlawful to engage a vehicle's brakes, and race the engine, power braking, causing the rear tires to spin leaving tire
material on the road surface or causing the rear of the vehicle to break traction and rotate out of a straight path.
(b) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Exhibition means conduct which could be intended to create excitement or alarm to persons viewing or hearing it.
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled, including motorcycles designed for transportation and operated on or off the roadway.
Motorcycle means a motor vehicle, other than a tractor, that is equipped with a rider's saddle and designed to have when propelled not more
than three wheels on the ground.
Power braking, while engaging the vehicle's brake, means racing the engine in such a manner as to cause the rear tires to spin depositing tire
material on the roadway.
Wheel stands means spinning tires in such as manner as to cause less than all the wheels of a vehicle to make contact with the ground, except
when necessary to avoid an accident.
(c) Defenses. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the acceleration or braking was performed in order to avoid a traffic
accident.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. II, sec. 23; 1994 Code, sec. 71.55; Ordinance 2015-13 adopted 4/28/15)
State law reference–Reckless driving, V.T.C.A., 545.401.
Sec. 11.06.003 Obstructing traffic
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon any street in a manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to traffic thereon. (1966
Code, ch. 20.2, art. II, sec. 22; 1994 Code, sec. 71.56)
Sec. 11.06.004 Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers
A person commits an offense if the person knowingly rides on any portion of a vehicle not intended for passengers. It shall be a defense to any
prosecution herein that:
(1) An employee was engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty;
(2) Such person was within a cavity of such vehicle intended for carrying a load; or
(3) Such person was participating in a parade supervised by the city police department.
(Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 11.06.005 Dangerous or improperly loaded vehicles
No vehicle shall be operated or driven in the city when it is so constructed, enclosed, equipped or loaded as to be dangerous, if the same is liable
to scatter its contents upon the streets, avenues, alleys or highways of the city, or if it is loaded so as to prevent the driver thereof from having a
view sufficient for safety. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. II, sec. 24; 1994 Code, sec. 71.35)
State law references–Transportation of loose materials, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 725; obstruction of operator's view or driving mechanism, V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code, sec. 545.417.
Sec. 11.06.006 Vehicles to be driven to curb upon sounding of fire alarm
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any vehicle upon the streets and alleys of this city for a period of five minutes after the
sounding of the fire alarm, which alarm is the official siren of the city. At the sounding of the fire alarm, all persons driving or operating vehicles on
the streets, alleys or other public thoroughfares of the city shall immediately drive such vehicles to the right-hand curb and keep such vehicles
stationary for the five-minute period. These provisions do not apply to firefighters, doctors, ambulances, police, and utility trucks on official duty.
(1966 Code, ch. 6, art. II, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 71.14)
Sec. 11.06.007 Railway trains to be moved from crossing upon sounding of fire alarm
Whenever any fire alarm is sounded, the conductor or, in his absence, the engineer of any railway train which may be standing or moving across
any railway grade crossing which is in the path of the fire apparatus en route to the fire shall immediately remove or cause to be removed the
train from the grade crossing and keep the grade crossing open and free for vehicular passage for a period of at least five minutes after the fire
alarm shall begin to sound. (1966 Code, ch. 6, art. II, sec. 5; 1994 Code, sec. 100.03)
Sec. 11.06.008 Following fire apparatus
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to follow any fire apparatus in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet from the rear of the
apparatus. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. II, sec. 18; 1994 Code, sec. 71.58)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/438
State law reference–Following or obstructing fire apparatus or ambulance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.407.
Sec. 11.06.009 Riding bicycle on sidewalk
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel any bicycle upon any sidewalk in the city. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. I, sec. 9; 1994 Code, sec.
71.45)
Sec. 11.06.010 Clinging to moving vehicle
It shall be unlawful for the rider of a bicycle, motorcycle or other vehicle to catch on to or hold to the side or rear of any other moving vehicle in
the city. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. I, sec. 8; 1994 Code, sec. 71.46)
State law reference–Clinging to streetcar or vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 551.102(d).
ARTICLE 11.07 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 11.07.001 Parking prohibited in specified places
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park the vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal:
(1) In the center of any street.
(2) Within a street intersection.
(3) On a crosswalk.
(4) Upon any bridge or viaduct.
(5) Within 20 feet from the intersection of curb lines, or, if none, then within 15 feet of the intersections of property lines at an
intersection, except at alleys.
(6) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of the roadway.
(7) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station.
(8) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
(9) In front of any private driveway, except with the consent of the owner.
(10) On a sidewalk.
(11) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when the stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(12) On the roadway beside any vehicle stopped or parked at the right-hand edge or curb of a street. It is the intention of this
subsection to prohibit what is commonly known as “double parking” or “double line parking.”
(13) At any place where official traffic signs have been erected prohibiting standing and parking.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 72.01)
State law reference–Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in certain places, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.302.
Sec. 11.07.002 Ten feet of roadway to be left available for traffic
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop, stand or park the vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in a manner or under the
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway free for movement of vehicular traffic, except during actual
unloading or loading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals or a police officer. (1966 Code,
ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 4; 1994 Code, sec. 72.02)
Sec. 11.07.003 Restrictions and prohibitions on designated streets
(a) The chief of police shall cause spaces for the parking of vehicles to be designated, maintained and marked off in and on the streets and
parts thereof as may be authorized from time to time by resolution of the city council. The chief of police shall also, as authorized by resolution of
the city council, cause spaces to be designated, maintained and marked off in and on streets or parts thereof in which the parking of vehicles, or
any particular type of vehicle, is prohibited altogether or is limited to a specific period of time.
(b) All parking spaces shall be laid out either parallel with the street or at an angle and shall be designated by painted lines showing clearly the
manner in which a vehicle is to be parked.
(c) In any area or space in which the parking of vehicles is prohibited, the prohibition shall apply at all times or only on certain days or between
certain hours, as prescribed by the city council. In areas or spaces in which parking is limited, the period of permitted parking shall be as
prescribed by the council and the limitation shall apply on days and at times the council designates.
(d) All areas or spaces in which parking is prohibited or limited as provided in this article shall be clearly indicated, by painting the curb or
street surface or by erecting signs, barriers, markers or other devices, so as to inform the operators of vehicles of the prohibition or limitation.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 8; 1994 Code, sec. 72.03)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/438
Sec. 11.07.004 Manner of parking; angle parking
The operator of a vehicle shall not park the vehicle in a street other than parallel with the edge of the street, headed in the direction of the traffic,
and with the curb-side wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the edge of the curb, except upon those streets which have been marked or
signed for angle parking, in which case vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by the mark or sign. In the event the parking
space is marked or signed for angle parking, the operator of the vehicle shall park the vehicle with the front end of the vehicle being closest to
the curb. It shall be unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to back into an angle parking space and park in such a manner that the rear end of the
vehicle is closest to the curb with the front end of the vehicle facing the street. This provision shall apply to any angle parking area on any street
within the city. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 9; 1994 Code, sec. 72.04; Ordinance 2010-17 adopted 9/7/10)
State law reference–Additional parking regulations, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.303.
Sec. 11.07.005 Parking in alley
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park the vehicle within an alley in the manner or under the conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 5; 1994 Code,
sec. 72.05)
Sec. 11.07.006 Parking for longer than 24 hours
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to remain parked or standing any motor vehicle upon any street or alley of the city, including
the parkway thereof, for longer than 24 hours at any one place. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 11; 1994 Code, sec. 72.06)
Sec. 11.07.007 Duties upon leaving vehicle unattended
No person having control or charge of any motor vehicle shall allow the vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes
thereon and stopping the motor thereof, and, when standing upon a perceptible grade, without turning the front wheels of the vehicle to the curb
or the side or the street or highway. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 72.07)
State law reference–Unattended vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.404.
Sec. 11.07.008 Parking for certain purposes prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any street or alley of the city for any of the following purposes:
(1) For the purpose of offering the vehicle for sale or selling the same.
(2) For the primary purpose of displaying advertising.
(3) For the purpose of repairing the vehicle or accessories thereon attached thereto. This subsection shall not apply to emergency
tire repair nor to any other emergency repairs for the purpose of removing the vehicle from streets, avenues and alleys.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 72.08)
Sec. 11.07.009 Designation of parking spaces and areas where parking is prohibited or restricted
(a) The chief of police shall cause spaces for the parking of vehicles to be designated, maintained and marked off in and on the streets and
parts thereof as may be authorized from time to time by resolution of the city council. The chief of police shall also, as authorized by resolution of
the city council, cause spaces to be designated, maintained and marked off in and on streets or parts thereof in which the parking of vehicles, or
any particular type of vehicle, is prohibited altogether or is limited to a specific period of time.
(b) All parking spaces shall be laid out either parallel with the street or at an angle and shall be designated by painted lines showing clearly the
manner in which a vehicle is to be parked.
(c) In any area or space in which the parking of vehicles is prohibited, the prohibition shall apply at all times or only on certain days or between
certain hours, as prescribed by the city council. In areas or spaces in which parking is limited, the period of permitted parking shall be as
prescribed by the council and the limitation shall apply on days and at times the council designates.
(d) All areas or spaces in which parking is prohibited or limited as provided in this article shall be clearly indicated by painting the curb or street
surface or by erecting signs, barriers, markers or other devices, so as to inform the operators of vehicles of the prohibition or limitation.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 8; 1994 Code, sec. 72.09)
Sec. 11.07.010 Parking near scene of fire
It shall be unlawful for any operator to park any vehicle within 300 feet of any burning building or structure or other thing where firefighting
apparatus is being used for the purpose of extinguishing the same, except under the direction of the chief or other officer of the fire department,
or a police officer of the city. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 12; 1994 Code, sec. 72.10)
State law reference–Parking in block where fire apparatus has stopped to answer fire alarm, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.407.
Sec. 11.07.011 Lights on parked vehicles
Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped on a street during the times between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, or at
any other time when there is not sufficient light to render clearly discernible any persons and vehicles upon the street from a distance of 500 feet,
there shall be displayed upon the vehicle one or more lamps, projecting a white or amber light visible under normal conditions from a distance of
500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and projecting a red light visible under like conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the rear, except that the
parking lights need not be displayed upon any vehicle stopped or parked in accordance with other provisions of this article upon any street where
there is sufficient light to reveal any person within a distance of 500 feet on the street. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 10; 1994 Code,
sec. 72.11)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/438
State law reference–Lighting requirements on parked vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 547.383.
Sec. 11.07.012 Passenger zones and loading zones
(a) The chief of police shall have authority, by and with the consent of the city council expressed by resolution, to determine the location of the
passenger zones and loading zones and shall erect and maintain, or cause to be maintained, appropriate signs indicating the same and stating
the hours during which the provisions of this article are applicable. In lieu of the signs, the zones may be laid out and designated by yellow
colored lines or marks on the surface of the street or curb, with the words “Loading Zone” painted thereon.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand, or park the vehicle for a period of time longer than necessary for the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger zone during hours when the regulations applicable to the
loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes.
(c) It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand, or park the vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary for the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or for the unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a
loading zone. In no case shall the stop for loading and for unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 13; 1994 Code, sec. 72.12)
Sec. 11.07.013 Public carrier stops and stands
(a) The city council shall have the right to establish bus stops and taxicab stands on the public streets in the places and in the number as it
shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every bus stop and taxicab stand so established shall be
designated by appropriate signs.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the operator or driver of any vehicle other than a bus to stand or park in an officially designated bus stop, or for any
vehicle other than a bus or taxicab to stand or park in an officially designated taxicab stand, except that the operator or driver of any passenger
vehicle may temporarily stop in any stop or stand for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers.
(c) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bus or taxicab to stand or park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at
a bus stop or taxicab stand respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the operator of any vehicle from temporarily stopping in
accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading
passengers.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 14; 1994 Code, sec. 72.13)
Sec. 11.07.014 Parking of trailers and towable recreational vehicles on public streets prohibited
(a) Definitions. The following definitions are hereby adopted and incorporated herein:
Motor vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle or a vehicle that is propelled by electric power from overhead trolley wires. The term does not
include an electric bicycle or an electric personal assistive mobility device, as defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code section 551.201.
Towable recreational vehicle means a non-motorized vehicle that:
(1) Is designed:
(A) To be towable by a motor vehicle; and
(B) For temporary human habitation for uses including recreational camping or seasonal use;
(2) Is permanently built on a single chassis;
(3) May contain one (1) or more life-support systems; and
(4) May be used permanently or temporarily for advertising, selling, displaying, or promoting merchandise or services, but is not
used for transporting property for hire or for distribution by a private carrier.
Trailer means a vehicle, other than a pole trailer (as defined by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code section 541.201(13)), with or without motive power,
designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to transport persons or property and constructed so that no part of the vehicle's weight and load
rests on the motor vehicle.
Vehicle means a device that can be used to transport or draw persons or property on a highway. The device does not include a device used on
stationary rails or tracks, or manufactured housing as that term is defined by Chapter 1201 of the Texas Occupations Code.
(b) Parking of unhitched or unattached trailers on city streets. Neither trailers nor towable recreational vehicles as defined by subsection (a)
above shall be parked in dedicated city streets unless they are properly hitched or attached to motor vehicles as defined by subsection (a)
above.
(c) Parking of hitched or attached trailers on city streets. Trailers or towable recreational vehicles defined by subsection (a) and properly
hitched to a motor vehicle may not remain unmoved (in place) on a dedicated city street for a period greater than seventy-two (72) hours.
(d) Notification and removal.
(1) Following receipt of a complaint alleging violation of either subsection (b) or subsection (c) of this section, a representative of
the city police department or city code enforcement may conduct an investigation of the alleged violation. Efforts to establish the
identity of the owner or responsible person of the violating trailer will be made at the time of the investigation.
(2) Owners or responsible persons of trailers found to be in violation of this section will be notified, either in person or by posted
notice on the violating trailer, and allowed 48 hours to abate the violation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/438
(3) After expiration of 48 hours, if the violation has not been abated, notice to appear in the city municipal court shall be issued to
the owner or responsible party.
(4) Following appearance in municipal court, failure or refusal to comply with the order of the court will be grounds for seizure of the
offending trailer by having the trailer removed from the public roadway under authority of Texas Transportation Code, title 7 (Vehicles
and Traffic), subtitle H (Parking, Towing, and Storage of Vehicles), chapter 683 (Abandoned Motor Vehicles), subchapter B
(Abandoned Motor Vehicles: Seizure and Auction), section 683.011 (Authority To Take Abandoned Motor Vehicle Into Custody): (a) A
law enforcement agency may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, or outboard motor found on public or
private property.
(e) Penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not
exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each and every day that a violation of this section occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2015-15 adopted 6/23/15)
Secs. 11.07.015–11.07.050 Reserved
Division 2. Enforcement
Sec. 11.07.051 Impoundment of vehicles
(a) Vehicles subject to impoundment. Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway to
the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the police department or otherwise maintained by the city
or to the city storage facility for the impoundment of motor vehicles (as provided below), under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated:
(1) Vehicles constituting a violation of a city ordinance, state law, or public nuisance. The chief of police or his or her designated
representative or any police officer employed by the city, may take into custody and impound such a vehicle.
(2) Vehicles constituting a violation of city ordinance or poses a fire or safety hazard. The fire chief, the fire marshal, or their
designated representatives may take into custody and impound such a vehicle.
(3) A motor vehicle may be impounded with or without citation and without giving notice to its owner under the following
circumstances:
(A) When the vehicle is impeding or likely to impede the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
(B) When in the judgment of the chief of police, the fire chief, the fire marshal, or a police officer, the vehicle poses an
immediate danger to the public safety;
(C) When a police officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle constitutes evidence of a crime, contains evidence of
a crime, or was used in the commission of a crime, and the impoundment is reasonably necessary in such instance to obtain or
preserve evidence;
(D) When the person operating the vehicle or in physical control of the vehicle is taken into custody and the vehicle is
impounded for safekeeping;
(E) When the vehicle is parked in the right-of-way of a public roadway, when such rights-of-way have signs posted in
accordance with applicable city ordinance or state law stating that parking is prohibited;
(F) When the vehicle is obstructing firefighting operations or equipment;
(G) When the vehicle is left, unattended, upon any bridge;
(H) When the vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the entrance to any private driveway;
(I) When the vehicle is found upon a street or private drive and a report has previously been made that the vehicle has been
stolen or a complaint has been filed and a warrant issued charging that the vehicle has been unlawfully taken from the owner;
(J) When a police officer has reasonable grounds to believe the vehicle has been abandoned;
(K) When the vehicle is upon a street and is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or impractical and the person
in control of the vehicle is incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other reason to such an extent as to be unable to provide
for the vehicle custody or removal, or is not in the immediate vicinity of the disabled vehicle;
(L) When officers arrests any person driving or in physical control of a motor vehicle for an alleged offense and the officers
are, by law, required to take the arrested person immediately before a magistrate;
(M) When the vehicle is standing, parked, or stopped in any portion of a street, and the officers have reason to believe that
the vehicle constitutes a hazard or interferes with the normal function of a governmental agency or that the safety of the vehicle
is imperiled;
(N) When the vehicle is standing, stopped, or parked in violation of any parking ban regulations;
(O) When the vehicle is involved in an accident and the driver, owner, operator, or person in control of the vehicle fails to show
evidence of financial responsibility as required by law;
(P) When the vehicle is stopped by a police officer for an alleged violation of a city or state traffic law or other law applicable
to the operation of a motor vehicle on a roadway and the vehicle's owner, driver, operator, or person in physical control of said
motor vehicle fails to show evidence of financial responsibility as required under Tex. Transportation Code, chapter 601;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/438
(Q) When the vehicle is stopped by a police officer for an alleged violation of a city or state traffic law or other law applicable
to the operation of a motor vehicle on a roadway and the vehicle's owner, driver, operator, or person in physical control of said
motor vehicle fails to produce a valid driver's license as required under Tex. Transportation Code, chapter 521;
(R) When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic;
(S) When any vehicle is parked or left standing for more than 24 hours in violation of section 11.07.006; or
(T) When any unattended vehicle is found parked in violation of the provisions of this division regulating parking in the parking
meter zone.
(b) Notice to owner. Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section and the officer knows or is able to
ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle the name and address of the owner thereof, the officer shall give or cause to be given notice
in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested to the registered owner at the registered owner's last known address within five (5) days of
possession with instructions on remedy by paying all charges, including towing charges, costs of storage and notification fees as provided
herein. In the event any vehicle is stored in a public garage, a copy of the notice shall be given to the proprietor of the garage. The notice shall
also include:
(1) The year, make, model and identification number;
(2) Give the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held; and
(3) Inform the owner of the time to claim the vehicle.
(c) Procedure when notice cannot be given. Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street under this section and does not know and is
not able to ascertain the name of the registered owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided for in
subsection (b), and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of five (5) days, then and in that event the officer shall
immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of the removal by mail to the state department whose duty it is to register motor vehicles,
and shall file a copy of the notice with the proprietor of any public garage in which the vehicle may be stored. The notice shall include a complete
description of the vehicle, the date, time, and place from which removed, the reasons for the removal, and name of the garage or place where
the vehicle is stored.
(d) Redemption of vehicle; sale of unclaimed vehicles. The owner of any vehicle impounded under this section, or his duly authorized agent,
shall be entitled to the possession thereof upon payment to the city of the sum set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code, together
with all other costs of removal and storage that may have accrued thereon.
(e) Vehicle is not redeemed.
(1) In the event the vehicle impounded is not redeemed by its registered owner or his/her agent within fifteen (15) days of the
above-referenced notice in section (b) above, a second letter, sent certified mail, return receipt requested, shall be mailed to (1) the
registered owner and (2) any lienholder recorded under chapter 501 of the Texas Transportation Code that allows for an additional
thirty (30) days to redeem the vehicle. This second letter will include a statement of charges and:
(A) The year, make, model and identification number;
(B) Give the location of the facility where the vehicle is being held; and
(C) Inform the owner of the time to claim the vehicle.
This second letter will also give notice that failure to redeem vehicle within the specified period is a waiver of all rights, title and
interests in the vehicle at the expiration of thirty (30) days and shall be considered a consent for the sale of the vehicle at a
public auction or sealed bid process as described in section 683.014 of the Texas Transportation Code.
(2) A notice shall also published in “newspaper of general circulation in the county” giving notice of the impoundment and intention
of public auction or sealed bid if vehicle is not claimed within thirty (30) days.
(f) Public auction/sealed bid sale of motor vehicle. When all times for notification to owner and lienholder have expired, a vehicle may be sold
by public auction or by sealed bid, including being listed on “go deals” as is the city's practice for other “surplus” property with issuance of Texas
Department of Transportation auction sales receipt which allows purchaser to obtain title.
(g) Proceeds.
(1) The law enforcement agency is entitled to reimbursement from the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle for:
(A) The cost of the auction;
(B) Towing, preservation, and storage fees resulting from the taking into custody;
(C) The cost of notice or publication; and
(D) Any compensation made by the agency under subsection (g) to property owners whose property was damaged as a result
of a pursuit involving the motor vehicle.
(2) After deducting the reimbursement allowed under subsection (g)(1) above, the proceeds of the sale shall be held for 90 days for
the owner or lienholder (as recorded under section 501 Tex. Transportation Code) of the vehicle.
(3) After the period provided by subsection (g)(2), the proceeds unclaimed by the owner or lienholder shall be deposited in an
account that may be used for the payment of auction, towing, preservation, storage, and notice and publication fees resulting from
taking other vehicles into custody if the proceeds from the sale of the other items are insufficient to meet those fees.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/438
(4) The city may transfer funds in excess of $1,000.00 from the account to the municipality's general revenue account to be used by
the law enforcement agency.
(h) Remedies and fees cumulative. The remedy and impounding fee and costs provided for in this section shall be cumulative of any and all
other penalties provided for the violation of this division.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 15; 1994 Code, sec. 72.30; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code; Ordinance 2018-07, sec. 2, adopted 7/6/18;
Ordinance 2018-10, sec. 2, adopted 9/10/18)
State law reference–Removal of unlawfully stopped vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.305.
Sec. 11.07.051.5 City storage facility for impounded vehicles
City council does designate two separate storage facilities to be located at (1) 1597 FM 766, Cuero, DeWitt County, Texas, being 3.00 of land in
the Samuel Lockhart League, abstract no. 28, in DeWitt County, Texas owned by the city, and (2) 514 West Sarah Street, Cuero, Texas being a
part of that property described as a 6.88 acre tract of land situated partly in the J. J. Tumlinson League, A-45, and situated partly in the Jose
Antonio Valdez Gonzales League, A-47 owned by the city as the city storage facilities for the impoundment of motor vehicles. (Ordinance 2018-
07, sec. 3, adopted 7/6/18; Ordinance 2018-10, sec. 3, adopted 9/10/18)
Sec. 11.07.052 Presumption that owner of vehicle is responsible for violation
In any prosecution charging a violation of a regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in
the complaint was parked in violation of the regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of the
violation, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the defendant was the person who
parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time which, the violation occurred. (1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 16; 1994
Code, sec. 72.31)
State law reference–Presumption that owner of vehicle is responsible for offense, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.308.
Sec. 11.07.053 Reports of violations; attachment of notice to vehicle
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to report the location of each parking space in which any vehicle is parked in violation of the
parking provisions of this chapter, the name of the state and the number of the license plate, if any, attached to the vehicle, and any other facts or
knowledge which is necessary to a complete understanding of the circumstances attending the violation. The police officer shall also attach to
the vehicle a notice to the owner thereof that the vehicle has been parked in violation of the provisions of this article and instructing the owner to
report to the municipal court of the city in regard to the violation at 9 a.m. on the first Thursday thereafter which is not a legal holiday. (1966
Code, ch. 20.2, art. VII, sec. 2; Ordinance 67-7 adopted 6/15/67; 1994 Code, sec. 72.98; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
ARTICLE 11.08 TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Sec. 11.08.001 Schedule I: Speed limits
SCHEDULE 1. SPEED LIMITS
Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation made as authorized by the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.356,
the following prima facie limits are indicated for vehicles traveling upon the named streets and highways or parts thereof, described as follows:
Street Location Speed
(mph)
Ord. No. Date
Passed
Bailey Street
(F.M. 1447)
From Esplanade Street (U.S. Highway
No. 77A) to a point 2,434 feet northeast
of Esplanade Street (U.S. Highway No.
77A), a distance of 0.461 mile
approximately
30 67-5 –/–/67
Bailey Street,
Stratton Road
(F.M. 1447)
From a point 2,434 feet northeast of
Esplanade Street (U.S. Highway No.
77A) to a point 3,949 feet northeast of
Esplanade Street (U.S. Highway No.
77A), a distance of 0.287 mile
approximately
35 67-5 –/–/67
Broadway Avenue
(U.S. 87)
From a point at its intersection with U.S.
Highway No. 77A to a point 2,619 feet
east, a distance of approximately 0.496
of a mile
30 71-8 12/7/71
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/438
Broadway Avenue
(U.S. 87)
From the east city limit to a point 1,969
feet west, a distance of approximately
0.373 of a mile
60 71-8 12/7/71
Broadway Avenue
(U.S. 87)
From a point 1,969 feet west of the east
city limit to a point 2,682 feet west, a
distance of approximately 0.508 of a
mile
55 71-8 12/7/71
Broadway Avenue
(U.S. 87)
From a point 4,651 feet west of the east
city limit to a point 1,151 feet west, a
distance of approximately 0.218 of a
mile
40 71-8 12/7/71
Broadway Avenue
(U.S. 87)
School zone from Henry Street to Valley
Street when so signed
25 71-8 12/7/71
Broadway Avenue
(U.S. 87)
School zone from Park Heights Drive to
a point 590 feet west of Courthouse
Street when so signed
40 71-8 12/7/71
Broadway Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point at its intersection with
Esplanade Street (U.S. Highway No.
77A) to a point 2,619 feet east, a
distance of approximately 0.496 of a
mile
30 74-28 1/9/75
Broadway Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point 2,619 feet east of its
intersection with Esplanade Street (U.S.
Highway No. 77A) to a point 1,151 feet
east, a distance of approximately 0.218
of a mile
40 99-02 1/7/99
Broadway Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point at the east city limit to a
point 871 feet west, a distance of
approximately 0.165 of a mile
55 99-02 1/7/99
Broadway Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point 871 feet west of the east
city limit to a point 1,579 feet west, a
distance of approximately 0.299 of a
mile
50 99-02 1/7/99
Broadway Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point 2,450 feet west of the east
city limit to a point 2,101 feet west, a
distance of approximately 0.398 of a
mile
45 99-02 1/7/99
Broadway Street From a point at its intersection with U.S. 30 09-10 6/18/09
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/438
(U.S. 87) Highway No. 77A (Esplanade Street) to
a point 2,618 feet south, a distance of
approximately 0.496 of a mile
Broadway Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point 2,618 feet south from its
intersection with U.S. Highway No. 77A
(Esplanade Street) to a point 1,056 feet
south, a distance of approximately 0.200
of a mile
40 09-10 6/18/09
Broadway Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point 3,674 feet south from its
intersection with U.S. Highway No. 77A
(Esplanade Street) to a point 3,722 feet
south, a distance approximately 0.705 of
a mile
45 09-10 6/18/09
Broadway Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point 7,396 feet south from its
intersection with U.S. Highway No. 77A
(Esplanade Street) to a point 924 feet
south, at the south city limit, a distance
of approximately 0.174 of a mile
55 09-10 6/18/09
Broadway Street
(U.S. 87)
School zone from a point 2,003 feet east
of its intersection with Esplanade Street
(U.S. Highway No. 77A) to a point 2,502
feet east, a distance of approximately
0.095 of a mile when so signed
25 99-02 1/7/99
Broadway Street
(U.S. 87)
School zone from a point 3,800 feet east
of its intersection with Esplanade Street
(U.S. Highway No. 77A) to a point 1,952
feet east, a distance of approximately
0.370 of a mile when so signed
30 99-02 1/7/99
Broadway Street
(U.S. 87)
School zone from a point 2,001 feet
south of an intersection of U.S. Highway
No. 77A (Esplanade Street), to a point
502 feet south, a distance of
approximately 0.095 of a mile
20 09-10 6/18/09
Broadway Street
(U.S. 87)
School zone from a point 3,827 feet
south of the intersection of U.S.
Highway No. 77A (Esplanade Street), to
a point 1,954 feet south, a distance
approximately 0.370 of a mile
25 09-10 6/18/09
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 87)
From the south city limit to a point 871
feet north, a distance of approximately
0.165 of a mile
55 71-8 12/7/71
Esplanade Street From a point 871 feet north of the south
city limit to a point 1,368 feet north, a
45 71-8 12/7/71
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/438
(U.S. 87) distance of approximately 0.259 of a
mile
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point 2,239 feet north of the
south city limit to a point 1,616 feet
north, a distance of approximately 0.306
of a mile
35 71-8 12/7/71
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point at its intersection with U.S.
Highway No. 77A to a point 2,513 feet
south, a distance of approximately 0.476
of a mile
30 71-8 12/7/71
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 77A)
From the north city limit to a point 776
feet south, a distance of approximately
0.147 of a mile
60 71-8 12/7/71
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 77A)
From a point 776 feet south of the north
city limit to a point 1,822 feet south, a
distance of approximately 0.345 of a
mile
55 71-8 12/7/71
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 77A)
From a point 2,598 feet south of the
north city limit to a point 1,072 feet
south, a distance of approximately 0.203
of a mile
50 71-8 12/7/71
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 77A)
From a point at its intersection with U.S.
Highway No. 87 (Broadway Street) to a
point 591 feet north, a distance of
approximately 0.112 of a mile
30 71-8 12/7/71
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 77A)
From a point 591 feet north of its
intersection with U.S. Highway No. 87
(Broadway Street) to a point 1,362 feet
north, a distance of approximately 0.258
of a mile
35 71-8 12/7/71
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 77A)
From a point 1,953 feet north of its
intersection with U.S. Highway No. 87
(Broadway Street) to a point 2,756 feet
north, a distance of approximately 0.522
of a mile
40 71-8 12/7/71
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 77A)
School zone from Prairie Street to
Clayton Street, when so signed
25 71-8 12/7/71
Esplanade Street From a point at the south city limit to a 55 74-24 11/6/74
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/438
(U.S. 87) point 871 feet north, a distance of
approximately 0.165 of a mile
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point 871 feet north of the south
city limit to a point 1,368 feet north, a
distance of approximately 0.259 of a
mile
45 74-24 11/6/74
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point 2,239 feet north of the
south city limit to a point 1,283 feet
north, a distance of approximately 0.243
of a mile
35 74-24 11/6/74
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 77A)
From a point at its intersection with
Broadway Street (U.S. Highway 87) to a
point 1,954 feet north, a distance of
approximately 0.370 of a mile
30 74-24 11/6/74
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 77A)
From a point 1,954 feet north of its
intersection with Broadway Street (U.S.
Highway 87) to a point 3,828 feet north,
a distance of approximately 0.725 of a
mile
40 74-24 11/6/74
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 77A)
From a point at the north city limit to a
point 2,598 feet south, a distance of
approximately 0.492 of a mile
50 74-24 11/6/74
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 77A)
School zone from a point 720 feet north
of its intersection with Broadway Street
(U.S. Highway 87) to a point 1,336 feet
north, a distance of approximately 0.117
of a mile, when so signed
25 74-24 11/6/74
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point at its intersection with U.S.
Highway No. 77A to a point 2,846 feet
south, a distance of approximately 0.539
of a mile
30 99-02 1/7/99
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point 2,846 feet south of its
intersection with U.S. Highway No. 77A
to a point 1,283 feet south, a distance of
approximately 0.243 of a mile
35 99-02 1/7/99
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point at the south city limits to a
point 956 feet north, a distance of
approximately 0.181 of a mile
50 99-02 1/7/99
Esplanade Street From a point 956 feet north of the south 45 74-28 1/9/75
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/438
(U.S. 87) city limit to a point 1,368 feet north, a
distance of approximately 0.259 of a
mile
Esplanade Street
(U.S. 87)
From a point at its intersection with
Esplanade Street (U.S. Highway No.
77A) to a point 2619 feet east, a
distance of approximately 0.496 of a
mile.
30 99-02 1/7/99
F.M. 236
(Morgan Street)
From a point at its intersection with U.S.
183 (Esplanade Street) to a point 5,205
feet southeast on McArthur Street, a
distance of approximately 0.986 of a
mile
35 76-11 8/5/76
F.M. 236
(McArthur Street)
From a point at the southeast city limit to
a point 1,130 feet northwest, a distance
of approximately 0.214 of a mile
45 76-11 8/5/76
F.M. 766 From the north city limit to a point 1,843
feet south, a distance of approximately
0.349 of a mile
50 71-8 12/7/71
F.M. 766 From a point 1,843 feet south of the
north city limit to a point 1,642 feet
south, a distance of approximately 0.311
of a mile
45 71-8 12/7/71
F.M. 766 From a point 3,485 feet south of the
north city limit to a point at its
intersection with U.S. 77A, a distance of
approximately 0.412 of a mile
30 71-8 12/7/71
F.M. 766 From a point at the north city limit to a
point 2,450 feet south, a distance of
approximately 0.464 of a mile
45 88-05 8/4/88
F.M. 766 From a point 2,450 feet south of the
north city limit to a point 1,894 feet
south, a distance of approximately 0.359
of a mile
35 88-05 8/4/88
F.M. 766 From a point 4,344 feet south of the
north city limit to a point at its
intersection with U.S. 77A, a distance of
approximately 0.254 of a mile
30 88-05 8/4/88
F.M. 3402 From a point at its intersection with U.S. 35 83-7 4/4/83
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/438
(Heaton Street) 87 (Esplanade) to a point 2,389 feet
west, a distance of approximately 0.452
of a mile
F.M. 3402
(Heaton Street)
From a point 2,389 feet west of its
intersection with U.S. 87 (Esplanade) to
a point 2,355 feet west, a distance of
approximately 0.446 of a mile
45 83-7 4/4/83
Junior High Drive School zone from the intersection of
Sarah Street and Junior High, down and
along Junior High Drive northeast to the
intersection of Junior High Drive and
Broadway (U.S. 87)
20 06-10 7/6/06
McArthur Street
(F.M. 236)
From Villa Street (F.M. Highway No.
236) to 1056 feet northwest of the
southeast city limit
35 71-8 12/7/71
McArthur Street
(F.M. 236)
From 1056 feet northwest of the
southeast city limit to the southeast city
limit
45 71-8 12/7/71
Morgan Avenue
(F.M. 236)
From Esplanade Street (U.S. Highway
No. 87) to Villa Street (F.M. Highway No.
236)
35 71-8 12/7/71
Stratton Road
(F.M. 1447)
From a point 3,949 feet northeast of
Esplanade Street (U.S. Highway No.
77A) to the northeast city limit, a
distance of 0.283 mile approximately
45 67-5 –/–/67
Terrell Street
(F.M. 766)
From its junction with Esplanade Street
(U.S. Highway No. 183 and U.S.
Highway No. 77A) to a point 1,637 feet
south of the north city limit, a distance of
0.400 mile approximately
30 67-7.1 8/27/67
Terrell Street
(F.M. 766)
From a point 1,637 feet south of the
north city limit, to the north city limit, a
distance of 0.310 mile approximately
45 67-7.1 8/27/67
Villa Street
(F.M. 236)
From Morgan Avenue (F.M. Highway
No. 236) to McArthur Street (F.M.
Highway No. 236)
35 71-8 12/7/71
(Ordinance 67-5 adopted –/–/67; Ordinance 67-7.1 adopted 8/27/67; Ordinance 71-8 adopted 12/7/71; Ordinance 74-24 adopted 11/6/74;
Ordinance 74-28 adopted 1/9/75; Ordinance 76-11 adopted 8/5/76; Ordinance 83-7 adopted 4/4/83; Ordinance 88-05 adopted 8/4/88; Ordinance
99-02 adopted 1/7/99; Ordinance 09-10 adopted 6/18/09; 1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. II, sec. 6; 1994 Code, ch. 73, schedule I)
Sec. 11.08.002 Schedule II: Restricted use of certain streets near schools
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/438
(a) The following streets are closed to motor vehicles other than school buses and vehicles owned or operated by employees of the school
district from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. each day that school is in session, every year, except Saturdays, Sundays, and school holidays:
Street Location Ord. No.
Date
Passed
McLeod Street Between Church and Courthouse Streets – 11/8/62
Hunt Street Between Sarah and Prairie Streets 92-09 9/3/92
(b) Cuero Independent School District and St. Michael's School, their agents, or employees may cause portable barricades to be installed
across Hunt Street at its intersection with Sarah and Prairie Streets (CISD), and McLeod Street at its intersection with Church and Courthouse
(St. Michael's), each day during the hours such street is closed and cause the barricades to be removed at the end of each closed period.
Neither the chief of police nor any other agent of the city shall be required to place or remove such barricades.
(c) It shall be a defense to a charge of violating this section to show that the school abutting such portion of Hunt Street or McLeod Street was
not in session on the date of such alleged violation or that the barricades referred to in subsection (b) of this section were not in place at the time
of such alleged violations.
(d) The vehicular traffic traveling on Junior High Drive running in front of the Cuero Junior High shall be directed as follows:
(1) Enter the east side of Junior High Drive from East Broadway (stadium side). This portion of Junior High Drive will be a two-way
roadway up to the easternmost entrance to the Cuero Junior High School. Then the two-way road will continue past the Junior High
School. There will be no left-hand turn allowed to enter the Cuero Junior High School property. Vehicles exiting the Cuero Junior High
School may do so by turning left onto Junior High Drive and flow back towards East Broadway. A right-hand turn will not be allowed
when exiting the Cuero Junior High School. This traffic flow will be effective 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, and all year round.
(2) It is further provided that Junior High Drive upon exit of the Cuero Junior High School will be one-way only. Right-hand turns will
not be allowed. Signs will be placed in appropriate locations to provide for no right turns.
(3) That portion of Junior High Drive in front of the Intermediate School will remain unchanged.
(4) A map depicting this road configuration is attached to Ordinance 08-15 as exhibit A and is incorporated herein by reference at
length for all purposes.
(e) There shall be no stopping, standing or parking on that portion of Junior High Drive located in the 500 and 600 block of Junior High Drive
during the school term from Monday to Friday at 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
(f) That part of Junior High Drive from the intersection of Sarah Street and Junior High Drive, down and along Junior High Drive in a northerly
and easterly direction out to the intersection of Junior High Drive and Broadway St. (U.S. Highway 87) is hereby declared a school zone as
defined by applicable state law, with the vehicular speed limit not to exceed 20 miles per hour during the school term, from Monday through
Friday, and from 7:00 a.m. until 4:30 p.m.
(g) Vehicular traffic shall yield to pedestrians at crosswalks located in or about the 500 block of Junior High Drive.
(Ordinance adopted 11/8/62; Ordinance 92-09 adopted 9/3/92; 1994 Code, ch. 73, schedule II; Ordinance 95-15 adopted 11/1/95; Ordinance
2006-10 adopted 7/6/06; Ordinance 08-15 adopted 12/4/08)
Sec. 11.08.003 Schedule III: One-way streets
Street Location Ord. No.
Date
Passed
A public alley Runs easterly from the east line of Gonzales
Street to the west line of Clinton Street and south
of the northern boundary line of Lots 6 and 8
located in Block 9 and north of the southern
boundary line of Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5, Block 9.
Vehicular traffic shall travel in a easterly direction
only, entering from the east line of Gonzales
Street and traveling to the west line of Clinton
Street. With the exception that vehicles shall be
allowed to travel in a westerly direction on said
alley entering from Clinton Street only to access
the parking lot located on Lots 4 and 5 in Block 9.
2004-07 5/6/04
A public alley Located between the 100 Block of East 2012-63 11/6/12
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/438
Broadway and 100 Block of East French Street,
with said traffic to travel in a northerly direction
only from the southerly boundary of East French
Street to the northerly boundary of East
Broadway Street
(1994 Code, ch. 73, schedule III; Ordinance 2004-07 adopted 5/6/04; Ordinance 2012-63 adopted 11/6/12)
ARTICLE 11.09 PARKING SCHEDULES
Sec. 11.09.001 Schedule I: Commercial motor vehicle parking
(a) “Commercial motor vehicle” is hereby defined as a single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of more than 26,000 pounds.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the operator of any commercial motor vehicle to cause, or permit, or to park a commercial motor vehicle at any of
the following locations:
Street Location Side Ord. No.
Date
Passed
Esplanade Street,
900 - 1000 block
Between Prairie and Bailey Streets on all
days and at all times
West 94-12 9/1/94
(1994 Code, ch. 74, schedule I; Ordinance 94-12 adopted 9/1/94)
CHAPTER 12
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 12.02 GENERAL ACCOUNT REGULATIONS
Sec. 12.02.001 Deposits
(a) Applicability. All customers requesting utility services from the city may require a deposit.
(b) Consideration of credit history. The city will consider the status of the customer's utility credit history to determine the deposit requirement.
(See attachments D through H to Ordinance 2013-09.)
(c) Amount of deposit. Deposit amounts shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(d) Credit checks for service applicants; increased deposit.
(1) Customers who pose no credit risk (Green Light returned on the ONLINE Utility Exchange 1-10%) will be charged the required
deposit listed in the fee schedule unless a letter of credit can be produced from a previous utility company used within the last 3
months for at least one year.
(2) Customers who pose a minimal credit risk (Yellow Light returned on the ONLINE Utility Exchange 10.1%-25%) will be charged a
deposit equal to two times the current deposit amount according to the deposit requirements listed in the fee schedule.
(3) Customers who pose a substantial credit risk (Red Light returned on the ONLINE Utility Exchange 25.1-100%) will be charged a
deposit equal to three times the current deposit amount according to the deposit requirements listed in the fee schedule.
(4) An existing customer who does not have a deposit on file and becomes delinquent shall be deemed to have an unsatisfactory
payment record and must pay a maximum deposit to continue service.
(5) A customer who has had service terminated shall be subject to a credit check under this section and will be charged a deposit
up to three times the current deposit amount according to the deposit requirements listed in the fee schedule.
(6) A customer who provides a social security number that is returned as deceased, non-issued, belonging to a person under the
age of 18, or belonging to a person other than the applicant, or is fraudulent, shall be required to provide a valid social security
number as well as additional proof of identity i.e. valid driver's license, merchant credit card, etc., before service will be activated. (Or
this option: denied service until that person supplies a valid social security number.)
(7) The city cannot demand that an applicant provide their social security number as a requirement for service. However, it is our
policy that applicants who refuse to provide their social security number pose a greater credit risk and shall be charged the maximum
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/438
deposit. Under section 12.02.004 (privacy policy), social security [numbers] are treated as confidential regardless of whether
requested or not.
(8) An adverse action letter will be printed and given to the customer(s) who were denied for service or charged a deposit. The
Federal Trade Commission and the Fair Credit Reporting Act mandate that a consumer who is charged a deposit based upon their
credit information is given notification as to where that information was obtained and detailed procedures as to how they may dispute
the information. Spanish-speaking customers should be given the adverse action letter printed in Spanish.
(e) Payment of deposit; return of deposit.
(1) Payment. Along with a written application for utility services which are to be furnished by the city, the applicant may pay a
deposit in such amount determined by the city council from time to time.
(2) Refund. Such deposit will be retained by the city until such customer's utility service for which the deposit was made is
terminated. Upon termination of such service. the customer shall be entitled to a refund of such deposit, if still on file, less any amount
which is due to the city.
(3) Demand deposit return. Upon 24 months (2 years) of good credit with no more than 2 penalties, the deposit will be applied to
the customer's account.
(4) New deposit following termination of service. Customers that have had their service terminated due to delinquent status,
request for termination, or any other reason shall be required to render a new deposit prior to service being resumed.
(Ordinance 93-05 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.13; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 12.02.002 Returned checks
When a customer makes payment by check which is returned from the financial institution for nonpayment, section 2.01.001 and section A1.001
of the fee schedule in appendix A of this code shall apply. Notice from the financial institution will serve as proper notice for immediate
disconnection of utility services. (Ordinance 93-05 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.12; Ordinance 98-07 adopted 4/2/98; Ordinance 00-07
adopted 2/3/00; Ordinance 02-16 adopted 9/5/02; Ordinance 02-17 adopted 9/5/02; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.02.003 Bad debt policy
Unpaid closed utility service accounts for electric, water, sewer (wastewater), and garbage will be reviewed on a monthly basis. The accounting
office will determine if the unpaid closed accounts are uncollectible and should be recommended to internal write-off or to an external agency for
additional collection efforts. (1994 Code, sec. 50.14; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.02.004 Privacy policy
In accordance with Texas Utilities Code, chapter 182, the city adopts the following policy pertaining to the confidentiality of a customer's
information in a utility account:
(1) Personal information, which includes information such as name, address, and telephone number, is requested when utility
services are initiated, and the information is maintained in a secure environment by the utility services department. This will also
include the protection of credit card information, by blocking out all but the last four digits of the account number. The information is a
means of identification, internal verification for administrative purposes, and debt collection purposes.
(2) Social security numbers are treated as confidential regardless of whether requested or not.
(3) Confidentiality of personal information can be requested by utility services customers. Information relating to the amount of
utility usage or the amount of the customer's utility bill, and account history, is also protected. If confidentiality is requested, the
information is available to only those city employees; however, it may be disclosed to other law enforcement agencies for official
purposes, other utility providers and consumer reporting agencies.
(4) City records are disposed of in accordance with the state law, the provisions of the Local Government Code (state library and
archives commission), and the administrative rules adopted under its authority.
(5) Confidentiality of customer information can be requested by completing a “Confidentiality of Personal Information” form
available at the utility services department.
(1994 Code, sec. 50.15; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
ARTICLE 12.03 ELECTRIC SERVICE*
Sec. 12.03.001 Schedule of rates adopted
The city council shall adopt a schedule of electric rates and there shall be charged and collected from every customer of the city electric
department, for electric current (electricity) distributed by the city to such customer the rates set forth in the applicable schedule of electric rates
made a part of and attached to Ordinance 2011-10, and amendments thereto, and as further depicted in appendix A (section A6.034) of this
code for all purposes, is hereby approved and adopted as the schedule of electric rates to be charged and collected. (Ordinance 93-05 adopted
1/18/93; Ordinance 93-09 adopted 2/4/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.01; Ordinance 96-08 adopted 7/2/96; Ordinance 98-03 adopted 2/5/98; Ordinance
99-03 adopted 2/4/99; Ordinance 01-28 adopted 12/6/01; Ordinance 02-03 adopted 1/3/02; Ordinance 02-12 adopted 7/2/02; Ordinance 03-02
adopted 4/3/03; Ordinance 2004-19 adopted 12/2/04; Ordinance 2006-14 adopted 9/14/06; Ordinance 2010-25 adopted 10/25/10; Ordinance
2011-10 adopted 3/10/11; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13; Ordinance 2017-29, sec. 4 adopted 12/1/17)
Sec. 12.03.002 Payment due date; late payment penalty
The rates and charges prescribed in the schedule of rates for utility charges furnished shall be due and payable in the utility department of the
city on or before the 17th of the following month by 5:00 p.m., except for those customers classified as large industrial electric customers shall
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/438
have 30 days from the billing date to pay for electric charges. Any payment received after 5:00 p.m. on the due date of the 17th (or after the 30th
day from the billing date for large industrial electric customers) will be posted on the next business day and the will incur a 10% penalty. If the
17th day (or the 30th day from the billing date for large industrial electric customers) falls on weekend or a holiday, then the following business
day will be given to pay the net amount. United States Post Office postmarks shall be the deciding factor for payments received by mail in
determining when an account is paid on time or when a late fee is to be assessed. (1994 Code, sec. 50.02; Ordinance 2009-06 adopted 5/20/09;
Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13; Ordinance 2015-31 adopted 10/30/15; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code; Ordinance 2016-26 adopted
1/11/17)
Sec. 12.03.003 Failure to receive bill
Failure of any patron to receive a bill for electric [service] shall be no excuse for nonpayment, and shall in no way extend the discount period
provided for in this article. (1994 Code, sec. 50.03; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.03.004 Failure to pay bill; discontinuance of service
(a) Policy. It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to customers for reasons of nonpayment of bills only after final notice has been
mailed and the account balance has not been disputed.
(b) Disconnect list; fees for reconnection.
(1) It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to customers for reasons of nonpayment of bills only after final notice has
been mailed and the account balance has not been disputed.
(2) Account balances not paid by the 27th by 5:00 p.m. will be subject to disconnect and appear on the disconnect list. An
administrative fee will be incurred and a reconnect fee will apply as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code, and the
fee for reconnect after hours is as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A.
(c) Right to hearing on correctness of bill. Any customer disputing correctness of his bill shall have the right to a hearing before the utilities
customer service director and may present orally or in writing his complaint and concerns. The utility customer service director shall be
authorized to order that services not be disconnected until such issues are resolved within a 72-hour period.
(d) Payment extensions. A customer who has at least twelve (12) months of utility service may request three (3) payment extensions per
calendar year. See attachment A to Ordinance 2013-09.
(e) Deferred payment plan. A customer who has at least twelve (12) months of utility service may request one deferred payment plan per
twelve-month period.
(Ordinance 93-05 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.04; Ordinance 94-14 adopted 12/1/94; Ordinance 01-15 adopted 7/10/01; Ordinance
2013-09 adopted 3/11/13; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code; Ordinance 2016-26 adopted 1/11/17)
Sec. 12.03.005 Delay of bill payment date for elderly
Elderly penalty delay request: Under the state constitution and statutes, Utilities Code title 4 (Delivery of Utility Services), subtitle 13 (Provisions
Regulating Delivery of Service), chapter 182 (Rights of Utility Customers), sections 182.001–182.005, individuals 60 years of age or older, and
who:
(1) Is a residential customer; and
(2) Occupies the premises for which the delay is requested;
can request a delay in payment without penalty until the 25th day after the date the bill was issued. (See attachments B and C to Ordinance
2013-09.)
(1994 Code, sec. 50.05; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.03.006 Postponement of service disconnection for medical reasons
(a) The city will postpone disconnection of utility service to a delinquent residential customer residing in an individually metered residential
dwelling when that customer establishes that disconnection of utility service will result in a person residing at the residence becoming seriously ill
or more seriously ill if service is disconnected.
(b) Each time a customer seeks to avoid disconnection of service under this reason, the customer must:
(1) Contact the city prior to the scheduled disconnection date
(2) Enter into a payment extension under section 12.03.004(d). A customer who has at least twelve (12) months of service may
request three (3) payment extensions per year.
(3) Payment extension will not be granted on utility accounts which contain the following: meter tampering, theft or diversion of
service, or willful damage to city property.
(4) The city will disconnect services to a customer who fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a payment extension. When
a customer fails a payment extension, the customer must wait one full year to be eligible for another payment extension.
(1994 Code, sec. 50.06; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.03.007 Free service prohibited
No free service shall be allowed. (Ordinance 93-05 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.07; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.03.008 Lease of security lights
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/438
100 watt, 250 watt or 400 watt security lights may be leased by the city to a customer, provided that the customer enters into a written lease
contract and pays to the city, before the installation of any such security light, the full estimated cost to the city of all labor and materials for the
furnishing and installation of such security light. Such lease contract shall contain a release or waiver by the customer of all liability on the part of
the city for injury or damage to person or property resulting from the ownership, installation, maintenance, use or malfunction of such light. Each
such contract shall be for a term of 18 months but shall provide that the customer may terminate the contract by written notice to the city given
not less than 15 days before the end of the current billing period. Upon the termination of any such contract, the city shall disconnect the security
light and shall thereafter, at the city's convenience, remove the pole and light from the customer's premises. The monthly rental charge for each
such security light shall be an amount equal to the rate shown in the current Schedule SL-100, SL-250 or SL-400. Schedule SL-175 shall only
apply to existing 175 watt fixtures. No new 175 watt fixtures shall be installed. (Ordinance 93-05 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.08;
Ordinance 96-08 adopted 7/2/96; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.03.009 Underground service
(a) If any person wants underground electric service installed in any existing or future section or subdivision of the city, he may either cause
such service to be installed at his expense by a private contractor subject to the applicable electric codes and to inspection and approval of the
city, or he may apply to the city to install such underground service. In the latter case, the city manager shall investigate and determine the
feasibility of the city's installing such an underground system. If the city manager determines that it is feasible to install such an underground
electric system, he shall calculate the costs thereof and advise the person desiring the same. Such person shall be required to pay the city in
advance of construction a sum of money equal to the total estimated cost of such underground system. Upon completion of such construction,
the city manager shall cause the actual cost of such underground system to be determined and, if such costs exceed the estimated cost, the
person contracting for same shall immediately pay to the city a sum of money equal to the difference between the total actual cost and the
estimated cost theretofore paid. If the actual cost is less than the estimated cost, the city shall promptly refund to such customer a sum of money
equal to the difference between the amount paid by the customer on account of such estimate and the amount of the actual cost. The
underground electrical system so installed, whether by the city or by a private contractor, shall upon completion and acceptance thereof belong
to and be the sole property of the city.
(b) In every area served by the city electric system, where underground service has been or shall hereafter be installed, each customer
desiring to connect to such underground system shall be required to pay, in addition to all other charges which may be provided by ordinance or
regulation, an amount equal to the actual cost to the city of the secondary service wire from the primary system to the customer's meter and the
actual cost of the installation thereof.
(c) No three-phase service shall be allowed where an underground electric distribution system has been installed. Commercial underground
service shall be made available at the discretion of the city. The customer shall be responsible for all installation, maintenance, and replacement
cost of said service, regardless of meter location.
(Ordinance 93-05 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.09; Ordinance 94-06 adopted 5/9/94; Ordinance 96-08 adopted 7/2/96; Ordinance 2013-
09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.03.010 Three-phase service
Three-phase service shall not be furnished for residential use unless the customer pays the city in cash in advance an amount equal to the entire
cost to the city of installing such three-phase service. No three-phase service shall be allowed where an underground system has been installed.
(Ordinance 93-05 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.10; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.03.011 Hook-up and service charges
The city electric department shall charge and collect the following service charges:
(1) Electrical hook-up. Electrical hook-up will be 100% of actual cost to the city. A customer requesting electrical hook-up shall be
required to pay the city, in advance of construction, a sum of money equal to the total estimated cost. Upon completion of such
construction, the city manager shall cause the actual cost to be determined and, if such costs exceed the estimated cost, the person
contracting for same shall immediately pay to the city a sum of money equal to the difference between the total actual cost and the
estimated cost theretofore paid. If the actual cost is less than the estimated cost, the city shall promptly refund to such customer a
sum of money equal to the difference between the amount paid by the customer on account of such estimate and the amount of the
actual cost.
(2) Service calls. The charge for service calls is as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(3) Temporary hook-up. Temporary electrical hook-up will be 100% of cost to the city. A customer requesting temporary electrical
hook-up shall be required to pay the city, in advance of construction, a sum of money equal to the total estimated cost. Upon
completion of such construction, the city manager shall cause the actual cost to be determined and, if such costs exceed the
estimated cost, the person contracting for same shall immediately pay to the city a sum of money equal to the difference between the
total actual cost and the estimated cost theretofore paid. If the actual cost is less than the estimated cost, the city shall promptly
refund to such customer a sum of money equal to the difference between the amount paid by the customer on account of such
estimate and the amount of the actual cost.
(4) Meter testing. If a patron complains of the charge for electric service supplied to him or her and demands that the meter
supplying his or her premises be tested, the electric department may remove the meter and submit it for testing with an appropriate
company authorized to provide such testing service. If the meter is found to register in error more than 2% fast, the city shall make an
appropriate adjustment. If, however, the meter does not register in error of more than 2% fast, the consumer shall pay the actual cost
of testing, and a service call charge as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. The actual cost of testing, based upon
the current rates, shall be determined and provided prior to the actual test.
(5) Meter relocation. Meter relocation will be 100% of the actual cost to the city. A customer requesting a meter relocation shall be
required to pay the city, in advance of construction, a sum of money equal to the total estimated cost. Upon completion of such
construction, the city manager shall cause the actual cost to be determined and, if such costs exceed the estimated cost, the person
contracting for same shall immediately pay to the city a sum of money equal to the difference between the total actual cost and the
estimated cost theretofore paid. If the actual cost is less than the estimated cost, the city shall promptly refund to such customer a
sum of money equal to the difference between the amount paid by the customer on account of such estimate and the amount of the
actual cost.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/438
(6) Transfer of service. In the event a customer requests a transfer of their electrical service for whatever reason, then that
customer shall pay a transfer fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(7) Temporary hook-up for repairs, cleaning, etc. If a residential customer requests electrical service for two weeks or less for
repairs, cleaning and the like, the fee for hook-up will be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. There will be no
deposit required for the account if the time of service is two weeks or less. This subsection shall not apply if service is for longer than
two weeks.
(Ordinance 93-05 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.11; Ordinance 00-26 adopted 10/5/00; Ordinance 02-17 adopted 9/5/02; Ordinance
2013-09 adopted 3/11/13; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 12.03.012 Street lighting
City streetlights in residential areas shall be placed only at the intersections of streets and not between intersections, except on main
thoroughfares, where the lights shall be located by the city electric department as required to maintain proper thoroughfare lighting levels.
(Ordinance 93-05 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.16; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.03.013 Service to areas outside corporate limits
If any person wants city electric service in an area outside the corporate limits of the city which is serviced by the city electric distribution system,
such person shall make application to the city for such service. The city manager shall determine the feasibility of providing such service, and if
he determines that it is feasible, he shall calculate the costs of furnishing such service, including without being limited to the cost of poles, wires,
and transformers, and shall advise the prospective customer of such costs. The customer shall be required to pay to the city in advance of
construction a sum of money equal to the total estimated cost. Upon completion of such construction the city manager shall determine the actual
cost of same, and if such costs exceed the estimated cost, the customer shall immediately pay to the city a sum of money equal to the difference
between the total actual costs and the estimated costs theretofore paid. If the actual cost is less than the estimated costs, the city shall promptly
refund to such customer a sum of money equal to the difference between the amount paid by the customer on account of such estimate and the
amount of the actual costs. (Ordinance 93-05 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.17; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.03.014 Average monthly payment plan
(a) Generally. A customer may apply to participate in an optional billing plan designed to make monthly bills more uniform throughout the year.
Under this plan, a customer will be charged each month for actual consumption, including any adjustments, but the average monthly payment
amount due will be computed based on the average of bills for the most recent 12 months on a continuing basis. It is not intended to be used to
defer payment of delinquent bills.
(b) Eligibility requirements.
(1) An applicant for the average monthly payment plan must meet certain qualifications. All applications are subject to city approval.
The average monthly payment plan will be available only to residential customers. Customers with only one type of service, such as
just electric or just water, will also be eligible to participate. If a customer receives all available utilities, then the plan must apply to
each and all services.
(2) Customers must have a minimum of 12 months of continuous service with the city utilities to be eligible. This may have been
attained at one or more addresses within the city's service area and applies only to the customer's primary residence. A customer
transferring from one address to another may continue to participate.
(3) Customers must not have had their service discontinued during the preceding 12 months for nonpayment. Applicants must have
a good utility payment history with no more than two penalties, no returned checks or bank drafts in the previous 12 months and no
previous balance on their account. They must also not be facing or subject to bankruptcy.
(4) A customer billing plan shall be signed and the following guidelines shall be implemented. A customer must participate in the
average monthly payment plan for a period of 12 months following the date of registration. A customer whose service is discontinued
for nonpayment of bill, or who fails to make any two payments by the twelfth of the month within any 12-month period, or has a
returned check or bank draft, will be taken off the program. Any amounts due will be subject to immediate collection. Such customers
may then become eligible for re-enrollment after establishing a good payment history for a minimum of 12 successive months.
(5) A customer who terminates service(s) entirely and reconnects at a future date is also ineligible for re-enrollment in the average
monthly payment plan for a minimum of 12 months.
(c) Method of billing.
(1) The monthly bill will be based on the average of the most recent 12 months of billing. The bill will not be a fixed amount but will
be computed on a running average. The current month will be averaged with the prior 11 months, and the oldest month will be
dropped from the calculation. The average monthly amount will usually be either higher or lower than the actual bill. This method of
billing will result in an accumulated debit or credit on the customer's account.
(2) No interest will be charged on any account debit balance accrued under average monthly billing, nor will interest be paid on any
account credit balance accrued under level billing.
(3) Customers who discontinue level billing at any time or for any reason will have their account adjusted as described in
subsection (c)(2) above [(c)(4)] at the time average monthly billing is stopped.
(4) Finalized accounts (terminating and not involving transfer of service) reflecting a credit balance will have the amount credited
against the final bill. If the credit balance is larger than the final bill, a refund check will be issued to the customer for the difference. If
a finalized account reflects a debit balance, this amount as well as any other charges owed by the customer will be due and payable
immediately to the city.
(5) Under no circumstances will any accumulated credit be used to reduce a customer's bill unless participation is discontinued.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/438
(6) The city will continue to read the meter(s) each month and will provide full information on the billing. Monthly bills will show the
actual consumption, the regular itemized charges computed on the actual consumption and the total payment due under level billing.
(7) Utility rates are not changed for average monthly billing, but it allows a customer to pay approximately the same amount each
month rather than more in high usage months and less in low usage months.
(d) Change in rates. If utility rates are changed at any time, the new rates will be factored into the billing and may cause an adjustment to the
average monthly bill payment due.
(e) Enrollment. The enrollment period for applications to participate in level billing shall be October. Eligible customers will be given the
opportunity to enroll only during this month. Terms of agreement and the application form will be furnished by the city. An application must be
received by the city prior to the last business day of the enrollment period.
(f) Change in rate classification. If a customer who is on the average monthly billing plan experiences a rate classification change, such as
from residential to commercial or industrial, they will be discontinued in the program, as average monthly billing applies only to the single
residential service. The account will then be adjusted as described in subsection (c)(2) [(c)(4)]. No cash refunds will be made for any credit
accrued unless the customer discontinues receiving service and the account is finalized.
(g) General rules and policies to apply. Average monthly billing accounts shall be subject to the same rules, rates, charges, fees, penalties and
policies established by the city as regular utility customer accounts.
(1994 Code, sec. 50.18; Ordinance 00-16 adopted 6/1/00; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.03.015 Meters required; obstruction of meter
(a) Meters will be required for all accounts.
(b) Meters shall be required to measure the consumption of each utility service furnished by the city, except garbage and sewer service.
(c) All meters shall be owned, installed and maintained by the city.
(d) No person, firm or entity shall allow the accumulation of any form of debris on or around any meter that prevents the city from reading the
meter.
(e) Upon conviction of the above obstruction, the defendant shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009.
(1994 Code, sec. 50.19; Ordinance 2005-25 adopted 12/1/05; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.03.016 Meter tampering
(a) In the event of diversion of service, tampering, unauthorized use or consumption, or evidence of attempted unauthorized use of the city's
utility, all utility service will be discontinued immediately without notice by the city. The following will be billed for meter tampering:
(1) A minimum charge of $500.00 or actual damages, whichever is greater;
(2) The cost of estimated or actual amount of utility service used without city authorization; and
(3) A service call for each trip made by city personnel to investigate, evaluate and correct the meter tampering or diversion.
(b) All costs and fees regarding the account must be paid prior to reconnection.
(1994 Code, sec. 50.20; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. 12.03.017 Prepay services
(a) A residential customer may choose to prepay their utility services.
(1) A minimum of $30.00 is required to initiate services.
(2) The customer is responsible for keeping the account in a positive balance. Account information and billing can be accessed
online or by smart phone.
(3) The customer will not receive a monthly statement.
(4) Once the account reaches a negative balance, the account will be subject to disconnection and a disconnection fee will be
assessed.
(b) To restore your services, the customer will need to contact the utility billing office during regular office hours. Prepay amounts can be made
in an amount not less than $30.00.
(Ordinance 2016-26 adopted 1/11/17)
ARTICLE 12.04 SOLID WASTE*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.04.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/438
Acceptable waste. Waste produced at a residential or commercial unit other than extraordinary amounts produced due to natural or man-made
disasters, but not including hazardous waste, dead animals in excess of ten (10) pounds, construction waste, ammunition, hot ashes, tires,
stumps, or other waste prohibited in a municipal solid waste landfill.
Building material. Any material such as lumber, brick, plaster, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of repairs or additions to
existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing structures.
Bulky waste. Waste that includes sofas, stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, dryers, air conditioners, sinks, toilets, furniture,
and other waste materials and appliances (certified where applicable as freon-free), and like items other than construction debris, or stable
matter with weight or volumes greater than allowed in approved bins or containers, as the case may be, or that can be loaded by one (1) person
at curbside.
Bundle. Tree, shrub and brush trimmings or newspaper and magazines securely tied together, forming an easily handled package not exceeding
four (4) feet in length or forty (40) pounds in weight .
Business establishment. Any premises where any commercial, industrial or professional activities are conducted, including any office, store,
factory, warehouse, school, hospital, halfway house or nursing home.
Carts. A wheeled receptacle with a capacity not to exceed ninety-six (96) gallon capacity, constructed of plastic, metal and/or fiberglass,
designed for automated or semi-automated solid waste collection systems, and having a lid. Carts will be provided with ownership retained by
the contractor, as required in the contract.
Collection. The practice of picking up municipal solid waste and/or recycling and/or composting using carts and containers with vehicles of safe
design and construction and hauling municipal solid waste from the collection site to a properly permitted or authorized facility and operated
disposal site(s) as determined by the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ).
Commercial unit. All commercial buildings or premises, including retail, wholesale, institutional, religious, governmental or other nonresidential
establishments, at which garbage, trash, refuse or recycling may be generated, having a physical address within the corporate limits of the city.
All customers and accounts that are not a residential unit.
Commodity. Materials that can be sold in a spot or future market for processing and use or reuse.
Complaint. A communication from a customer to a contractor or entity concerning service, which, upon investigation by the contractor or the city,
is determined to be correct and shall prompt some action by the contractor or the city.
Compost. Green waste, yard waste, soiled paper, and tree limbs no longer than four (4) feet.
Construction site. Any location, lot, site or area in the entity upon which building, remodeling or construction is being performed.
Construction waste. Waste building materials resulting from construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations.
Container (commercial/industrial). A metal receptacle designed to be lifted and emptied mechanically for use only at commercial and industrial
unit(s). No less than two (2) cubic yards nor larger than eight (8) cubic yards.
Customer. An occupant of a residential unit or commercial unit who generates refuse or a commercial or industrial occupant who is disposing of
construction debris or solid waste through our [the contractor's] roll-off services.
Dead animals. Animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten (10) pounds, that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered
or killed for human use and properly placed in an acceptable container, must be disposed of separate from this contract.
Disposal site. A refuse depository licensed and permitted by the state selected for use by the contractor, including but not limited to Texas type I
sanitary landfills, transfer stations, incinerators, and waste processing/separation centers licensed, permitted or approved to receive for
processing of final disposal of refuse, garbage, bulky waste, brush, construction debris, dead animals and commercial and institutional waste by
all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction and requiring such licenses, permits and approvals.
Garbage. As used in this article, shall include any and all dead animals of less than ten (10) pounds in weight, except those slaughtered for
human consumption; every accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable, and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing,
consumption, dealing, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or
other animal, vegetable or other matter, including, but not by way of limitation, that are used in tin cans and other food containers; and all
putrescible or easily decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents); except (in all cases) any matter
included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste, rubbish or stable matter.
Hazardous waste. Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which is designated by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
under the Resource Conservation Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. section 1002 et seq. or regulated as toxic under the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15
U.S.C.A. section 2601 et seq., regulations promulgated thereunder or appropriate agency of the state, to be hazardous or toxic as defined by or
pursuant to federal or state law. This term does not include small quantity generators of household hazardous waste, as defined by federal or
state law. For purposes of this contract, the term “hazardous waste” shall also include motor oil, gasoline, paint and paint cans.
Industrial refuse. All non-hazardous waste materials that are a byproduct or generated from a manufacturing process.
Industrial unit. All manufacturing customers whose solid wastes are (i) compacted by industrial sized compactors and stored in containers for
hauling to the disposal site, or (ii) processed by dust collection units containers for hauling to the disposal site or (iii) collected for disposal with a
frequency of more than one (1) time per week, having a physical address in the entity and not a residential or commercial unit.
Multiple-family dwelling. Any single structure occupied by more than two families.
Municipal solid waste. All non-hazardous (as defined by CERCLA and other acceptable laws) and non-special (see special waste definition) solid
waste material including unwanted or discarded waste material in a solid or semi-solid waste, including but not limited to garbage, ashes, refuse,
rubbish, waste materials, brush, paper, plastic, yard waste (including brush, tree trimmings, and Christmas trees), discarded appliances, home
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/438
furniture, and furnishings, provided that such material must be of a type and consistency to be lawfully accepted at the sanitary landfill under the
applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and permits governing each.
Premises. All public and private establishments including individual residences, all multi-family dwellings, residential care facilities, hospitals,
schools, businesses, other buildings or vacant lots.
Recycling. “Recycle” or “recycling” means any process or portion thereof by which solid waste or materials which would otherwise become solid
waste are separated, collected and processed for reuse or returned to use or to market in the form of raw materials or products. Includes green,
brown, and clear glass; plastics #1 - #7 (except styrofoam); aluminum, tin, and steel cans; and newsprint, cardboard, boxboard, junk mail,
magazines, and office paper.
Refuse. This term shall refer to all garbage, rubbish, bulky waste, construction debris and stable matter generated by residential, commercial or
industrial units, unless the context otherwise requires.
Residential refuse. All garbage and rubbish generated by a producer at a residential unit.
Residential unit. Any house, trailer house, mobile home, manufactured home, apartment, townhouse, condominium unit or other dwelling unit
occupied by not more than two (2) families for living purposes. Each apartment in any apartment house or duplex and each condominium unit in
any condominium regime shall be deemed to be a separate residence. A residential unit shall be deemed occupied when either water or
domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto.
Roll-off. A unit varying in capacity between fourteen (14) and forty (40) cubic yards which is used for collecting, storing, [and] transporting
building materials, business trash, industrial waste, refuse or yard waste. Not all container sizes are available in all service areas. The unit may
be of the open or closed variety. The distinguishing feature of the detachable container is that it is picked up by a specially equipped truck and
becomes an integral part of transporting the waste material to the final disposal site.
Rubbish. Non-putrescible solid waste (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste materials; combustible
rubbish includes all waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof,
chips, shavings, sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, excelsior, furniture, straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and
discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible pulp, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, and other products, such as are
used for packaging, or wrapping; noncombustible rubbish includes crockery, glass, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and mineral or
metallic substances.
Special waste. Any waste material including but not limited to, waste discarded from a nonresidential source from an industrial process (including
process sludge); waste from a pollution control process (e.g., baghouse dust, treatment plant sludge, filter cake, sedimentation pond cleanout,
etc.); waste container free liquids (free liquid wastes are those wastes which fail the paint filter test prescribed by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency method 9095); residue and debris from the cleanup of a spill of any size of a chemical substance or
commercial product or a waste listed previously or afterward; contaminated residuals from the cleanup of a facility generating, storing, treating,
recycling, or disposing chemical substances, commercial products, or waste listed herein; any waste which is non-hazardous as a result of
treatment pursuant to RCRA subtitle C; chemical-containing equipment removed from service, in which the chemical composition and
concentration are unknown.
Stable matter. All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable, or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure, and
resulting from keeping of animals, livestock or poultry.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, secs. 1-A, 3-G; Ordinance 89-01 adopted 2/2/89; Ordinance 90-05 adopted 8/2/90; Ordinance 92-07 adopted
8/25/92; 1994 Code, sec. 51.01; Ordinance 2015-34, sec. 1, adopted 11/17/15)
Sec. 12.04.002 Type of collection; accumulation of garbage in greater than ordinary quantities
(a) Residential refuse pickup. The city or any agent of the city to which the city is contracted with shall provide both containers in the alley and
curbside collection of a 96-gallon cart of refuse from residential units one (1) time per week. The containers in alleys will be up to three cubic
yards and provide service to up to four residential units. If an alley container is provided, a cart will not be provided. All refuse must be placed in
a container or cart. Additional carts may be provided at an additional charge. The customer is responsible for carts lost, stolen, damaged or
destroyed by abuse caused by the customer at a cost plus delivery fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(1) Single stream recycling. The city or any agent of the city to which the city is contracted with shall provide curbside collection of
single stream recyclable materials one (1) time every other week with a 96-gallon recycling cart only. The city or any agent of the city
to which the city is contracted with will provide recycling collection services to all residential customers within the city for the following:
(A) Plastics #1 - #7 (except #6 - styrofoam).
(B) Aluminum, tin, and steel cans.
(C) Paper products: newsprint, cardboard, boxboard, junk mail, magazines, and office paper.
(D) Any other materials for which a recycling market may exist and which the parties hereto agree can be added to the
recycling program.
(2) The city or any agent of the city to which the city is contracted with will collect the cart only and its contents at curbside. Extra
carts will be provided upon request at an additional fee.
(3) The city or any agent of the city to which the city is contracted with may decline to collect any residential refuse not in the cart
provided.
(b) Commercial collection. The city or any agent of the city to which the city is contracted with will establish commercial routes to service the
commercial customers. The following container sizes will be offered: 96-gallon carts, 1.5-yard, 3-yard and 4-yard. Commercial customers will
determine the container size and frequency of pickup. Service will be provided by the city or any agent of the city to which the city is contracted
with, Monday through Friday.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/438
(c) Enclosure required for accumulation of garbage in greater than ordinary quantities. All packing plants, slaughterhouses, killing and dressing
plants, and other places within the city where garbage accumulates in greater than ordinary quantities, and which dispose of the garbage by sale
to or contract with other collectors of garbage other than the city garbage department or any agent of the city to which the city is contracted with,
are required to house their accumulation of garbage in rooms, sheds, buildings, or other structures completely enclosed or tightly screened, so
that flies may not [have] access to the accumulation of garbage.
(d) Drainage from garbage enclosures. All the enclosures for the accumulation of garbage shall have floors of some impervious material and
shall be equipped with adequate floor drains connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city, so that the enclosures may be easily cleaned.
Wastes from the enclosures, including waste water used in cleaning the enclosures, shall not be allowed to discharge into any street gutter, ditch,
alley, or public place of any kind or on top of the ground on any public or private premises but shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer of the
city.
(e) Cleanliness of garbage enclosures. All enclosures for the accumulation of garbage shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all
times.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 5; 1994 Code, sec. 51.02; Ordinance 2015-34, sec. 1, adopted 11/17/15; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Secs. 12.04.003–12.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Garbage Cans and Other Receptacles
Sec. 12.04.031 Condition of containers
(a) Garbage cans shall be kept in clean, sanitary condition at all times and shall be kept tightly closed at all times, and shall be kept free from
holes and watertight. All covers on the garbage cans shall fit tightly. The contents of all receptacles containing rubbish shall be so protected that
the wind cannot blow out and scatter same over the streets, alleys, and premises of the city.
(b) No person, firm, or corporation shall bring into the corporate limits of the city any garbage can or receptacle which has been used before
without first thoroughly cleaning and disinfecting the same, both inside and outside, before introducing same into the city limits. No person, firm,
or corporation collecting garbage within the corporate limits of the city shall pick up full cans or receptacles and deposit empty cans or
receptacles within the corporate limits unless the cans so deposited by them shall have been thoroughly cleaned and disinfected before the
deposit and equipped with tightfitting covers. No person, firm, or corporation shall transport any garbage cans or receptacles on, over, or through
the streets or alleys of the city, except in tightly covered cans or receptacles.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, secs. 2-B, 2-C; 1994 Code, sec. 51.16; Ordinance 2015-34, sec. 1, adopted 11/17/15)
Sec. 12.04.032 Storage areas for containers to be kept in sanitary manner
Every person, firm, or corporation owning, managing, operating, leasing, or renting any premises or residence or any place where garbage or
rubbish accumulates shall maintain their entire premises and any portion of the alleys or streets of the city that are used by them to store
garbage cans or receptacles in a clean, sanitary condition and in a manner as to prevent the breeding of flies or mosquitoes. (1966 Code, ch.
8.0, art. III, sec. 2-D; 1994 Code, sec. 51.17)
Sec. 12.04.033 Exposure of garbage prohibited
No person, firm, or corporation shall permit any garbage of any character whatsoever, including organic matter whether vegetable or animal, to
be exposed to the open air except when the same is being emptied into a closed container. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 2-E; 1994 Code,
sec. 51.18)
Sec. 12.04.034 Meddling with containers
Anyone who shall meddle with garbage cans or rubbish receptacles or in any way pilfer, scatter the contents of, junk, or carry off any garbage
can or rubbish receptacle shall be deemed guilty of an offense and punished by fine as herein provided. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 4-C;
1994 Code, sec. 51.19)
Sec. 12.04.035 Dumpsters (carts)
(a) The city or any agent of the city to which the city is contracted with will from time to time place dumpsters or carts in blocks of the city or in
the streets or alleys adjacent to the blocks. The dumpsters or carts are intended for the exclusive use of the owners and tenants of property
located in the blocks and are not designed for use by persons who reside in other blocks of the city or outside the city. The dumpsters or carts
are intended to receive only garbage and rubbish generated in the block in or adjacent to which the dumpster is placed and not garbage and
refuse generated elsewhere in the city or outside the city.
(b) No person, firm, or corporation shall deposit in any dumpster or cart any garbage or rubbish generated outside of the city block in which or
adjacent to which the dumpster is located.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 4-C(1); Ordinance adopted 2/5/87; 1994 Code, sec. 51.20; Ordinance 2015-34, sec. 1, adopted 11/17/15)
Secs. 12.04.036–12.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Collection and Disposal
Sec. 12.04.061 Authorized collectors
No person, firm or corporation shall collect garbage within the city limits except the duly authorized employees of the city environmental
department or any agent of the city to which the city is contracted. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 3-A; 1994 Code, sec. 51.35; Ordinance 2014-
05 adopted 1/28/14; Ordinance 2015-34, sec. 1, adopted 11/17/15)
Sec. 12.04.062 Times for collections; collection generally
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/438
(a) The city environmental department or any agent of the city to which the city is contracted with shall make collections of refuse at least once
a week, as provided in section 12.04.002 above, the time for the collections to be determined by the superintendent of public works or any agent
of the city to which the city is contracted for garbage collections.
(b) The city environmental department or any agent of the city to which the city is contracted with shall make collections of single stream
recyclable materials one (1) time every other week as provide in section 12.04.002 above, the time for the recycle collections to be determined
by the superintendent of public works or any entity to which the city has contracted with for garbage collections.
(c) The city or any entity to which the city has contracted with for garbage collection will collect the cart only and its contents at curbside. Extra
carts will be provided upon request at an additional fee. The city or any entity to which the city has contracted with for garbage collection may
decline to collect any residential refuse not in the cart provided. The city or any entity to which the city has contracted with for garbage collection
shall make special arrangements to provide special collection for those individuals with demonstrated disabilities requiring “at door collection.”
Employees of the city or any agent of the city to which the city is contracted with shall not be required to expose themselves to vicious animals in
order to collect refuse.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 3-B; 1994 Code, sec. 51.36; Ordinance 2014-05 adopted 1/28/14; Ordinance 2015-34, sec. 1, adopted
11/17/15)
Sec. 12.04.063 Refusal of service; improper preparation of waste; putrefying garbage
No garbage or refuse shall be collected from any premises where the owner or lessee is in arrears for a period of one month in payment of the
service charge nor where garbage and rubbish has not been prepared for collection as is herein provided. Fermenting, putrefying, or odoriferous
garbage shall be an offense punishable by fine as herein provided. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 3-D; 1994 Code, sec. 51.38)
Sec. 12.04.064 Disposal of certain items restricted
(a) Tree limbs, shrub trimmings, newspapers, etc. Tree limbs and shrub and brush trimmings securely tied together forming an easily handled
package cut into lengths not exceeding four feet and tied in bundles not exceeding 40 pounds in weight and magazines, newspapers, and books
securely tied in bundles not exceeding 40 pounds in weight shall be collected by the city garbage department.
(b) Dead animals. Dead animals or portions thereof including horses, mules, cows, or sheep equal to or greater than ten (10) pounds as
defined in section 12.04.001 above shall not be collected.
(c) Heavy accumulations. Heavy accumulations including bricks, broken concrete, lumber, other building materials, ashes, clinkers, cinders,
dirt, plaster, sand, gravel, automobile frames, dead trees, tree limbs, brush, and other heavy bulky materials shall be disposed at the expense of
the party responsible therefor under the direction of the superintendent of public works.
(d) Charge for use of city brush collection truck. When the superintendent authorizes the disposition of the items through use of the city owned
and operated brush collection trucks, the person responsible therefor shall be charged a fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this
code.
(e) Charge for use of front-end loader. Whenever it is necessary to use a front-end loader to collect brush to be disposed of by the city, the
person responsible therefor shall be charged and shall pay a fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for the use of such
front-end loader.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 3-E; Ordinance 78-14 adopted 11/8/78; Ordinance 92-11 adopted 10/1/92; 1994 Code, sec. 51.39; Ordinance
2015-34, sec. 1, adopted 11/17/15; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 12.04.065 Burning or burying waste; disposal within city prohibited
The disposal of garbage or rubbish by burning, burial or otherwise, at any place within the city limits or within 500 feet outside of such city limits,
shall constitute an offense punishable by fine as provided in section 1.01.009. However, the city council may on application of any political
subdivision of the state grant permission to such political subdivision to dispose of brush by burning the same within the corporate limits of the
city or within 500 feet outside thereof provided that the political subdivision obtains a permit for such burning from the state commission on
environmental quality. Any such permit granted by the city shall state the name of the political subdivision, the location of the proposed burn, and
the date of such burn. It may contain such other conditions as the city council may determine. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 4-B; Ordinance
91-10 adopted 8/1/91; 1994 Code, sec. 51.40)
Sec. 12.04.066 Rates and charges for collection service
(a) Residential service. There shall be charged and collected from each residence within the city, and from each residence outside of the city
which receives city solid waste collection service, a minimum billing period collection service charge as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix
A. Residential customers shall pay per pickup, per container for any additional pickups above normal schedule a fee as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A to this code for the 96-gallon poly carts.
(b) Commercial service.
(1) Minimum collection service charge. There shall be charged and collected from each business establishment within the city and
from each business establishment outside the city which receives city solid waste collection service the following minimum billing
period collection service charges set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A to this code.
(2) Customers outside city limits. Commercial customers outside the city limits shall receive once a week pickup, or if additional
weekly pickups are required, they shall pay for the additional pickups proportionally.
(3) Additional pickups. Commercial customers shall pay per pickup per container for any additional pickups above normal schedule
as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A to this code.
(4) Open top container (roll-off) fees.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/438
(A) Customers requesting and utilizing open top containers shall pay a one-time account charge as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A to this code, which includes delivery of the container to location site. Additionally, each customer utilizing
an open top container shall pay a container rental fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A to this code.
(B) Customers utilizing open top containers shall pay a per container transportation or trip charge as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A to this code, for each transport of waste to landfill and return to location site within service area. The
customer will also be charged the actual cost of disposal per yard of refuse assessed to the city by the disposal landfill site. For
service up to ten miles outside of service area, the fee will be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A.
(C) All customers requesting an open top container (roll-off) will be required to pay a minimum deposit of $500.00. The city will
consider the status of the customer's credit history to determine the deposit required as set forth in section 12.03.011 of the
city's code.
(D) It is the policy of the city to discontinue roll-off service to customers for reasons of nonpayment of bills as set forth in
sections 12.03.002 and 12.03.003 of the city's code.
(c) The city manager shall cause the monthly solid waste collection service charge to be billed through and collected by the city utility
department as a separate item on each utility bill or in such other reasonable manner as the city manager may from time to time direct.
(d) The collection service rates set out in appendix A shall be effective as of the date of the first utility billing mailed or delivered to customers
after the date of adoption of this section.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 3-G; Ordinance 72-17 adopted 10/5/72; Ordinance 81-20 adopted 10/1/81; Ordinance 89-01 adopted 2/2/89;
Ordinance 90-05 adopted 8/2/90; Ordinance 92-07 adopted 8/25/92; Ordinance 93-14 adopted 3/4/93; 1994 Code, sec. 51.41; Ordinance 96-04
adopted 4/4/96; Ordinance 96-06 adopted 7/2/96; Ordinance 97-16 adopted 7/3/97; Ordinance 97-25 adopted 10/2/97; Ordinance 97-28 adopted
12/4/97; Ordinance 98-22 adopted 9/3/98; Ordinance 00-14 adopted 5/9/00; Ordinance 01-09 adopted 3/8/01; Ordinance 01-24 adopted 11/1/01;
Ordinance 02-27 adopted 12/5/02; Ordinance 03-11 adopted 11/6/03; Ordinance 2006-15 adopted 9/14/06; Ordinance 2008-14 adopted 9/23/08;
Ordinance 2010-22 adopted 10/5/10; Ordinance 2011-26 adopted 9/6/11; Ordinance 2012-05 adopted 1/17/12; Ordinance 2014-05 adopted
1/28/14; Ordinance 2015-34, sec. 1, adopted 11/17/15; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code; Ordinance 2016-29 adopted 1/11/17)
Sec. 12.04.067 Average monthly payment plan
See section 12.03.014 of the electric service rates herein for the applicable optional payment plan. (1994 Code, sec. 51.42; Ordinance 00-16
adopted 6/1/00; Ordinance 2015-34, sec. 1, adopted 11/17/15)
Secs. 12.04.068–12.04.090 Reserved
Division 4. City Collection Center
Sec. 12.04.091 Compliance with regulations
No person shall place, dump, or dispose of any garbage or refuse at the designated city collection center of the city except in obedience to the
lawful directions of the superintendent of the environmental department. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 6-A; 1994 Code, sec. 51.55; Ordinance
2014-05 adopted 1/28/14)
Sec. 12.04.092 Charges; materials not accepted
(a) Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall be permitted to place or dispose of any garbage, rubbish or waste at any citizens'
collection station except upon payment of disposal charges as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) The citizens' collection station will not accept the following items:
(1) Materials classified as hazardous waste.
(2) Any other materials restricted by the landfill and/or the state commission on environmental quality.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 6-B; Ordinance 72-18 adopted 12/7/72; Ordinance 75-5 adopted 9/10/75; Ordinance 91-01 adopted 1/3/91;
Ordinance 92-10 adopted 10/1/92; 1994 Code, sec. 51.56; Ordinance 95-01 adopted 1/5/95; Ordinance 96-17 adopted 10/3/96; Ordinance 00-14
adopted 5/9/00; Ordinance 01-09 adopted 3/8/01; Ordinance 01-24 adopted 11/1/01; Ordinance 02-27 adopted 12/5/02; Ordinance 03-11
adopted 11/6/03; Ordinance 2006-15 adopted 9/14/06; Ordinance 2010-22 adopted 10/5/10; Ordinance 2011-02 adopted 1/11/11; Ordinance
2011-07 adopted 2/22/11; Ordinance 2011-26 adopted 9/6/11; Ordinance 2012-05 adopted 1/17/12; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 12.04.093 Collection of charges; issuance of receipt
It shall be the duty of the person in attendance at the city collection center to collect the pit charges and to issue a receipt for the same and to
deliver the same to the city manager. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 6-D; 1994 Code, sec. 51.57)
Sec. 12.04.094 Materials become property of city
All junk and other materials of the dumping ground are the property of the city and no person is allowed to separate and collect, carry off, or
dispose of same except under the direction of the superintendent of public works. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 3-C; 1994 Code, sec. 51.58)
Sec. 12.04.095 Charge for road use to access solid waste disposal site
The charge for the road use to access the city's solid waste disposal site shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(1994 Code, sec. 51.59; Ordinance 2013-21 adopted 6/25/13; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Secs. 12.04.096–12.04.120 Reserved
Division 5. Brush Disposal Site
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/438
Sec. 12.04.121 Findings of fact
All of the following premises are hereby found to be true and correct legislative and factual findings of the city council:
(1) The city owns and operates a brush disposal site located at the citizens' collection station, Highway 87, Cuero, Texas;
(2) This city facility furnishes a beneficial service for the residents of the community by providing a site for disposal of brush and
other related materials that are generated at residential sites in the city; and
(3) In considering the safety and welfare of city residents and the rules of the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ),
the city council recognizes the need for rules and regulations to govern the materials to be disposed, the sources of these materials,
and the proper permits and appropriate fees and charges for the disposal process.
(1994 Code, sec. 51.75; Ordinance 2009-07(A) adopted 5/7/09)
Sec. 12.04.122 Source of materials
The brush disposal site is available only to city residents and to permitted contractor haulers hauling brush from a residential property located
within the city's corporate boundaries and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). Contractor haulers may only dispose of brush that has been hauled
from residential property in the city, and must provide their permit and the address from which the brush or other authorized material was
generated, together with a contact name and telephone number of the owner or representative of the city property that was the source of the
material. (1994 Code, sec. 51.76; Ordinance 2009-07(A) adopted 5/7/09)
Sec. 12.04.123 Types of materials; disposal rules
(a) The facility is only for organic materials.
(b) Brush loads must only be placed in designated locations.
(c) No trash, plastic bags, construction materials, bricks, CMU blocks, municipal solid waste, hazardous waste, material from commercial or
industrial sites, or metal material is allowed.
(d) Bags holding organic material must be emptied and the bag removed from the site by the customer.
(e) To utilize the residential brush and chipping services provided by city crews, tree trunks must have diameters six inches or smaller.
(f) Vehicles must remain on designated roads, as other areas of this site are high security and must not be entered.
(1994 Code, sec. 51.77; Ordinance 2009-07(A) adopted 5/7/09)
Sec. 12.04.124 Registration of contractor haulers; prepaid ticket; identification for city residents
(a) Contractor haulers must be registered with the city utility office as a licensed contractor. Contractors may obtain a prepaid ticket card for
brush disposal from the city utility office. No disposal of brush will be allowed until the contractor presents a prepaid ticket. A prepaid ticket may
be immediately cancelled if it is determined that the brush is from an address or location outside of the city limits or its ETJ, or from a
nonresidential property. Cancellation will remain in effect for a one-year period, and the contractor hauler will be ineligible to use the city's brush
disposal site.
(b) In order to obtain a prepaid ticket card, the contractor hauler must pay in advance for the number of loads to be hauled for landscape
maintenance material or brush removal within the city limits or its ETJ.
(c) Residents within the city's corporate limits or its ETJ receiving garbage collection service by the city may utilize a recent city garbage bill,
driver's license, or picture ID to use the disposal site for disposal of brush from residential property for a charge as provided in section 12.04.127.
(1994 Code, sec. 51.78; Ordinance 2009-07(A) adopted 5/7/09)
Sec. 12.04.125 Proof of eligibility for use
All potential users of the brush disposal site must first check in with the recycle center monitor and show valid proof of their eligibility to use the
site, i.e.:
(1) A city resident should provide a copy of the most recent city garbage bill (along with driver's license or other valid identification);
and
(2) Contractor haulers must present a prepaid ticket card in order to dispose of brush at the disposal site.
(1994 Code, sec. 51.79; Ordinance 2009-07(A) adopted 5/7/09)
Sec. 12.04.126 City chipping and pickup service
(a) A qualified residential user of the city's brush disposal site may request the city to chip and pick up those materials as defined in section
12.04.123 above. Fees for same are as provided in section 12.04.127.
(b) The city shall not be responsible for any type of general land clearing service, nor shall it be responsible for chipping or hauling to the city
brush disposal site those materials produced from a resident's general land clearing of residential or commercial property. Land clearing
materials include those materials caused by the uprooting, cutting or clearing of vegetation in connection with the conversion for the construction
of buildings, rights-of-way, residential, commercial or industrial development, or the clearing of vegetation to enhance property value, access or
production.
(c) When in question as to whether materials may be chipped and/or removed by the city, it shall be left up to the discretion of the city
manager. The city manager's decision shall be final.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/438
(1994 Code, sec. 51.80; Ordinance 2009-07(A) adopted 5/7/09)
Sec. 12.04.127 Fees and charges
(a) Fee schedule. The fees and charges for brush disposal fees and charges shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this
code.
(b) Annual pass for city residential garbage customer. An annual residential brush disposal pass may be purchased and obtained at the city
utility office.
(c) Adjustment of fees and charges. Fees and charges may be adjusted on an annual basis if so approved by the city council, and listed in the
schedule of services and rates.
(1994 Code, sec. 51.81; Ordinance 2009-07(A) adopted 5/7/09; Ordinance 2013-22 adopted 7/23/13; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 12.04.128 Hours of operation
The hours of operation of the brush disposal site shall be listed on the city's website. These hours may be modified from time to time in order to
best serve the needs of city residents. (1994 Code, sec. 51.82; Ordinance 2009-07(A) adopted 5/7/09)
Secs. 12.04.129–12.04.150 Reserved
Division 6. Recycling Center
Sec. 12.04.151 Source of materials
The city recycling center is available to all in the community who have permitted recyclable materials. (Ordinance 2014-50, sec. II, adopted
12/9/14)
Sec. 12.04.152 Types of materials; disposal rules
(a) The city recycling center is only for materials that can be recycled as determined by the city. Those materials shall include wood, wood
pallets and wood products. All wood, wood pallets and wood products shall be free of all chemicals, varnish, and paint and shall be untreated.
There shall be no metal materials (excepting nails) attached to any wood, wood pallets and wood products.
(b) All recyclable materials must only be placed in designated locations at the recycling center.
(c) Wood, wood products, electronics, paper, #1 and #2 plastics, aluminum and steel cans, metal, cardboard and all rechargeable batteries are
accepted at the recycling center.
(d) The city reserves the right to refuse to accept any materials to be placed in the city recycling center.
(Ordinance 2014-50, sec. III, adopted 12/9/14)
Sec. 12.04.153 Taking disposed materials prohibited
No person shall be allowed to enter the city recycling center to collect or take possession of any pallets, wood, brush, recyclable materials or any
other garbage or refuse that has been previously disposed of at the recycling center. (Ordinance 2014-50, sec. IV, adopted 12/9/14)
Sec. 12.04.154 Fees and charges
(a) Fee schedule. The charges will be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) Adjustment of fees and charges. Fees and charges may be adjusted on an annual basis if so approved by the city council, and listed in the
schedule of services and rates.
(Ordinance 2014-50, sec. VI, adopted 12/9/14)
Sec. 12.04.155 Hours of operation
The hours of operation of the recycling center shall be listed on the city's website. These hours may be modified from time to time in order to best
serve the needs of the city residents. (Ordinance 2014-50, sec. VII, adopted 12/9/14)
ARTICLE 12.05 SEWER SYSTEM*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.05.001 Composition of sanitary sewer system
The sanitary sewer system of the city consists of main and lateral conduits of salt-glazed vitrified earthenware, or other similar pipe except
cement pipe, with necessary accessories, and are known herein as sanitary sewers. They are designated to carry off all liquid wastes. The
sewers in the alleys or streets adjacent to the various lots are called main or lateral sewers. The sewers leading from the main or lateral sewers
to the property on either side are called house sewers. (1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. I, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 52.01)
Sec. 12.05.002 Connection of cesspool, privy or open gutter to sewer or drain prohibited
No open gutter, cesspool or privy vault shall be connected with any sewer or drain. (1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. I, sec. 10; 1994 Code, sec. 52.02)
Sec. 12.05.003 Water closet required; tank and water for flushing
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/438
(a) In all cases where a privy or water closet is now or may hereafter be connected with the public sewer system, the owner controlling the
same or his agent shall cause the privy or closets to be supplied with water for flushing, which shall be delivered from a tank. The tank shall hold
not less than four gallons of water at each flushing and refill with water at a pressure of not less than 15 pounds to the square inch. The water
shall be conducted from the tank to the bowl of the privy or closet through a circular metallic pipe not less than one and one-fourth inches in
diameter.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building or premises within this city to use, or to permit anyone else to use, any privy
or water closet on the premises that is connected with the sewer system of the city, unless the same shall be used in connection with sufficient
water flowing into the sewer to keep the pipes connecting the privies or water closets with the sewers free from obstruction.
(c) It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building where people reside or are regularly employed, within reach of the sewer
systems as provided by this article, to fail to have at least one water closet connected with the city sewer system; except, where two adjoining
buildings are owned and operated by the same person, requires but one connection.
(1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. I, secs. 37, 38; 1994 Code, sec. 52.03)
Sec. 12.05.004 Maintenance of house sewer
The maintenance of all house sewers, from the city's main or lateral sewers, shall be the sole responsibility of the customer using the house
sewer. The city shall have no responsibility and shall bear no expense for the maintenance of the house sewer. (1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. I, sec.
38; 1994 Code, sec. 52.04)
Sec. 12.05.005 Injury or obstruction of sewer system
No person, firm or corporation shall injure, break, or remove any section of any manhole, lamp hole, flush tank, catchbasin, or any part of the
sewer system, or throw or deposit or cause to be deposited or thrown in any sewer openings or receptacles connecting with the sewer system
any garbage, offal, dead animals, vegetables, parings, ashes, cinders, rags, or other matter or thing whatsoever, except feces, urine and the
necessary waste toilet paper, liquid, and house and mill slops. (1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. I, sec. 11; 1994 Code, sec. 52.05(A))
Sec. 12.05.006 Depositing waste on or in ground
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, or allow to be thrown, or deposited upon the surface of the ground, or in any hole in or under the
surface of the ground where the premises are within the distance herein prescribed to be connected with the sewer, any water which has been
used for domestic or manufacturing purposes, or any liquid or solid filth, feces, or urine, after the 30-day period following the enactment and legal
publication of this article. (1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. I, sec. 38; 1994 Code, sec. 52.05(B))
Secs. 12.05.007–12.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 12.05.031 Plumbing inspector
The plumbing inspector shall be filled by appointment by the city manager. The person chosen to fill the office shall be of good moral character,
and shall be possessed of such executive ability, training and experience as is required for the performance of his duties of enforcing this article.
He shall receive the compensation and serve for the term as may be fixed by the governing body, and execute and deliver to the city a surety
bond in the principal amount of $1,000.00 conditioned upon the diligent and honest performance of his duties required of him by this article or
any other ordinance or law. The bond premium shall be paid by the city and the bond shall be satisfactory to the governing body. (1966 Code, ch.
19.0, art. I, sec. 1a; 1994 Code, sec. 52.85)
Sec. 12.05.032 Authority to stop or prevent harmful discharges
The city, acting through the plumbing inspector or other authorized officers, shall have the power to stop and prevent from discharging into the
sewer system any private sewer or drain through which substances are discharged which are liable to injure the sewers or obstruct the flow of
the sewage, or interfere with the operation of the disposal plant. (1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. I, sec. 13; 1994 Code, sec. 52.86)
Sec. 12.05.033 Publication of rules and regulations
It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector to issue a copy of these rules and regulations to every master plumber doing plumbing work on the
city sewer system, and to instruct the party for whom the work is being done in regard to the reasons for the establishment of these rules and
regulations for the protection of the city sewer system and the maintenance of the public health. (1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. I, sec. 36; 1994 Code,
sec. 52.87)
Secs. 12.05.034–12.05.060 Reserved
Division 3. Rates and Charges
Sec. 12.05.061 Monthly rates; miscellaneous charges
(a) Monthly charges; late payment. For the necessity of proper maintenance, operation and extension of the sanitary sewer system of the city,
the following monthly charges shall be paid by all users of the system:
(1) All persons connected to the sanitary sewer system of the city who have metered connections to the water system shall pay a
monthly sanitary sewer charge based upon their average monthly metered water usage during the preceding December, January and
February billing periods, or upon their actual metered water usage for the current billing period, whichever is less. For new residential
customers who have not established an average water usage during the December, January and February billing period, such
average shall be presumed to be 5,000 gallons. For all commercial customers, the monthly sanitary sewer charge shall be based on
their actual metered water consumption for the current billing period. Churches will not be considered commercial accounts, and thus
a church's monthly sanitary sewer charge shall be based on the average water usage during the December, January and February
billing period.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/438
(2) All customers connected to the city's sanitary sewer system who do not have metered connections to the city's water system
shall pay a monthly sanitary sewer charge based on 5,000 gallons of water per billing period unless a higher basis is set by the water
and sewer superintendent, or on the actual metered wastewater flow if a meter acceptable to the water and sewer superintendent is
installed.
(3) The charges and rates for sewer service furnished by the city are as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) Late payment; net and gross rate. The rates prescribed in subsection (a) are net. Net charges shall be due and payable within 17 days of
the billing date. In the event a current monthly bill is not paid within 17 days of the billing date, the gross rate shall apply.
(c) Restoration of service after termination for failure to pay bill. If any bill for sewer service is not paid within 22 days of the billing date, sewer
service to such customer shall be discontinued. Service may be restored to such customer upon payment in full of such delinquent account and
a restoration of service fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(d) Waiver of charges when no person living in residence. The minimum monthly service charge for wastewater shall be waived for any
customer who indicates in writing to the city that they will be absent from their residence for more than 90 days or has been admitted as a patient
in a long-term nursing care facility resulting in no person living in the residence being supplied the wastewater services. The waiver shall only be
effective for as long as no person resides in the residence.
(e) Trucked or hauled waste. The fee for trucked or hauled waste will be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code, if
assistance is needed from the city. The city reserves the right to adjust sampling and waste disposal fees at its sole discretion. Random
unannounced sampling of loads discharged at the plant will be conducted by the city throughout the year to test for prohibited waste products.
The city may reject and/or deny any future waste disposal at the discretion of the chief plant operator that is deemed harmful to the plant or is
believed to cause the plant to not be in compliance with its permit.
(f) Road use to access solid waste disposal site. The charge for the road use to access the city's solid waste disposal site shall be as set forth
in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. I, sec. 34; Ordinance 70-7 adopted 7/2/70; Ordinance 87-07 adopted 6/4/87; Ordinance 88-02 adopted 2/4/88;
Ordinance 90-11 adopted 11/1/90; Ordinance 93-06 adopted 6/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 52.60; Ordinance 97-15 adopted 7/3/97; Ordinance 99-18
adopted 7/1/99; Ordinance 00-25 adopted 9/7/00; Ordinance 01-15 adopted 7/10/01; Ordinance 02-26 adopted 12/5/02; Ordinance 2008-13
adopted 9/23/08; Ordinance 2010-04 adopted 2/2/10; Ordinance 2010-09 adopted 3/9/10; Ordinance 2011-33 adopted 10/4/11; Ordinance 2013-
23 adopted 7/23/13; Ordinance 2013-55 adopted 12/10/13; Ordinance 2014-48 adopted 10/28/14; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code; Ordinance
2016-27 adopted 1/11/17)
Sec. 12.05.062 Inspection fees
(a) (1) All master plumbers doing work under this article shall pay inspection fees as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A
of this code.
(2) Where the plumbing inspector is required to go to the same job more than once for the same inspection, he shall charge an
extra fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for each and every inspection after the first one, if construction is
contrary to, or not in accordance with, this article, the work is defective, the wrong address is given, or the work is not ready for
inspection.
(b) All fees shall be paid to the city plumbing inspector and by him paid into the general fund of the city.
(1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. I, sec. 35; 1994 Code, sec. 52.61)
Sec. 12.05.063 Fees for service calls
(a) The city sewer department shall charge and collect service fees as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) No charge shall be assessed to the customer if the stoppage is found to be in the city's sewer system.
(1994 Code, sec. 52.62; Ordinance 02-18 adopted 9/5/02; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 12.05.064 Average monthly payment plan
See section 12.03.014 for the applicable optional payment plan. (1994 Code, sec. 52.78; Ordinance 00-16 adopted 6/1/00)
Secs. 12.05.065–12.05.090 Reserved
Division 4. Industrial Wastes*
Sec. 12.05.091 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Approving authority. The city water and sewer superintendent (or other official designated by the city manager), or his duly authorized deputy,
agent, or representative.
BOD. The quantity of oxygen, expressed in parts per million by weight, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20° C. The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set
forth in Standard Methods.
Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning three feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the sewer or other place of disposal.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/438
City. The City of Cuero, Texas, or any authorized person acting in behalf of the city.
Domestic sewage. Waterborne wastes normally discharging into the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels),
office buildings, factories and institutions, free of storm and surface water and industrial wastes.
Garbage. Solid wastes and residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food
products and produce.
Industrial waste. Waterborne solids, liquids or gaseous wastes resulting from and discharged, permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial,
manufacturing or food processing operation or process, or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or
domestic sewage as distinct from normal domestic sewage.
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
Normal domestic sewage. Normal sewage for the city, in which the average concentration of suspended materials and five-day BOD is
established at 250 parts per million each, by weight.
Parts per million. A weight to weight ratio; the parts-per-million value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million
gallons of water.
Person, establishment, or owner. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm, company, industry, municipal or private
corporation, association, governmental agency, or other entity and its or their servants, agents, and employees.
pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in molecules per liter. It shall be determined by one of
the procedures outlined in Standard Methods.
Properly shredded garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to a degree that particles
shall be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
Public sewer. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights and interest, controlled by public authority.
Sanitary sewer. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm, surface and ground waters or
unpolluted industrial wastes are not intentionally passed.
Sewage. A combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with
the ground, surface and storm water as may be present.
Sewage service charge. The charge made on all users of public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values
established as representative of normal sewage.
Sewage treatment plant. Any city-owned facility, device, and structures used for receiving and treating sewage from the city sanitary sewer
system.
Sewage works. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage and industrial wastes, and would include sewage, as well
as the sewage treatment facilities.
Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage.
Sewerage. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial wastes.
Standard Methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition at the time of analysis of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American
Water Works Association and the Water Environment Federation.
Storm sewer or storm drain. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
Stormwater runoff. That portion of the rainfall that is drained into the sewers.
Surcharge. The charge in addition to the sewage service charge which is made on those persons whose waste loadings exceed those of normal
domestic sewage.
Suspended solids. Solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard
Methods.
Unpolluted water or waste. Water or waste containing none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acids or alkalis; phenols or other
substances imparting taste and odor in receiving water; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution; and noxious or
otherwise obnoxious odorous gases. It shall contain not more than ten parts per million each of suspended solids and BOD. The color shall not
exceed fifty parts per million.
Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. II, sec. 1; Ordinance 74-23 adopted 10/3/74; 1994 Code, sec. 52.70)
Sec. 12.05.092 Admission into public sewers
(a) Review and acceptance of the approving authority shall be obtained prior to the discharge into [from] downspouts, yard drains, yard
fountains and ponds or lawn sprays into any sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to the sewers as
are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the approving authority. Unpolluted processed water may be
discharged upon prior written approval of the approving authority to a storm sewer or natural outlet or into the sanitary sewer system by an
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/438
indirect connection whereby the discharge is cooled, if required, and flows into the sanitary sewer at a rate not in excess of three gallons per
minute, provided the waste does not contain materials or substances in suspension or solution in violation of the limits prescribed in this division.
(b) In cases where, in the opinion of the approving authority, the character of the sewage from any manufacturer or industrial plant building or
other premises is such that it will damage the system or cannot be treated satisfactorily in the system, the approving authority shall have the right
to require the user to dispose of the waste otherwise and prevent it from entering the system.
(c) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, either directly or indirectly, any of the following described substances, materials,
waters or waste:
(1) Any liquid having a temperature higher than 150° F (65° C), except with the approval of approving authority.
(2) Any solids, liquids or gases which by themselves or by interaction with other substances may cause fire or explosion hazards, or
in any other way be injurious to persons, property, or the operator of the sewage disposal works.
(3) Any solids, slurries, or viscous substances of the character as to be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or
other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, including ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical
residues, paint residues, or bulk solids.
(4) Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded. If properly comminuted or shredded, then it may be accepted
in subsection (c)(1) [sic] of this section above.
(5) Any noxious or malodorous substance which, either singly or by interaction with other substances, is capable of causing
objectionable odor or hazard to life, or forms solids in concentrations exceeding limits established in subsection (c)(2) [sic] of this
section above, or creates any other condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes, or requires unusual provisions,
alteration, or expense to handle the materials.
(6) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.5 or having any corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazards to structures, equipment, or personnel of sewage disposal works.
(7) Any wastes or waters containing suspended or dissolved solids of the character and quantity that unusual attention or expense
is required to handle the materials at the sewage treatment or in the public sewage works.
(8) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance, including plating or heat-treating wastes, in sufficient quantity
to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment [plant].
(9) Any waters or wastes containing concentrations of heavy metals greater than the following, stated in milligrams per liter:
Element mg/l
Arsenic 0.05
Barium 5.0
Boron 1.0
Cadmium 0.02
Chromium 5.0
Copper 1.0
Lead 0.1
Manganese 1.0
Mercury 0.005
Nickel 1.0
Selenium 0.02
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/438
Silver 0.1
Zinc 5.0
(10) Any radioactive wastes greater than allowable releases as specified by current United States Bureau of Standards Handbooks
dealing with the handling and release of radioactivity.
(d) Except in quantities or concentrations or with provisions as stipulated herein, it shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or individual to
discharge waters or wastes to the sanitary sewer containing:
(1) Free or emulsified oil and grease exceeding on analysis an average of 100 parts per million (833 pounds per million gallons) of
either or both or combinations of free or emulsified oil and grease, if, in the opinion of the approving authority, it appears probable that
the wastes:
(A) Can deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in the manner to clog the sewers.
(B) Can overload skimming and grease-handling equipment.
(C) Are not amenable to bacterial action and will therefore pass to the receiving waters without being affected by normal
sewage treatment processes.
(D) Can have deleterious effects on the treatment process due to excessive quantities.
(2) Any radioactive wastes greater than the allowable releases as specified by current United States Bureau of Standards
Handbooks dealing with the handling and release of radioactivity.
(3) Cyanide or cyanogen compounds capable of emanating hydrocyanic gas on acidification in excess of one-half part per million
by weight as CN in the wastes from any outlet into the public sewers.
(4) Materials which exert or cause:
(A) Unusual concentrations of solids or composition, as for example, in total suspended solids of inert nature (including fuller's
earth) and in total dissolved solids (including sodium chloride or sodium sulfate).
(B) Excessive discoloration.
(C) Unusual biochemical oxygen demand or an immediate oxygen demand.
(D) High hydrogen sulfide content.
(E) Unusual flow and concentration shall be pretreated to a concentration acceptable to the city, if the wastes can cause
damage to collection facilities, impair the processes, incur treatment cost exceeding those of normal sewage, or render the
water unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. Where discharges of the wastes to the sanitary sewer are not properly
pretreated or otherwise corrected, the approving authority may reject the wastes or terminate the service of water and sanitary
sewer, require control of the quantities and rates of discharge of the wastes, or require payment of surcharges for excessive cost
for treatment, provided the wastes are amenable to treatment by normal sewage plant facilities operated by the city. This
division also prohibits heavy metals and toxic materials, which include but are not limited to:
Antimony
Beryllium
Bismuth
Cobalt
Molybdenum
Rhenium
Strontium
Tellurium
Uranyl ion
Herbicides
Fungicides
Pesticides
(1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. II, sec. 2; Ordinance 74-23 adopted 10/3/74; 1994 Code, sec. 52.71)
Sec. 12.05.093 Control of admissible wastes
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/438
(a) Discharge permit required. Any person desiring to deposit or discharge any industrial waste mixture into the sewers or sewer works of the
city, or any sewer connected therewith, or who is now so doing, shall make application to the approving authority for a permit therefor upon
application forms to be obtained from him.
(b) Control chamber. Any person discharging or desiring to discharge an industrial waste mixture into the sewers or sewer works of the city, or
any sewer connected therewith, shall provide and maintain in a suitable, accessible position on his premises, or the premises occupied by him,
an inspection chamber or manhole near the outlet of each sewer, drain, pipe, channel, or connection which communicates with any sewer or
sewer works of the city or any sewer connected therewith. Each manhole or inspection chamber shall be of the design and construction which
will prevent infiltration by ground and surface waters or introduction of slugs of solids by installation of screens with maximum openings of one
inch, but of sufficient fineness to prevent the entrance of objectionable slugs of solids to the sanitary sewage system, and shall be so maintained
by persons discharging wastes so that any authorized representative or employee of the city may readily and safely measure the volume and
obtain samples of the flow at all times. Plans for the construction of control manholes or inspection chambers, including flow measuring devices
as may or may not be required, shall be approved by the approving authority prior to the beginning of construction.
(c) Measurement of flow. The water consumption during the previous month, as determined from the meter records of the water department,
shall be the valid basis for computing the sewage flow, unless actual sewage flow is measured by a recording, meter of a type approved by the
approving authority. The persons shall install and maintain the device in proper condition to accurately measure the flow. Upon failure to do so,
the water consumption shall be the basis for charges. When water is contained in a product or is evaporated or is discharged as unpolluted
waste in an uncontaminated condition to surface drainage, an application may be made for a reduction in the volume of waste discharged to the
public sewer, provided supporting data satisfactory to the approving authority is furnished. This data shall include a flow diagram, destination of
water supply and waste, supported by sub-metering data installed on the process piping at the expense of the person.
(d) Sampling of wastes. Sampling of the effluent of waste discharge may be accomplished manually or by the use of mechanical equipment to
obtain a composite sample which would be representative of the total effluent. [Samples shall be taken at intervals determined by the approving]
authority as necessary to maintain a control over the discharges from the establishment. The method used in the examination of all
bacteriological wastes to determine suspended solids, BOD and prohibited wastes shall be those set forth in section 12.05.091 of this division.
(1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. II, sec. 4; Ordinance 74-23 adopted 10/3/74; 1994 Code, sec. 52.72)
Sec. 12.05.094 Damaging or tampering with sewage works
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenances or
equipment which is part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct. (1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. II, sec. 5; Ordinance 74-23 adopted 10/3/74; 1994 Code, sec. 52.73)
Sec. 12.05.095 Surcharge for wastes of abnormal strength
(a) The sewage service charge for any person, firm, owner or corporation discharging industrial wastes into the system is 25% of the total cost
of water purchased by the owner for that billing period provided that the city meter is the only source of water used by the owner, and provided
that the BOD or the suspended solids in the wastewater does not exceed the normal concentration of 250 parts per million. In those cases where
the owner uses water other than city water, then the owner shall be required to install at his own expense a city water meter to measure the
volume of water used. The sewage service charge will then be computed on the basis of the city water rate as if the volume of water was
purchased from the city.
(b) When the total concentration of the BOD and the suspended solids added together exceeds 500 parts per million at the point entering the
city's system, a surcharge shall be applied to the base sewage service charge by multiplying the base charge by the factor obtained from dividing
the total of the actual measured BOD and suspended solids added together by 500. The surcharge will be applied only when the factor exceeds
one.
(c) The determination of BOD and suspended solids shall be by an independent laboratory selected by the city.
(d) Samples shall be taken in accordance with the provisions covered under section 12.05.093(d) of this division.
(e) When any tests made at the discretion of the city shows that a surcharge shall be applied, continued or increased over the base rate,
whichever is applicable, then the owner shall be billed at the rate set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for each test to cover
the costs of sampling, mailing and handling, plus the laboratory fees. When a surcharge is in effect, a test will be made at least once each 30
days. When the tests made at the discretion of the city reveals that the surcharge is no longer applicable, then no costs will be made to the
owner for the test or tests.
(1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. II, sec. 6; Ordinance 74-23 adopted 10/3/74; 1994 Code, sec. 52.74; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 12.05.096 Billing procedure; disconnection of service
(a) Industrial waste surcharges provided for in this division shall be included as a separate item on the regular bill for water and sewer charges
and shall be paid monthly in accordance with the existing practices. Surcharges shall be paid at the same time that the water, sewer and
sanitation charges of the person become due, and payment for water, sewer and sanitation services shall not be accepted without payment also
of sewer service charges and surcharges.
(b) Failure to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due, or failure to pay the established sewer charge for industrial
wastes when due, or repeated discharge of prohibited waste to the sanitary sewer, shall be sufficient cause to disconnect any and all services to
the water and sanitary sewer mains of the city, and the same penalties and charges now or hereafter provided for by the ordinances of the city
for failure to pay the bill for water service when due shall be applicable in like manner in the case of failure to pay the established surcharge for
industrial waste discharged to the sanitary sewer mains as established in section 12.05.095 of this division.
(1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. II, secs. 7, 8; Ordinance 74-23 adopted 10/3/74; 1994 Code, sec. 52.75)
Sec. 12.05.097 Powers and authority of enforcing agents
(a) The approving authority bearing credentials and identification shall be permitted to gain access to the properties as may be necessary for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with provisions of these regulations. Any person
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/438
found to be violating any provision of this division shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a
reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit shall be guilty of
violation of the service contract and shall be summarily disconnected from the sanitary sewer and water service. The disconnection and
reconnection would be at the total expense of the customer.
(b) Where acids and chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment processes are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these
structures, or interfering with proper treatment of sewage, the approving authority is authorized to immediately terminate services by the
measures as are necessary to protect the facilities.
(1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. II, sec. 9; Ordinance 74-23 adopted 10/3/74; 1994 Code, sec. 52.76)
Sec. 12.05.098 Failure to enforce does not constitute waiver
The failure on the part of the city to enforce any section, clause, sentence or provision of this division shall not constitute a waiver of the right of
the city to later enforce any section, clause, sentence or section of this division. (1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. II, sec. 11; Ordinance 74-23 adopted
10/3/74; 1994 Code, sec. 52.77)
ARTICLE 12.06 WATER SYSTEM*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.06.001 Supply of water not guaranteed
In the sale of water by the city to any person firm or corporation within and without the city limits, and in the supply of water for municipal use for
the protection of property against fires, the city does not agree nor is the city bound to furnish water of any special or specific analysis, or in any
special or specified amount, but only undertakes to furnish the water and the amount of water that may be supplied from the wells of the city, or
other sources as the city may select, and in an amount within the capacity of the city's pumping plants. (Ordinance adopted 7/12/48; 1966 Code,
ch. 23, art. I, sec. 1; 1994 Code, sec. 53.01)
Sec. 12.06.002 Compliance with rules and regulations
All patrons of the water system of the city, before being furnished water by the city, must agree and do agree to comply with the rules and
regulations of the city council, as well as all of the provisions of this article. (Ordinance adopted 7/12/48; 1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 2; 1994
Code, sec. 53.02)
Sec. 12.06.003 Applicability of regulations to customers outside city
All of the rules and regulations applicable to patrons within the city limits shall likewise be applicable to patrons without the city limits, except the
rates to be charged. (Ordinance adopted 7/12/48; 1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 4; 1994 Code, sec. 53.03)
Sec. 12.06.004 City not liable for damages by reason of failure of water system
In the event of accident by reason of which the city may become unable to supply water to the patrons of the city, within or without the city, or to
the municipality for the prevention or suppression of fire, the city will in no manner be liable for damages by reason of any failure to any patron of
the water system or to any person or persons whose property may have been destroyed by fire or otherwise damaged. (Ordinance adopted
7/12/48; 1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 3; 1994 Code, sec. 53.04)
Secs. 12.06.005–12.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 12.06.031 Supervision of system
(a) The superintendent of the city water department shall, under the direction of the city council, have full charge of the waterworks system of
the city, and all property, fixtures, appurtenances and supplies belonging thereto.
(b) The superintendent of the city water department shall see that all officers and employees of the water and sewer system of the city do their
duty and that the rules and regulations of the city council are complied with.
(1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 5; 1994 Code, sec. 53.70)
Sec. 12.06.032 Right of entry; right to temporarily shut off water in mains
Every patron of the waterworks system must agree, and does agree, that the superintendent of waterworks, or anyone acting under the direction
of the city council, shall at reasonable times be permitted to enter any premises or building in which water is used. It is expressly agreed and
must be understood that the city reserves the right at any time to shut off the water in the mains for the purpose of repairing the same, or making
connections or extensions to the same, or for the purpose of cleaning same, and in so doing the city shall not be liable in any manner for
damages. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 24; 1994 Code, sec. 53.71)
Sec. 12.06.033 Disposition of revenue
(a) All receipts from the waterworks system of the city shall be paid into the treasury of the city, the receipts to be disbursed by the council in a
manner as the council may direct.
(b) The city manager shall pay all sums of money coming into his hands, arising from the water system of the city, into the treasury of the city,
monthly, and shall make monthly reports to the city council.
(1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, secs. 4, 13; 1994 Code, secs. 53.26(B), 53.72)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/438
Sec. 12.06.034 Failure to comply with rules and regulations
The city shall not furnish water to any person unless the person has complied with all of the rules and regulations of the city waterworks system
in this article. If any patron of the city waterworks system violates any of the rules and regulations of the city waterworks system, the city shall
shut off the water from the premises of the violator, and the violator shall forfeit the unexpired term for which the violator has paid rent. (1966
Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 42; 1994 Code, sec. 53.73)
Secs. 12.06.035–12.06.060 Reserved
Division 3. Rates and Charges; Billing
Sec. 12.06.061 Monthly rates; connection charges
(a) All rates for water service shall be uniform and equal as they apply to separate classes of service, and no free service shall be granted.
(b) Charges for water connections to the city water system shall be as follows:
(1) Within 100 feet from existing line:
(A) Inside the city limits: 100% of actual cost to the city;
(B) Outside the city limits: 110% of actual cost to the city.
(2) One hundred feet or more from existing line:
(A) Inside the city limits: 100% of actual cost to the city plus 100% of any extraordinary expenses incurred by the city;
(B) Outside the city limits: 110% of actual cost to the city plus 110% of any extraordinary expenses to the city.
(3) A customer requesting connection to the water system shall be required to pay the city in advance of construction a sum of
money equal to the total estimated cost. Upon completion of such construction, the city manager shall cause the actual cost to be
determined, and if such costs exceed the estimated cost, the person contracting for same shall immediately pay to the city a sum of
money equal to the difference between the total actual cost and the estimated cost theretofore paid. If the actual cost is less than the
estimated cost, the city shall promptly refund to such customer a sum of money equal to the difference between the amount paid by
the customer on account of such estimate and the amount of the actual cost.
(c) For all meters larger than 5/8 inch, the charge shall be set by the city manager at an amount sufficient to cover the entire cost of the tap
and meter installation to the city.
(d) Rates for water consumed are based on the water consumed as registered by each consumer's meter and are set out in the fee schedule
in appendix A of this code.
(e) The charges and rates for water furnished by the city are as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(f) Wherever more than one residential unit is served through a single meter, as in the case of apartment houses and mobile home parks, the
minimum rate prescribed in the fee schedule shall be charged and collected each month for each residential unit so served through the meter. All
water delivered through the meter in excess of the monthly minimum multiplied by the number of residential units served through the meter shall
be charged and paid for in accordance with the regular schedule of rates set out in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 14; Ordinance 70-06 adopted 6/4/70; Ordinance 87-06 adopted 6/4/87; Ordinance 88-01 adopted 2/4/88;
Ordinance 90-10 adopted 11/1/90; Ordinance 92-14 adopted 11/5/92; Ordinance 93-07 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 53.55; Ordinance 98-
08 adopted 4/2/98; Ordinance 99-19 adopted 7/1/99; Ordinance 00-25 adopted 9/7/00; Ordinance 02-04 adopted 1/3/02; Ordinance 02-19
adopted 9/5/02; Ordinance 02-24 adopted 11/7/02; Ordinance 02-26 adopted 12/5/02; Ordinance 2008-13 adopted 9/23/08; Ordinance 2010-03
adopted 2/2/10; Ordinance 2010-08 adopted 3/9/10; Ordinance 2011-24 adopted 9/6/11; Ordinance 2013-54 adopted 12/10/13)
Sec. 12.06.062 Payment of charges
(a) Minimum water rents shall be due and payable monthly in advance, together with any charges for water used in excess of the minimum for
the preceding month. The rents and charges shall be due on the dates indicated on the patron's bill. Charges to customers for water service shall
be due and payable on or before the 17th of each month, and there shall be added to each account which is delinquent, the sum set forth in the
fee schedule in appendix A of this code as penalty. Water service to any person, firm or corporation whose account is more than 17 days
delinquent may be discontinued, and in addition to customary charges as heretofore set out there shall be a reconnect fee for resumption of
service.
(b) The advance minimum payment by persons procuring water service on any other date than the regular billing date, as set out in subsection
(a) above, shall be prorated as of the date of procuring the water service.
(1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, secs. 15, 16; 1994 Code, sec. 53.56; Ordinance 01-15 adopted 7/10/01; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code; Ordinance
2016-28 adopted 1/11/17)
Sec. 12.06.063 Failure to receive bill
Failure of any patron to receive a bill for water used shall be no excuse for nonpayment, and shall in no way operate to extend the discount
period provided for in this article. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 17; 1994 Code, sec. 53.57)
Sec. 12.06.064 Refunds
No patron of the city shall be entitled to any refund for the unexpired portion of any month for which the minimum charge had been made by
reason of discontinued use of water during the month. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 18; 1994 Code, sec. 53.58)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/438
Sec. 12.06.065 Separate charges to be made for each building
In all cases where two or more houses or buildings are now served, separate charges shall be made for each house and building and no
allowance shall be made for a vacancy of either house and building unless the owner shall furnish satisfactory proof to the city council that water
service to the house or building has been disconnected, and at the same time by a written application agree that, in the event of a reconnection,
the same shall be equipped and a separate charge paid therefor. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 38; 1994 Code, sec. 53.59)
Sec. 12.06.066 Reporting of change of occupancy
Where any person, firm or corporation moves from a house or building and the same is thereafter occupied by another person, firm or
corporation, the other person, firm or corporation shall be and is hereby required to report the change in occupancy to the city manager and to
pay to the city a fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. In the event that any person, firm or corporation moving into a
house or building where water service is already installed by the city fails to report the change in occupancy to the city manager, a fee as set
forth in the fee schedule in appendix A shall be charged when the change of occupancy is brought to the attention of the city manager, and
unless the sum is paid the water service shall be discontinued. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 40; 1994 Code, sec. 53.60; Ordinance adopting
2016 Code)
Sec. 12.06.067 Average monthly payment plan
See section 12.03.014 for the applicable optional payment plan. (1994 Code, sec. 53.61; Ordinance 00-16 adopted 6/1/00)
Secs. 12.06.068–12.06.100 Reserved
Division 4. Connections and Extensions
Sec. 12.06.101 General policies; meter deposit
It shall be the policy of the city to supply water to its patrons through mains and lines owned and controlled by the city, which shall be located as
far as practical in the streets between the curb and sidewalk lines or in the alleys or public utility easements adjacent to the property being
served. All lines constructed and all meters installed under the provisions of this article shall be the property of the city, and the city shall have full
jurisdiction and control over all the lines and meters. The location and size of all water meters shall be designated by the city. All water patrons
shall upon the installation of the meter pay a minimum deposit as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. The amount of the
deposit shall be based on the size of the meter and shall be set by the city manager. (Ordinance adopted 4/8/63; 1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec.
6(a); Ordinance adopted 8/13/64; Ordinance 65-4 adopted 3/10/65; 1994 Code, sec. 53.15)
Sec. 12.06.102 Application for service; connection fees
All persons desiring a connection to the city water system shall make written application for water service on a form to be prescribed by the city
manager. If the property to be served is on a dedicated street or alley or a dedicated public utility easement and within 100 feet of a line of
sufficient capacity to furnish the service in question under the opinion of the city manager, the applicant shall pay only the customary meter
deposit and connection service charge as elsewhere provided. In addition, the applicant shall pay 100% of all extraordinary costs of the project,
including but not limited to highway borings, railroad borings, manholes, pump stations, and the like, or other expenses caused by unusual
topography or engineering difficulties. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 6(b); 1994 Code, sec. 53.16; Ordinance 96-13 adopted 10/3/96)
Sec. 12.06.103 Duties of superintendent of waterworks
The superintendent of the city waterworks shall see that all patrons of the city water system shall obey the rules and regulations prescribed for
the management of the waterworks system of the city, and the superintendent of the city waterworks shall see that all persons using water have
paid for the same, and for this purpose shall keep a list of all patrons. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 11; 1994 Code, sec. 53.17)
Sec. 12.06.104 Permit for use of water; record of collections
All permits for the use of water shall be issued by the city manager, who shall collect the proper amount as per the rate established, the permit to
be granted only upon written request to the city manager, subject to the approval of the city council. The applicant, by the request for the use of
water, must agree and obligate himself or herself and does agree and obligate himself or herself to comply with all of the rules and regulations of
the city council. All collections for the use of water shall be evidenced by a stub, or duplicate bill, which shall show the date when made, from
whom collected, and the period covered by collections. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 12; 1994 Code, sec. 53.18)
Sec. 12.06.105 Approval of extensions; payment of costs
If the property to be served is farther than 100 feet from the nearest acceptable water line, then the city manager shall consider the feasibility of
the proposed extension in the light of engineering and topographical features, the planned work program of the city crews, and the other factors
as may be relevant. If in his judgment the application should be rejected, he shall note his reasons and his recommendations on the application
and refer the same to the city for approval or disapproval at its next regular meeting. If such application is approved by the city manager or by the
city council, then, in addition to the charges elsewhere provided for herein, the applicant shall be required to pay in cash in advance an off-site
extension charge equal to 100% of the actual cost for all distance in excess of 100 feet from the nearest accessible line, plus 100% of all
extraordinary costs of the project, including but not limited to highway borings, railroad borings, manholes, pump stations, and the like, or other
expenses caused by unusual topographical or engineering difficulties. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 6(c); 1994 Code, sec. 53.19; Ordinance 96-
13 adopted 10/3/96)
Sec. 12.06.106 Reimbursement for costs of off-site extensions
The city shall reimburse the applicant for the costs of off-site extensions as follows: For every water tap made on the off-site extension within a
period of ten years after the completion thereof, the city shall pay to the applicant the pro rata share of the total cost by the original customer of
the front footage of the property to be served belonging to the new customer; provided, however, that the applicant shall in no event be
reimbursed in a total aggregate amount greater than the amount of his actual contribution to the off-site construction. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I,
sec. 6(d); 1994 Code, sec. 53.21)
Sec. 12.06.107 Developed or semi-developed areas being served by private lines
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/438
In areas which are developed or semi-developed, and where water patrons are now being served by privately owned lines, the following
procedure will be followed:
(1) Upon an offer and tender by the owners of any existing mains or lines of a three-fourth inch or larger capacity, which have been
laid entirely in the streets or alleys of the city, the city will accept full ownership jurisdiction and control of the mains and lines, to and
including the meter, and in consideration therefor the city will assume all costs of operation and maintenance of the mains and lines
so accepted.
(2) The city shall continue to use the accepted mains to serve its water patrons so long as, in the judgment of the city water
department, the water service supplied is equal to the volume and pressure of the service at the time the mains or lines were
accepted by the city.
(3) If and when the mains shall, in the judgment of the city water department, fail to give adequate service because of loss of
volume or pressure, or have deteriorated beyond profitable repair, or have become a health hazard, the city shall install or cause to be
installed the lines or mains as are necessary to make the service adequate.
(4) During the process of the construction of the new mains or lines, each of the patrons then being served by the old main shall be
notified and requested by mail, on a regular form prepared by the city water department, to make application to have their water
service changed from the old to the new main. Any water patron making an application during the time of construction of the main
shall receive a $10.00 credit on the regular service charge.
(5) Water patrons so notified but failing to make the application for connection to the new main shall continue to be served by the
old main at their own risk. The city will cease to maintain or allow the maintenance of the mains or lines which have been paralleled or
replaced by new mains or lines. When leaks are discovered in the old mains, it shall be the duty of the city water superintendent to
close off or cause to be closed off the old main, and no further service shall ever be provided the mains or lines that have been so
closed off. Water patrons who may be affected by the discontinuance of service may make regular application for connection to the
new main, and upon the payment of the regular service charge, the connection shall be made by the city water department from the
new main to the water patron's meter, the location of which meter shall be designated by the city water department.
(6) In the event that the owners of the private mains or lines do not offer and tender the mains or lines to the city, and the city does
not accept them, the city will continue to serve the water patrons through the lines, but the city will not be responsible for the
maintenance or repair of the mains or lines, and the city shall not permit the repair or maintenance of any portion of the line which is
located in any street or alley. When breaks are discovered in the mains or lines, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of the city
water department to close off the mains, and no further service shall be provided through the mains so long as they remain private
property. Any patron on the main or line may make application to the city for a connection to the city water mains under sections
12.06.101, 12.06.102, 12.06.105 and 12.06.106.
(1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 7; 1994 Code, sec. 53.22)
Sec. 12.06.108 Service for new additions or subdivisions
Service for water patrons in new additions or subdivisions shall be provided in the manner prescribed by the subdivision regulations, as now
written or hereafter changed. (Ordinance adopted 4/8/63; Ordinance 65-4 adopted 3/10/65; 1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 8; 1994 Code, sec.
53.23)
Sec. 12.06.109 Supervision of laying of mains and pipes
All pipes or mains for the extension of the waterworks system of the city shall be laid under the management and control of the superintendent of
the city waterworks. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 9; 1994 Code, sec. 53.24)
Sec. 12.06.110 Maps of water system
The superintendent of the city waterworks shall keep in his office maps and plats of the city showing all mains and pipes laid or belonging to the
city, giving the size of same, and showing the locations of all valves and fire hydrants. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 10; 1994 Code, sec. 53.25)
Sec. 12.06.111 Persons authorized to make taps
No plumber or other person, except the superintendent of the water department, or other person acting under the direction of the city council,
shall be allowed to tap any city main or any service pipe. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 25; 1994 Code, sec. 53.26(A))
Sec. 12.06.112 Minimum distance between taps
In no case shall taps in the city water mains be closer than 12 inches apart. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 31; 1994 Code, sec. 53.26(C))
Sec. 12.06.113 Cross-connections
(a) Cross-connection between piping receiving water from city water mains and piping receiving water from any other source or storage is
positively forbidden, and the city reserves the right when it discovers the existence of any cross-connection to immediately and without further
notice disconnect the service connecting the piping with the city mains. Anyone desiring to use water from some other source in addition to the
city connection may do so by using a storage tank and delivering the city water supply into the tank four inches above the overflow and through a
pipe having at least a four-inch air space between its discharge end and the surface of the water in the tank. The water from the other source
may then be piped into the tank and the service lines taken from the tank in any manner desired.
(b) If inflow from a city water main to a swimming pool or other storage of water is below overflow level a cross-connection exists.
(1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 23; 1994 Code, sec. 53.27)
State law reference–Backflow prevention, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 1301.501.
Sec. 12.06.114 Service lines
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/438
(a) All service lines shall be of Mueller's copper service pipe, or copper pipe of similar construction and equal in quality, or of cast iron. In no
case shall any wrought iron, steel pipe or malleable fittings be used in a service line in a street or alley.
(b) The city waterworks system shall cause to be placed in each service line two stops, one inside and one outside the property line. In cases
where the service line is one inch or smaller, the stops shall be Mueller's H-15275 round way ground key curb stop, solid “T” handle, or a stop of
similar construction and equal in quality.
(c) Where the service line is of a size 1.25 inch or larger, the stops shall be a disk valve.
(d) All stops outside the property line, as aforesaid, shall be for the exclusive use of the city and shall be under the exclusive control of the city.
(e) Where a two-inch gate valve or smaller size is used, the same shall be connected to the copper service pipe with Mueller's H-15425
copper connection, or a copper connection of similar construction and equal in quality, or a brass or copper nipple.
(1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 26; 1994 Code, sec. 53.28)
Sec. 12.06.115 Extending line across street or alley
No water line is to be extended by any individual, firm, or corporation across a street or alley for the purpose of watering any fowl or animal of
whatsoever kind or nature, or for the purpose of furnishing water for plant life, or for any other purpose. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 39; 1994
Code, sec. 53.20)
Sec. 12.06.116 Charge for broken water cut-off
The charge for the repair and/or replacement of a broken water cut-off shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. (1994
Code, sec. 53.29; Ordinance 02-19 adopted 9/5/02; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Secs. 12.06.117–12.06.150 Reserved
Division 5. Water Meters
Sec. 12.06.151 Meters required
Water from the city waterworks system shall be sold and delivered by the city through its mains to patrons at whose premises water meters have
been installed and to those patrons at whose premises water meters may hereafter be installed, from water meter readings and water meter
computations only. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 32; 1994 Code, sec. 53.40)
Sec. 12.06.152 Each meter constitutes separate service
Each meter installed at any premises shall constitute a separate service and must be paid for. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 33; 1994 Code,
sec. 53.41)
Sec. 12.06.153 Separate meter required for each patron
Each patron making connection with the city water system shall have a separate meter, and no new connection shall be made by the city unless
the patron is separately metered. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 34; 1994 Code, sec. 53.41)
Sec. 12.06.154 Billing when meter serves more than one building
In existing cases where more than one building is served by a single meter, the entire amount of water consumed and registered through the
meter shall be billed to the building nearest the meter and shall include an additional minimum for each and every other building served by the
meter, and the procedure shall continue until the buildings are separately metered. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 35; 1994 Code, sec. 53.42)
Sec. 12.06.155 Meters and billing for tourist camps
Any number of houses on one plot of ground owned by one person and constituting a bona fide tourist camp shall be entitled to water service
from one meter. In all cases, however, where the owner's or manager's residence, store and filling station are conducted in connection with the
tourist camp, the residence, store and filling station shall each be equipped with a separate meter and a separate charge made therefor, unless
the residence, store and filling station be situated within a single building, in which case a single meter shall suffice for the residence, store and
filling station and one charge shall be made therefor. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 36; 1994 Code, sec. 53.43)
Sec. 12.06.156 Estimation of charge when meter fails to register actual consumption
If a meter fails to register the water actually consumed by reason of the register or meter getting out of order, the city water department may
estimate the charge by the normal consumption, taking into consideration the season of the year. This estimation may be based on the
consumption either before or after the period that the meter fails to register the water consumed. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 20; 1994 Code,
sec. 53.45)
Sec. 12.06.157 Testing of meter
If a patron complains of the charges for water service supplied to him and demands that the meter supplying his premises be tested, the city
water department may remove the meter and submit it for testing with an appropriate company authorized to provide such testing service. If the
meter is found to register in error more than 2% fast, the city shall make an appropriate adjustment. If, however, the meter does not register in
error of more than 2% fast, the consumer shall pay the actual cost of testing plus one service call charge fee. The actual cost of testing, based
upon current rates, shall be determined and provided to the customer prior to the actual test. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 21; Ordinance 93-12
adopted 3/4/93; 1994 Code, sec. 53.46; Ordinance 00-26 adopted 10/5/00; Ordinance 02-19 adopted 9/5/02)
Sec. 12.06.158 Relocation of meter
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/438
If a water consumer of the city requests the relocation of a water meter located on property owned, leased or managed by them, then there will
be a charge as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for each water meter relocated. (1994 Code, sec. 53.47; Ordinance 00-05
adopted 2/3/00; Ordinance 02-19 adopted 9/5/02; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. 12.06.159 Meter service call charge
There will be a charge as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for meter service calls made by the city to water consumers.
(1994 Code, sec. 53.48; Ordinance 00-05 adopted 2/3/00)
Sec. 12.06.160 Obstruction of meter
(a) No person, firm or entity shall allow the accumulation of any form of debris on or around a water meter that prevents the city from reading
the water meter.
(b) Upon conviction the defendant shall be fined as provided in section 1.01.009.
(1994 Code, sec. 53.49; Ordinance 2005-25 adopted 12/1/05)
Secs. 12.06.161–12.06.190 Reserved
Division 6. Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control*
Sec. 12.06.191 Purpose; responsibilities of water purveyor and consumer
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this division is:
(1) To protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the
consumer's internal distribution system(s) or the consumer's private water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could
backflow into the public water system;
(2) To promote the discovery, and elimination or control, of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the consumer's
potable water system(s) and nonpotable water system(s), plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and
(3) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically and effectively
prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.
(b) Responsibilities of water purveyor and consumer. The water purveyor is responsible for delivering safe, clean potable water to the
consumer's service connection and for the enforcement of this division. The consumer is responsible for maintaining his private water system to
insure that no unprotected cross-connections or unacceptable plumbing arrangements are permitted to exist on his premises, and that no
pollutants nor any other material enters his water system. If, in the judgment of the water purveyor, in accordance with this division and its
references, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required (at the consumer's water service connection and/or within the consumer's
private water system) for the safety of the water system, the water purveyor's designated agents shall give notice in writing to the consumer to
install such an approved backflow prevention assembly(s) at a specific location(s) on his or her premises. The consumer shall within the stated
time period install such backflow prevention assembly(s) at the consumer's own expense, and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the
consumer to install and have tested and maintained said assembly(s) shall constitute grounds for denying and/or discontinuing water service to
the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met. The existence of a serious threat to the integrity of the city water supply shall
be considered sufficient grounds for immediate termination of water service.
(1994 Code, sec. 53.80; Ordinance 00-21 adopted 9/7/00)
Sec. 12.06.192 Adoption
The city council hereby adopts the City of Cuero Cross-Connection Control and Backflow Prevention Program, Version 2017.1, and appendices,
as published and filed with the city secretary, as the official backflow and cross-connection control program of the city for regulating the
installation, alteration, repair, testing, and maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies and devices within the city, and said code is hereby
referred to, incorporated herein and made a part of this code. The city council hereby expressly adopts any and all subsequently published
editions to said code together with all appendices and amendments thereof as the official backflow and cross-connection control program of the
city, each subsequently published addition to be effective as of the date a published copy thereof is filed in the office of the city secretary and
stamped with the seal of the city. (Ordinance 2017-28 adopted 12/1/17)
Editor's note–Former section 12.06.192 pertaining to definitions was repealed and deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 2017-28 adopted 12/1/17. Prior to the
deletion, this section derived from the 1994 Code, sec. 53.81 and Ordinance 00-21 adopted 9/7/00.
Sec. 12.06.193 Authority to make additional regulations and appeals
(a) Authority to make additional regulations; conflicts with plumbing codes. The city manager is authorized to make all necessary and
reasonable rules and policies with respect to the enforcement of this division. All such rules and policies shall be consistent with the provisions of
this division. Where provisions in this division differ with backflow requirements of the city plumbing codes, this division shall regulate.
(b) Appeals.
(1) The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the water purveyor
to the construction board of adjustments and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist:
(A) The water purveyor rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or
materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system.
(B) The provisions of this division do not apply to the specific case.
(C) An equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/438
(D) The true intent and meaning of this division or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly
interpreted.
(2) Notice of appeal shall be in writing, addressed to the board and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is rendered by
the water purveyor.
(Ordinance 2017-28 adopted 12/1/17)
Editor's note–Former section 12.06.193 pertaining to requirements was repealed and deleted in its entirety by Ordinance 2017-28 adopted 12/1/17. Prior to
the deletion, this section derived from the 1994 Code, sec. 53.82 and Ordinance 00-21 adopted 9/7/00.
ARTICLE 12.07 IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM
Sec. 12.07.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
Covered account. An account whereby an entity (such as a municipal utility) provides a service or good before the consumer pays for it. For
example, the city provides utilities to the customer and then bills the customer later based on consumption.
Identity theft. Fraud committed using the identifying information of another person.
Red flag. A pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of theft.
(1994 Code, sec. 39.07; Ordinance 2009-29 adopted 12/1/09)
Sec. 12.07.002 Red flags
Suspicious personal identifying information, suspicious documents, suspicious account activity and alerts from others:
(1) Documents provided for identification appear to be altered, forged or inauthentic;
(2) The photograph or physical description on the identification is not consistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer
presenting identification;
(3) Other information on the identification is not consistent with information provided by the person opening a new covered account
or customer presenting the identification;
(4) Other information on the identification is not consistent with readily accessible information that is on file for the customer (such
as inconsistent birth dates);
(5) The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other persons opening an account or other customers;
(6) The person opening the covered account or the customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an
application, or [sic] (however, by law social security numbers must not be required);
(7) Mail sent to the customer is repeatedly returned as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection
with the customer's covered accounts; and
(8) The city is notified by a customer, a victim of identity theft, a law enforcement authority or any other person that it has opened a
fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft.
(1994 Code, sec. 39.01; Ordinance 2009-29 adopted 12/1/09)
Sec. 12.07.003 Detecting red flags
In order to facilitate detection of the above-referenced red flags, the city:
(1) Obtains identifying information about and verifies the identity of a person opening a covered account. For example, obtaining a
suitable, current, valid and verifiable identification, such as a current driver's license or other form of U.S. government issued
identification.
(2) Authenticates customers, monitors transactions and verifies the validity of change of address requests in the case of existing
covered accounts. For example, verifies with the customer a current driver's license or other form of U.S. government issued
identification prior to making changes to the account or providing account information either in person or over the phone.
(1994 Code, sec. 39.02; Ordinance 2009-29 adopted 12/1/09)
Sec. 12.07.004 Preventing and mitigating identity theft
(a) The city's identity theft program provides for appropriate responses to the red flags that have been detected. Appropriate responses may
include the following:
(1) Monitoring a covered account for evidence of identity theft;
(2) Contacting the customer;
(3) Changing any passwords, security codes or other security devices that permit access to a covered account;
(4) Reopening a covered account with a new account number;
(5) Not opening a new covered account;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/438
(6) Closing an existing covered account;
(7) Not attempting to collect on a covered account or not selling a covered account to a debt collector;
(8) Notifying law enforcement; or
(9) Determining that no response is warranted under the particular circumstances.
(b) In order to further prevent the likelihood of identity theft occurring with respect to utility accounts, the city will take the following steps with
respect to its internal operating procedures to protect customer identifying information:
(1) Ensure that its website is secure or provide clear notice that the website is not secure;
(2) Ensure complete and secure destruction of paper documents and computer files containing customer information;
(3) Ensure that office computers are password protected and that computer screens lock after a set period of time;
(4) Keep offices clear of papers containing customer information;
(5) For verification purpose, request only the last four digits of social security numbers;
(6) Ensure computer virus protection is up to date; and
(7) Require and keep only the kinds of customer information that are necessary for utility purposes.
(1994 Code, sec. 39.03; Ordinance 2009-29 adopted 12/1/09)
Sec. 12.07.005 Updates to program
The city will update the identity theft prevention program (including the red flags determined to be relevant) periodically, to reflect changes in
risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city from identity theft, based on factors such as:
(1) The experiences of the city with identity theft;
(2) Changes in methods of identity theft;
(3) Changes in methods to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft;
(4) Changes in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains;
(5) Changes in the business arrangements of the city, including service provider arrangements; and
(6) Any other factors the city deems necessary.
(1994 Code, sec. 39.04; Ordinance 2009-29 adopted 12/1/09)
Sec. 12.07.006 Methods of administering program
(a) Oversight of program. The city's identity theft program has been adopted by the city council and will be reexamined as circumstances
warrant. The program administrator (finance director) will:
(1) Assign specific responsibility for the program's implementation and oversee daily activities of the program to assure red flags
are monitored;
(2) Review reports prepared by staff regarding compliance by the city; and
(3) Recommend material changes to the program as necessary to address changing identity theft risks.
(b) Reports and review. In general, the program administrator, who is responsible for development, implementation and administration of its
program, will report to senior management annually and present reports to the city council as needed.
(1) Contents of report. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as:
(A) The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the
opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts;
(B) Service provider arrangements whenever the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one
or more covered accounts. The city will take steps to ensure that the activity of the service provider is conducted in accordance
with reasonable policies and procedures designed to detect, prevent and mitigate the risk of identity theft;
(C) Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and
(D) Recommendations for material changes to the program.
(2) Review. This policy will be reviewed and modified as warranted.
(1994 Code, sec. 39.05; Ordinance 2009-29 adopted 12/1/09)
Sec. 12.07.007 Third party vendors
In the event a third party vendor is involved in a client transaction with a city customer, every effort will be made to ensure the protection of the
customer's identity and information as required by the FACT Act. (1994 Code, sec. 39.06; Ordinance 2009-29 adopted 12/1/09)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/438
ARTICLE 12.08 ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTED GENERATION
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.08.001 Short title
This article shall be known and cited as the distributed generation ordinance. (Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.002 Intent
This article is intended to provide for the orderly, safe and effective interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation facilities within
the city electric system by customers of the city. (Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.003 Authority
The city is authorized to enact this article by the Public Utility Regulatory Act, Texas Util. Code Ann. section 31.005 (Vernon 1998 & Supp. 2005)
(PURA) and successors, which authorizes and encourages electric utilities to establish customer option programs that encourage the reduction
of air contaminant emissions including distributed energy generation technology. Also, the Public Utility Regulatory Act, Texas Util. Code Ann
section 39.101 (b)(3) (Vernon 1998 & Supp. 2005) (PURA) entitles all state electric customers to access to on-site distributed generation. Finally,
the state Public Utility Regulatory Act, Texas Util. Code Ann section 39.916 (Vernon 1998 & Supp. 2005) (PURA) and its successors authorizes
electric utilities to establish requirements for and allow the interconnection and parallel operation of distributed renewable generation, and
requires the public utility commission of the state to promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation of interconnection and parallel
operation of distributed renewable generation. (Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.004 Definitions
As applied in this article, the following words and terms shall be used:
City manager. The city manager and/or his/her duly authorized representative.
Commission. The public utility commission of the state.
Customer. An entity interconnected to the city electric system for the purpose of receiving or exporting electric power from or to the city electric
system.
Distributed generation. An electrical generating facility located at a customer's point of delivery (point of common coupling) of ten megawatts
(MW) or less and connected at a voltage less than 60 kilovolts (kV) which may be connected in parallel operation to the city electric system.
Interconnection. The physical connection of distributed generation to the utility system in accordance with the requirements of this article so that
parallel operation can occur.
Networked secondary. Two or more utility primary distribution feeder sources electrically tied together on the secondary (low voltage) side to
form one power source for one or more customers. The service is designed to maintain service to the customers even after the loss of one of
these primary distribution feeder sources.
Parallel operation. The operation of distributed generation by a customer while the customer is connected to the city electric system.
Point of interconnection (point of service, point of common coupling). The point where the electrical conductors of the city utility system are
connected to the customer's conductors and where any transfer of electric power between the customer and the city utility system takes place,
such as switchgear near the meter.
Pre-certified equipment. A specific generating and protective equipment system or systems that have been certified as meeting the applicable
parts of this article relating to safety and reliability by an entity approved by the commission.
Stabilized. The city electric system shall be considered stabilized when, following a disturbance, the system returns to the normal range of
voltage and frequency for a duration of two minutes.
(Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.005 Applicability
This article applies to all persons or entities that desire to interconnect or operate in parallel a distributed generation system within the city
electric system. (Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.006 Application and agreement required
(a) Before a person or entity may interconnect or operate in parallel a distributed generation system within the city electric system, that person
or entity must apply with the city on the form provided by the city (an example is attached to Ordinance 2017-12 as exhibit A) and execute an
agreement with the city that establishes the terms and conditions for the interconnection and parallel operation of the distributed generation
system. The agreement shall be in the general form of the agreement in exhibit B attached to Ordinance 2017-12.
(b) The city council hereby delegates to the city manager the authority to execute agreements with customers for the interconnection and
parallel operation of distributed generation within the city electric system in accordance with this article, the public utility commission of the state
rules and regulations, and in accordance with all state and federal laws applicable. The agreement shall not vary substantially in form and intent
from exhibit B of Ordinance 2017-12.
(c) Substantial changes to the form and/or intent of the agreement in exhibit B attached to Ordinance 2017-12 must be approved by the city
council before the execution of the agreement.
(d) The interconnection shall not be energized prior to the execution of the agreement as required herein.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/438
(e) The application, exhibit A attached to Ordinance 2017-12, may be modified from time to time by the city manager as is required for smooth
processing of applications.
(Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.007 Utility contact person
(a) Per the P.U.C. SUBST. R. 25.11(I), the city manager shall designate the appropriate city staff member or members as contact person or
persons for all matters related to distributed generation interconnection.
(b) The city manager shall identify to the public utility commission of the state the contact person or persons for all matters related to
distributed generation interconnection.
(c) The city manager shall cause the city internet website to provide convenient access through the internet website to the names, telephone
numbers, mailing addresses and electronic mail addresses for the distributed generation contact person or persons.
(d) The designated contact person or persons shall review applications for distributed generation with attached technical documentation and
determine compliance with the city technical requirements for interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation.
(e) When satisfied that a customer has complied with the application requirements and that the customer's system complies with the technical
requirements for interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation, the contact person shall recommend to the city manager that an
agreement be executed with the customer for the interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation. The city manager shall review
the application and technical information submitted, and if the city manager finds that the customer has complied with the application
requirements and that the customer's system complies with the technical requirements for interconnection and parallel operation of distributed
generation, the city manager shall execute an agreement with the customer substantially in the form attached to Ordinance 2017-12 as exhibit B.
(Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Secs. 12.08.008–12.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Technical Requirements
Sec. 12.08.031 General requirements
(a) All interconnections shall comply with P.U.C. SUBST. R. 25.212 and successors. In addition, all interconnections shall comply with
applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
(b) All interconnections shall comply with local building and electric codes as adopted by the city. Installation of all interconnections shall be
inspected by the city. Inspection and approval of the installation by the city is a condition of interconnection and parallel operation of distributed
generation.
(c) Variations from the technical requirements herein must be reviewed and approved by the city manager prior to implementation. Variations
in the point of interconnection must be approved by the city manager and included in the agreement approved by the city council.
(Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.032 Manual disconnect
The customer shall provide and install a manual load break switch that provides clear indication of the switch position at the point of
interconnection to provide separation between the city's electrical system and the customer's electrical generation system. The location of the
disconnect switch must be approved by the city. The disconnect switch shall be easily visible, mounted separately from metering equipment,
readily accessible to city personnel at all times, and capable of being locked in the open position with a city padlock. The city reserves the right to
open the disconnect switch isolating the customer's electrical generating system (which may or may not include the customer's load) from city
electrical system for the following reasons:
(1) To facilitate maintenance or repair of the city electrical system.
(2) When emergency conditions exist on the city electrical system.
(3) When the customer's electrical generating system is determined to be operating in a hazardous or unsafe manner or unduly
affecting the city electrical system waveform.
(4) When the customer's electrical generating system is determined to be adversely affecting other electric consumers on the city
electrical system.
(5) Failure of the customer to comply with applicable codes, regulations and standards in effect at the time.
(6) Failure of the customer to abide by any contractual arrangement or operating agreement with the city.
(Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.033 Power quality
(a) Voltage. The city shall endeavor to maintain the distribution voltages on the electrical system but shall not be responsible for factors or
circumstances beyond its control. The customer shall provide an automatic method of disconnecting generation equipment from the city electrical
system within 10 cycles should a voltage deviation greater than +5% or -10% from normal be sustained for more than 30 seconds (1800 cycles)
or a voltage deviation greater than +10% or -30% from normal be sustained for more than 10 cycles. If high or low voltage complaints or flicker
complaints result from the operation of the customer's electrical generation, the customer's generating system shall be disconnected until the
problem is resolved.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/438
(b) Frequency. The city shall endeavor to maintain a 60-hertz nominal frequency on the electrical system. The customer shall provide an
automatic method of disconnecting generation equipment from the city electrical system within 15 cycles should a deviation in frequency of
+0.5Hz or -0.7Hz from normal occur.
(c) Harmonics. In accordance with IEEE 519, the total harmonic distortion (THO) of voltage shall not exceed 5% of a pure sine wave of 60-
hertz frequency or 3% of the 60-hertz frequency for any individual harmonic when measured at the point of interconnection with the city electrical
system. Also, the total current distortion shall not exceed 5% of the fundamental frequency sine wave. If harmonics beyond the allowable range
result from the operation of the customer's electrical generation, the customer's generating system shall be disconnected until the problem is
resolved.
(d) Flicker. The distributed generation facility shall not cause excessive voltage flicker on the city electrical system. This flicker shall not
exceed 3% voltage dip, in accordance with IEEE 519 (Section 10.5), as measured at the point of interconnection.
(e) Power factor. The customer's electrical generation system shall be designed, operated and controlled at all times to provide reactive power
requirements at the point of interconnection from 0.95 lagging to 0.95 leading power factor. Induction generators shall have static capacitors that
provide at least 95% of the magnetizing current requirements of the induction generator field. The city may, in the interest of safety, authorize the
omission of capacitors. However, where capacitors are used for power factor correction, additional protective devices may be required to guard
against self-excitation of the customer's generator field.
(Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.034 Loss of source
The customer shall provide approved protective equipment necessary to immediately, completely and automatically disconnect the customer's
electrical generation equipment from the city electrical system in the event of a fault on the customer's system, a fault on the city system or loss
of source on the city system. Such protective equipment shall conform to the criteria specified in UL 1741 and IEEE 1547. The customer's
generating system shall automatically disconnect from the grid within 10 cycles if the voltage on one or more phases falls and stays below 70%
of nominal voltage for at least 10 cycles. The automatic disconnecting device may be of the manual or automatic reclose type and shall not be
capable of reclosing until after the city service voltage and frequency are restored to within the normal operating range and the system is
stabilized. (Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.035 Coordination and synchronization
The customer shall be solely responsible for coordination and synchronization of the customer's electrical generating system with all aspects of
the city electrical system, and the customer assumes all responsibility for damage or loss that may occur from improper coordination and
synchronization of its generating system with the city electrical system. (Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.036 Metering
The actual metering equipment required, its voltage rating, number of phases and wires, size, current transformers, number of input and
associated memory is dependent upon the type, size and location of the electric service provided. The customer shall pay for the installation of
the data recorder (meter) that is capable of measuring the “Delivered KWh” (energy delivered by the city); the “Received KWh” (energy delivered
to the city by the customer) using a single meter or two-meter configuration. Additionally, for all customers, the city reserves the right to install, at
its own expense, a meter to measure the output of the DG system. (Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.037 Interconnection study
The city will determine whether an interconnection study is necessary, based on relevant engineering factors including the output of the system,
the location of the system and other city distribution system factors. If the interconnection study is deemed necessary, the city shall perform the
study under reasonable terms and conditions agreed upon by both the customer and city and at the customer's sole expense. No study fee will
be charged if the proposed generation site is not on a networked secondary and if all of the following apply:
(1) Proposed generation equipment is pre-certified.
(A) Generation equipment that are less than 20 kW AC shall be considered pre-certified if a UL 1741 listed inverter that also
meets IEEE 1547 specifications is used. For solar PV installations, to be pre-certified system must have UL 1703 listed PV
modules.
(2) Proposed generation system does not expect to export more than 15% of total load on the feeder.
(3) Proposed generation system does not contribute more than 25% of the maximum possible short circuit current of the feeder.
(Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.038 Protection
The distributed generation facility must have interrupting devices capable of interrupting the maximum available fault current, an interconnection
disconnect device, a generator disconnect device, an over-voltage trip, an under-voltage trip, an over/under frequency trip and a manual or
automatic synchronizing check (for facilities with standalone capability). Facilities rated over 10 kW, three phase, must also have reverse power
sensing and either a ground over-voltage or a ground over-current trip depending on the grounding system. Grounding shall be done in
accordance with UL 1741, IEEE 1547 and NEC article 250. (Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.039 Three-phase generators
(a) Synchronous machines.
(1) The distributed generation facility's circuit breakers shall be three-phase devices with electronic or electromechanical control.
(2) The customer is solely responsible for proper synchronization of its generator with the city system.
(3) The excitation system response ratio shall not be less than 0.5.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/438
(4) The generator's excitation system shall conform to the field voltage versus time criteria specified in ANSI Standard C50. 13-
1989.
(b) Induction machines. The induction machines used for generation may be brought up to synchronous speed if it can be demonstrated that
the initial voltage drop at the point of interconnection is within the flicker limits specified in this document.
(c) Inverters.
(1) Line-commutated inverters do not require synchronizing equipment.
(2) Self-commutated inverters require synchronizing equipment.
(Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.040 Standards
The distributed generation equipment shall be designed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with, but not limited to, ANSI
standards, UL standards, IEEE standards, the National Electrical Code, ERCOT Operating Guides and any other applicable local, state or
federal codes and statutes. In the case of a conflict between the requirements in this article and any of those standards or codes, this article shall
prevail. (Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Secs. 12.08.041–12.06.060 Reserved
Division 3. Miscellaneous Provisions
Sec. 12.08.061 Liability
The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed to effectively carry out its purposes, which are hereby found and declared to be in the
furtherance of the public health, safety, and welfare. Any member of the city council, city official, or employee charged with enforcement of this
article, acting for the city in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby render himself or herself personally liable; and is hereby relieved
from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
said duties. (Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.062 Penalty
Any person violating this article by interconnecting distributed generation to the city electric system without a complete application and executed
agreement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined up to $1,000.00 per violation, and each day that a violation
continues or each occurrence shall be considered a separate offense and punished accordingly. (Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
Sec. 12.08.063 Violation
Any violation of this article can be enjoined by a suit filed in the name of the city in court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in
addition to any penalty provision in this article. (Ordinance 2017-12 adopted 6/9/17)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
ARTICLE A1.000 MISCELLANEOUS FEES
Sec. A1.001 Service charge for returned checks
Whenever a person pays any charge, fee, cost or bill owing to the city by check and such check is not paid upon presentation to the bank on
which it is drawn, the city shall charge such person a service charge in the amount of $30.00. (1994 Code, sec. 10.98; Ordinance 02-16 adopted
9/5/02; Ordinance 2008-07 adopted 10/15/08; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. A1.002 Garage sale permit
A fee of $5.00 shall be charged for issuance of a garage sale permit. (Ordinance 93-21 adopted 8/5/93; 1994 Code, sec. 101.02)
Sec. A1.003 Administration fee for notice of property maintenance violation (weeds, rubbish, etc.) after original notice
In the event the city gives the notice of violation as provided in section 7.04.003(b), and if the city thereafter sends any subsequent notice of
violation within the following 36 months from the original notice of violation, then the city shall charge the owner a $200.00 administration fee for
each subsequent written notice of violation. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. VIII, sec. 3; Ordinance 92-02 adopted 4/–/92; 1994 Code, sec. 98.02;
Ordinance 2004-16 adopted 11/4/04; Ordinance 2007-16 adopted 11/1/07)
Sec. A1.004 Application for public hearing regarding junked vehicle
If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is served regarding an alleged junked vehicle, there shall be a nonrefundable application
fee in the amount of $150.00. (1994 Code, sec. 98.43; Ordinance 2011-09 adopted 3/10/11)
Sec. A1.005 Redemption of impounded vehicle
The owner of any vehicle impounded under section 11.07.051 shall be entitled to the possession thereof upon payment of all fees listed below,
together with any other costs of removal and storage that may have accrued thereon.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/438
(1) Impoundment fee: $20.00.
(2) Notification fee: $50.00.
(3) Storage fee:
(A) For vehicle 25 feet or in length or less: $20.00 per day; and
(B) For vehicle over 25 feet in length: $35.00 per day.
(4) All associated tow truck/wrecker fees.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.2, art. IV, div. 1, sec. 15; 1994 Code, sec. 72.30; Ordinance 2018-07, sec. 4, adopted 7/9/18; Ordinance 2018-10, sec. 4,
adopted 9/10/18)
Sec. A1.006 Police escort for oversized vehicles or oversized loads
Any person, firm or entity transporting an oversized motor vehicle and/or oversized load requesting a police escort shall pay a fee of $60.00.
(1994 Code, sec. 71.59; Ordinance 09-09 adopted 6/4/09)
Sec. A1.007 Cemetery lots
(a) Block 3, Section H, Hillside Cemetery.
(1) The price for each whole lot shall be $3,200.00, and the price for each half-lot shall be $1,600.00
(2) The remaining spaces in Lots 24 and 25, Block 2, Section H, shall be sold as single grave spaces at a price of $400.00 per
grave space. Each of the remaining lots in Block 2, Section H (other than the Lots 24 and 25), shall be divided into eight single
graves, numbered from one through eight. The grave spaces shall be sold in multiples of two, at a price of $400.00 per grave space.
(3) Lots 85 through 5: Single grave spaces shall be sold at a price of $400.00 per grave space. Quarter-lots shall be sold at a price
of $400.00 per grave space.
(1966 Code, ch. 3.1, art. I, sec. 4a; Ordinance 89-06 adopted 4/19/89; Ordinance 91-09 adopted 5/21/91; Ordinance 93-11 adopted 3/4/93;
Ordinance 93-28 adopted 10/7/93; 1994 Code, sec. 91.06; Ordinance 01-14 adopted 7/10/01; Ordinance 09-27 adopted 11/17/09; Ordinance
2013-49 adopted 11/15/13)
ARTICLE A2.000 MUNICIPAL COURT FEES
Sec. A2.001 Technology fund fee
The municipal court technology fund fee shall be $4.00. (1994 Code, sec. 35.11; Ordinance 00-04 adopted 1/6/00; Ordinance 2005-09 adopted
7/7/05; Ordinance 2012-71 adopted 12/12/12)
Sec. A2.002 Building security fund fee
The municipal court building security fee shall be $3.00. (1994 Code, sec. 35.12; Ordinance 2012-70 adopted 12/12/12)
ARTICLE A3.000 ANIMAL CONTROL FEES
Sec. A3.001 Vaccination, permit and impoundment fees
(a) Rabies vaccination fee: Amount established by the service provider.
(b) Dangerous animal permit (annual): $75.00.
(c) Dangerous wild animal permit (annual): $25.00.
(d) Euthanasia fee: $15.00.
(e) Kennel permit fee: $25.00 annually.
(f) Impoundment fee: The cost of reclaiming animals from the city animal control facility shall be as follows:
(1) Impoundment (per animal): $25.00 plus boarding fee.
(2) This fee will be reduced to $25.00 if the impounded animal is sterilized, has a current rabies vaccination certificate, and is
identified by some means of traceable identification.
(g) Boarding fee (daily for all or part of any one day): $5.00.
(h) Small animals (swine, sheep, goats, etc.):
(1) Capture and impoundment, per head: $25.00.
(2) Boarding, per head per day: $5.00.
(i) Large animals (cattle, horses, etc.):
(1) Capture and impoundment, per head: $50.00.
(2) Boarding fee, per head per day: $10.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/438
(j) Voluntary surrender: $15.00 per animal (may be waived upon proof of sterilization of female parent animal prior to surrender of litters).
(1994 Code, sec. 90.02; Ordinance 2011-39 adopted 11/28/11; Ordinance 2013-30 adopted 8/27/13)
ARTICLE A4.000 BUILDING, CONSTRUCTION AND FIRE PREVENTION RELATED FEES
Sec. A4.001 Building, plumbing, HVAC and electrical permit fees
(a) Failure to obtain permit. Double the amount of permit fee or a $150.00 administrative fee, whichever is greater, if work is started but not
complete, or double the amount of permit fee plus a $150.00 administrative fee if work is complete.
(b) Building permit fees.
(1) Building permit fees: Includes manufactured home placement.
Total Valuation
Up to $500.00 $15.00
$500.00 to $1000.00 $25.00
$1,000.00 to $50,000.00 $25.00 for the first $1,000.00, plus $5.00 for
each additional $1,000.00 to $50,000.00
$50,000.00 to $100,000.00 $270.00 for the first $50,000.00, plus $4.00
for each additional $1,000.00 to $100,000.00
$100,000.00 to $500,000.00 $470.00 for the first $100,000.00, plus $3.00
for each additional $1,000.00 to $500,000.00
$500,000.00 and up $1,670.00 for the first $500,000.00, plus
$2.00 for each additional $1,000.00 thereof
(2) Demolition fees; building moving fees: $100.00.
(3) Swimming pool, fence and sign permit fees: See building permit fees.
(4) Driveway and paving permit fees: See building permit fees.
(5) Plan review fees: Includes remodels, additions, swimming pools, fences, signs, and driveway/paving plans if plans are
submitted for review.
(A) One- and two-family dwelling: $25.00.
(B) Multifamily and nonresidential construction: 1/3 permit fee.
(If plans need to be sent for outside review, the amount of cost for that review will be charged along with 1/3 permit fee.)
(c) MEP permits fees. Permit fee schedule (one inspection per phase included in price of permit): Permit issuance $35.00, plus $10.00 per
$1,000.00 of valuation.
(d) Reinspection fee: $25.00.
(e) Certificate of occupancy fee: $50.00.
(f) Site plan review fee: $150.00.
(g) Extension of permit:
(1) 90-day extension: $35.00.
(2) 180-day extension: $60.00.
(Ordinance 2015-04, sec. 1, adopted 1/30/15)
Sec. A4.002 Annual license fee for contractors and builders
Every contractor or builder who is required to obtain a permit by the applicable provisions in the International Codes shall pay an annual license
fee of $100.00 unless exempted by state law. (1994 Code, sec. 150.15(B); Ordinance 2015-04, sec. 1, adopted 1/30/15)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/438
Sec. A4.003 Excavation permit
(a) The application for a permit to make an excavation shall be accompanied by a deposit of $3.00 to cover the cost of processing the
application and of inspecting the excavation.
(b) If any person shall apply for a permit after having already made the excavation, he shall be required to deposit a fee of $6.00 instead of
$3.00.
(1966 Code, ch. 19.2, art. I, secs. 2, 6; 1994 Code, sec. 100.17)
Sec. A4.004 Inspection of installation of petroleum gas equipment
Any person, firm or corporation installing any installation or equipment designed to use as a fuel any form of manufactured and liquefied
petroleum gases shall pay an inspection fee of $1.00 for each piece of equipment. (1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. III, secs. 4, 5; 1994 Code, sec.
93.32)
Sec. A4.005 Permit for filling station or plant storing or handling gasoline or other volatile liquids
The following fees shall be charged before the issuance of a permit to erect or maintain a filling station or storage plant or to erect or alter any
building to be used for the purposes of storing or handling gasoline or other volatile or explosive liquid:
(1) Minimum charge: $15.00.
(2) For stations where the total length of openings for driveways across the sidewalk is greater than 40 feet but less than 100 feet:
$20.00.
(3) For stations where the total length of openings for driveways across the sidewalk is greater than 100 feet: $35.00.
(4) Wholesale or bulk storage plant or private plant, including inspection and issuance of permit: $5.00.
(5) For replacement of equipment, relocation of existing equipment, location of additional equipment, location of new equipment,
including inspection and issuance of permit, for each piece of equipment: $1.00.
(1966 Code, ch. 7.0, art. I, sec. 2; 1994 Code, sec. 93.03)
ARTICLE A5.000 BUSINESS RELATED FEES
Sec. A5.001 Itinerant vendors
(a) Before any license shall be issued under the provisions of section 5.04.006, same of which will be good for one year, the applicant thereof
shall pay to the city: (1) a nonrefundable processing fee of $25.00 at least ten (10) days in advance of the issuance of the said license; and (2)
an investigation fee of $50.00 per applicant if located in the state. If the applicant is located outside the state, then the actual cost of the
investigation shall be paid to the city.
(b) The food truck permit fees are based upon the length of time the vendor desires for the license to remain in effect and will not be issued
until the license and processing fees have been paid by the applicant. The fees shall be as follows:
(1) For one year: $150.00.
(2) For six months: $75.00.
(3) For one day: $35.00.
(1994 Code, sec. 112.05; Ordinance 00-12 adopted 4/13/00; Ordinance 2011-12 adopted 4/5/11; Ordinance 2014-21 adopted 5/12/14; Ordinance
2017-08 adopted 4/11/17)
Sec. A5.002 Carnivals and circuses
The applicant for a permit for a carnival or circus shall pay a license fee of $50.00 together with $5.00 per extra police officer. (1994 Code, sec.
111.03)
Sec. A5.003 Release of sealed coin-operated machine
A fee of $5.00 shall be charged for the release of any coin-operated machines sealed because the occupation tax has not been paid. (1966
Code, ch. 20.0, art. I, sec. 4; Ordinance 82-1 adopted 2/4/82; 1994 Code, sec. 111.18)
Sec. A5.004 Amusement redemption machine game rooms
(a) Annual fee. An amusement redemption machine game room shall pay an annual inspection and license fee of $250.00.
(b) Fee for late renewal. Failure to obtain renewal within 30 days after expiration will require the licensee to pay an additional late fee in an
amount equal to 20% of the fee actually due, or 20% of the previous year's fee, whichever is greater.
(1994 Code, sec. 111.51(A), (C); Ordinance 2013-29 adopted 8/13/13)
Sec. A5.005 Oil and gas wells and pipelines
(a) Oil, gas, or combined well permit application and filing fees: $10,000.00 per well.
(b) Annual inspection fee: $4,000.00 per well.
(c) Amended well permit fee: $2,500.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/438
(d) Transfer fee for oil and gas well permits: $5,000.00 per well.
(e) Appeal fees: $2,000.00 per well.
(f) Oil and gas pipeline permit fees:
(1) Oil and gas flowline permit application fee: $2,500.00.
(2) Oil and gas pipeline right-of-way review and inspection fee: 5% of the total construction costs of that portion of the project that is
located within the public rights-of-way.
(3) Oil and gas pipeline right-of-way annual use fee: Annual fee of $1.80 times the number of linear feet of public right-of-way
occupied. This fee may, in the sole discretion of the city, be adjusted for inflation.
(1994 Code, sec. 153.22; Ordinance 2012-67 adopted 11/8/12)
Sec. A5.006 Filming and film ventures
(a) Application processing fee: $25.00.
(b) Rates for use of city property:
Activity Cost (per Calendar Day)
Total or disruptive use (regular operating hours) of a public
building, park, right-of-way, or public area
$500.00
Partial nondisruptive use of a public building, park, right-ofway,
or public area
$250.00
Total closure or obstruction of a public street or right-ofway,
including parking lots and on-street parking (for
filming purposes)
$50.00 per block
Partial closure or obstruction of a public street or right-ofway,
including parking lots and on-street parking (for
filming purposes)
$25.00 per block
Use of city parking lots, parking areas, and city streets (for
the purpose of parking film trailers, buses, catering trucks,
and other large vehicles)
$50.00 per block or lot
(1994 Code, secs. 115.04, 115.06; Ordinance 2009-01 adopted 1/8/09)
Sec. A5.007 Taxicab operator's and driver's licenses
(a) Annual fee for license to operate a taxicab: $25.00 for each vehicle to be operated.
(b) Driver's license:
(1) Application for license: $5.00.
(2) Annual fee for renewal of license: $1.00.
(1966 Code, ch. 20.3, art. II, secs. 2-A, 1-F; Ordinance adopted 5/9/63; 1994 Code, secs. 113.10, 113.17)
Sec. A5.008 Structural pest control operators
Each structural pest control operator shall pay an annual registration fee of $5.00. (1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. VI, sec. 2; Ordinance 77-1 adopted
1/6/77; 1994 Code, sec. 112.51)
Sec. A5.009 Food service establishments
The following fees shall be charged for permits for food service establishments:
(1) 1 to 3 employees: $15.00.
(2) 4 to 19 employees: $25.00.
(3) 20 or more employees: $35.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/438
(1994 Code, sec. 114.11; Ordinance 03-07 adopted 9/4/03)
ARTICLE A6.000 UTILITY RATES AND CHARGES
Division 1. Generally
Sec. A6.001 Deposits
(a) Customer requesting utility services from the city may require a deposit. Deposit amounts for residential services:
(1) Electric: $150.00.
(2) Water/sewer: $75.00.
(3) Solid waste: $25.00.
(4) Total: $250.00.
(5) The deposit may be waived is the residential customer provides the city with a letter of credit from a prior utility service used
within the last 3 months for a least one year of service.
(6) A residential customer will have the option to choose to prepay their services, instead of providing a deposit for services.
(b) Commercial/industrial service. The deposit shall be a sum of money equal to the average of the properties twelve-month history for all
services provided by the city. For new dwellings, the deposit will be based on estimated usage as compared to a dwelling of the same square
footage.
(c) Customers posing credit risk. Customers who pose a credit risk will be charged a deposit as provided in section 12.02.001.
(Ordinance 93-05 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.13; Ordinance 2013-09 adopted 3/11/13; Ordinance 2016-26 adopted 1/11/17)
Secs. A6.002–A6.030 Reserved
Division 2. Electric Service
Sec. A6.031 Late payment penalty
Any payment received after 5 p.m. on the due date of the 12th (or after the 30th day from the billing date for large industrial electric customers)
will be posted on the next business day and will incur a 10% penalty. (1994 Code, sec. 50.02; Ordinance 2009-06 adopted 5/20/09; Ordinance
2013-09 adopted 3/11/13; Ordinance 2015-31 adopted 10/30/15)
Sec. A6.032 Account placed on disconnect list
Fees for accounts placed on disconnect list due to unpaid bill:
(1) Administrative fee: $20.00.
(2) Reconnect fee: $30.00.
(3) Reconnect after hours: $40.00.
(Ordinance 93-05 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.04; Ordinance 94-14 adopted 12/1/94; Ordinance 01-15 adopted 7/10/01; Ordinance
2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
Sec. A6.033 Service charges
The city electric department shall charge and collect the following service charges:
(1) Service calls:
(A) During regular working hours: $30.00.
(B) Outside regular working hours: $40.00.
(2) Testing meter if meter does not register in error: The actual cost of testing, and a service call charge of $30.00.
(3) Transfer of service:
(A) During regular working hours: $30.00.
(B) Outside regular working hours: $40.00.
(4) Hook-up fee if residential customer requests electrical service for two weeks or less for repairs, cleaning and the like:
(A) During regular working hours: $30.00.
(B) Outside regular working hours: $40.00.
(Ordinance 93-05 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 50.11; Ordinance 00-26 adopted 10/5/00; Ordinance 02-17 adopted 9/5/02; Ordinance
f2013-09 adopted 3/11/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/438
Sec. A6.034 Schedule of electric rates
Electric Rates Effective - January 1, 2018
Residential Small
Commercial
Med
Commercial
Large
Commercial
Small
Industrial
Medium
Industrial
Large
Industrial
New rate
customer charge $10.00 $25.00 $100.00 $150.00 $175.00 $500.00 $1,000.00
New energy
charge ($.kWh) $0.0299 $0.0249 $0.0359 $0.0303 $0.0170 $0.0296 $0.0023
New demand
charge $3.50/kW $3.50/kW $4.00/kW $4.50/kW
(Ordinance 2017-29, sec. 5 adopted 12/1/17)
Secs. A6.035–A6.060 Reserved
Division 3. Solid Waste Collection
Sec. A6.061 Rate schedules
(a) Solid waste collection. Rate schedules (fiscal years run from October 1st–September 30th):
FY 16-
17
FY 17-
18
FY 18-
19
FY 19-
20
FY 16-
17
FY 17-
18
FY 18-
19
FY 19-
20
FY 20-21
Residential - Inside 19.88 20.48 21.09 21.71 22.38 23.04 23.74 24.44 25.18
Residential - Outside 28.44 29.29 30.18 31.08 32.01 32.96 33.95 34.98 36.03
Extra Cart 7.50 7.73 7.96 8.20 8.44 8.70 8.95 9.23 9.50
Commercial Cart 35.01 36.16 37.32 38.54 39.80 41.09 42.43 43.80 45.22
Commercial Cart
Recycle - EOW
7.75 8.00 8.25 8.53 8.80 9.09 9.39 9.69 10.00
Commercial Cart
Recycle - lx
20.00 20.65 21.33 22.03 22.74 23.48 24.24 25.03 25.84
Commercial 1.5 CY -
1X
79.20 81.40 84.70 86.90 90.20 92.40 95.70 99.00 102.30
Commercial 3 CY -
lx
96.80 100.10 103.40 106.70 110.00 113.30 117.70 121.00 125.40
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/438
Commercial 3 CY -
2X
176.00 181.50 187.00 193.60 200.20 206.80 213.40 220.00 226.60
Commercial 3 CY -
3X
256.30 264.00 272.80 281.60 290.40 300.30 310.20 320.10 330.00
Commercial 3 CY -
4X
335.50 346.50 357.50 369.60 381.70 393.80 407.00 420.20 433.40
Commercial 3 CY -
5X
414.70 427.90 442.20 456.50 471.90 487.30 502.70 519.20 535.70
Commercial 4 CY -
1X
112.20 116.60 119.90 124.30 127.60 132.00 136.40 140.80 145.20
Commercial 4 CY -
2X
205.70 212.30 218.90 225.50 233.20 240.90 248.60 256.30 265.10
Commercial 4 CY -
3X
299.20 309.10 319.00 328.90 339.90 350.90 361.90 374.00 386.10
Commercial 4 CY -
4X
392.70 405.90 419.10 432.30 446.60 460.90 476.30 491.70 507.10
Commercial 4 CY -
5X
485.10 501.60 517.00 534.60 551.10 569.80 588.50 607.20 627.00
Commercial Recycle
3 CY - EOW
70.40 72.60 74.80 78.10 80.30 82.50 85.80 88.00 91.30
Commercial Recycle
3 CY - lx
92.40 95.70 99.00 102.30 105.60 108.90 112.20 115.50 119.90
Commercial Recycle
4 CY - EOW
111.10 114.40 117.70 122.10 126.50 129.80 134.20 138.60 143.00
Commercial Recycle
4 CY – lx
105.60 108.90 112.20 115.50 119.90 123.20 127.60 132.00 136.40
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/438
Editor's note–The table in this section is labeled exactly as numbered by the city.
(b) Dumpster rates.
Rates: For acceptance, transfer station processing, transportation, disposal and related services required to be performed pursuant to section
3.01(a) [of the contract], Cuero's cost shall not exceed the rates as shown below except as may be adjusted in accordance with paragraph
11.02(a) and (b) of the contract.
For the first three 3 years of the contract, the rates shall be adjusted as follows (expressed in minimum cost per load and based upon the rated
capacity of the vehicle):
Contract Years
FY 2016
20-yard dumpsters, the greater of a minimum cost of $325.00, or total dumped refuse/debris weight charged at $61.59/ton.
30-yard dumpsters, the greater of a minimum cost of $490.00, or total dumped refuse/debris weight charged at $61.59/ton.
40-yard dumpsters, the greater of a minimum cost of $650.00, or total dumped refuse/debris weight charged at $61.59/ton.
Tire disposal without rims, at $6.00 - 17" or smaller, $8.50 - 18" to 25".
FY 2017
Rates above shall increase 3.2% above FY 2016 rates.
FY 2018
Rates above shall increase 3.2% above FY 2017 rates.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 3-G; Ordinance 72-17 adopted 10/5/72; Ordinance 81-20 adopted 10/1/81; Ordinance 89-01 adopted 2/2/89;
Ordinance 90-05 adopted 8/2/90; Ordinance 92-07 adopted 8/25/92; Ordinance 93-14 adopted 3/4/93; 1994 Code, sec. 51.41; Ordinance 96-04
adopted 4/4/96; Ordinance 96-06 adopted 7/2/96; Ordinance 97-16 adopted 7/3/97; Ordinance 97-25 adopted 10/2/97; Ordinance 97-28 adopted
12/4/97; Ordinance 98-22 adopted 9/3/98; Ordinance 00-14 adopted 5/9/00; Ordinance 01-09 adopted 3/8/01; Ordinance 01-24 adopted 11/1/01;
Ordinance 02-27 adopted 12/5/02; Ordinance 03-11 adopted 11/6/03; Ordinance 2006-15 adopted 9/14/06; Ordinance 2008-14 adopted 9/23/08;
Ordinance 2010-22 adopted 10/5/10; Ordinance 2011-26 adopted 9/6/11; Ordinance 2012-05 adopted 1/17/12; Ordinance 2014-05 adopted
1/28/14; Ordinance 2015-34, att. A, adopted 11/17/15; Ordinance 2016-29, ex. A, adopted 1/11/17)
Sec. A6.062 Use of city brush collection truck or front-end loader
(a) Disposition of items through use of city owned and operated brush collection trucks: $12.00 for each brush truck load and $6.00 for each
half truck load or fraction thereof.
(b) Use of front-end loader to collect brush to be disposed of by city: $25.00 per hour, with a one-hour minimum charge.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 3-E; Ordinance 78-14 adopted 11/8/78; Ordinance 92-11 adopted 10/1/92; 1994 Code, sec. 51.39; Ordinance
2015-34, sec. 1, adopted 11/17/15)
Sec. A6.063 Collection center charges
Charges for disposal of garbage, rubbish or waste at citizens' collection station:
(1) Minimum charge, 200 pounds or less: $15.00.
(2) Minimum charge for greater than 200 pounds but less than 2,000 pounds: $0.062 per pound.
(3) Minimum charge for 2,000 pounds or greater: $110.00 per ton or proportionate portion thereof.
(1966 Code, ch. 8.0, art. III, sec. 6-B; Ordinance 72-18 adopted 12/7/72; Ordinance 75-5 adopted 9/10/75; Ordinance 91-01 adopted 1/3/91;
Ordinance 92-10 adopted 10/1/92; 1994 Code, sec. 51.56; Ordinance 95-01 adopted 1/5/95; Ordinance 96-17 adopted 10/3/96; Ordinance 00-14
adopted 5/9/00; Ordinance 01-09 adopted 3/8/01; Ordinance 01-24 adopted 11/1/01; Ordinance 02-27 adopted 12/5/02; Ordinance 03-11
adopted 11/6/03; Ordinance 2006-15 adopted 9/14/06; Ordinance 2010-22 adopted 10/5/10; Ordinance 2011-02 adopted 1/11/11; Ordinance
2011-07 adopted 2/22/11; Ordinance 2011-26 adopted 9/6/11; Ordinance 2012-05 adopted 1/17/12)
Sec. A6.064 Charge for road use to access solid waste disposal site
The charge for the road use to access the city's solid waste disposal site shall be $10.00 per truck per trip. (1994 Code, sec. 51.59; Ordinance
2013-21 adopted 6/25/13)
Sec. A6.065 Brush disposal
The following tables indicate the brush disposal fees and charges:
BRUSH DISPOSAL FEES AND CHARGES
(1) Contractor hauler.
Description Brush Only Brush Only
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/438
Inside City Limits
(ICL)
City's ETJ (OCL)
Pickup truck load $15.00/load $25.00/load
Trailer load $20.00/load $30.00/load
Dump truck load up to 12
yards $30.00/load $35.00/load
(2) Residential.
Description
Brush Only
Inside City Limits
(ICL)
Brush Only
City's ETJ (OCL)
Residential $5.00/load $10.00/load
(3) Residential brush and chipping fees by city crew.
Description Inside City Limits
and City's ETJ
Residential bulk brush:
7' x 14' dump trailer (full load) $40.00/load
7' x 14' dump trailer (one-half load) $20.00/load
Residential chipping on-site:
First 15 minutes $20.00
Each additional minute $1.00
(1994 Code, sec. 51.81; Ordinance 2009-07(A) adopted 5/7/09; Ordinance 2013-22 adopted 7/23/13)
Sec. A6.066 Disposal at recycling center
The charges for disposal at the city recycling center will be as follows:
(1) Commercial trailer under 16 feet: $25.00.
(2) Commercial trailer over 16 feet: $40.00.
(3) Commercial truck: $15.00.
(4) Commercial city roll-off container: $100.00 disposal fee.
(5) Residential disposal per wood pallet charge: $0.20 per pallet.
(Ordinance 2014-50, sec. VI, adopted 12/9/14)
Sec. A6.067 Replacement of lost, stolen or damaged carts
The customer is responsible for carts lost, stolen, damaged or destroyed by abuse caused by the customer at a cost of $75.00 plus a $25.00
delivery fee. (Ordinance 2015-34, sec. 1, adopted 11/17/15)
Secs. A6.068–A6.090 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/438
Division 4. Sewer Service
Sec. A6.091 Monthly rates; miscellaneous charges
(a) Inside city limits.
Residential and Commercial
Monthly base rate $13.80
Volumetric rate $4.86
Industrial
Monthly base rate $250.00
Volumetric rate $4.86
(b) Outside city limits.
Residential Customers
Monthly rate $17.25
Volumetric rate $6.08
Commercial Customers
Monthly rate $21.51
Volumetric rate $7.59
TDCJ $1,000.00
Volumetric rate - 0 to 2,499,999 $4.86
Volumetric rate - Over 2,500,000 $2.87
(1966 Code, ch. 19.0, art. I, sec. 34; Ordinance 70-7 adopted 7/2/70; Ordinance 87-07 adopted 6/4/87; Ordinance 88-02 adopted 2/4/88;
Ordinance 90-11 adopted 11/1/90; Ordinance 93-06 adopted 6/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 52.60; Ordinance 97-15 adopted 7/3/97; Ordinance 99-18
adopted 7/1/99; Ordinance 00-25 adopted 9/7/00; Ordinance 01-15 adopted 7/10/01; Ordinance 02-26 adopted 12/5/02; Ordinance 2008-13
adopted 9/23/08; Ordinance 2010-04 adopted 2/2/10; Ordinance 2010-09 adopted 3/9/10; Ordinance 2011-33 adopted 10/4/11; Ordinance 2013-
23 adopted 7/23/13; Ordinance 2013-55 adopted 12/10/13; Ordinance adopting 2016 Code; Ordinance 2017-30 adopted 11/1/17)
Sec. A6.092 Fees for service calls
The city sewer department shall charge and collect the following fees for service calls:
(1) During regular working hours:
(A) Residential customers: $45.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/438
(B) Commercial customers: $90.00.
(2) Outside regular working hours:
(A) Residential customers: $60.00.
(B) Commercial customers: $120.00.
(1994 Code, sec. 52.62; Ordinance 02-18 adopted 9/5/02)
Sec. A6.093 Testing of industrial waste
For each test relating to industrial waste surcharges: $20.00 to cover the costs of sampling, mailing and handling, plus the laboratory fees. (1966
Code, ch. 19.0, art. II, sec. 6; Ordinance 74-23 adopted 10/3/74; 1994 Code, sec. 52.74)
Secs. A6.094–A6.120 Reserved
Division 5. Water Service
Sec. A6.121 Monthly rates
(a) Inside city limits.
Monthly Rates
Residential and Commercial Customers
Meter Size
5/8" X 3/4" $11.75
1" $20.44
1-1/2" $30.66
2" $35.77
3" $51.10
4" $76.65
6" $127.75
8" $127.75
Volumetric Rates
Residential Customers
0–9,999 gallons $2.07
10,000–19,999 gallons $3.09
20,000–49,999 gallons $4.11
50,000 gallons and above $6.15
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/438
Commercial Customers
Volumetric rate per 1,000 $3.61
Industrial/City Customers
Base rate avg 1m or more $550.00
[Volumetric rate:]
0–25,000 $3.61
over 25,000 $2.30
Bulk Customers
0–99,999,999 $13.50
(b) Outside city limits.
Monthly Fee
Residential and Commercial Customers
Meter Size
5/8" X 3/4" $14.70
1" $25.55
1-1/2" $38.33
2" $44.71
3" $63.88
4" $95.81
6" $159.69
8" $159.69
Volumetric Rates
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/438
Residential Customers
0–9,999 gallons $2.59
10,000–19,999 gallons $3.87
20,000–49,999 gallons $5.14
50,000 gallons and above $7.69
Commercial Customers
Volumetric rate per 1,000 $4.52
Industrial/City Customers
Base rate avg 1m or more $550.00
Volumetric rate:
0–2,499,999 $3.54
over 2,500,000 $3.14
Bulk Customers
0–99,999,999 $13.77
(1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 14; Ordinance 70-06 adopted 6/4/70; Ordinance 87-06 adopted 6/4/87; Ordinance 88-01 adopted 2/4/88;
Ordinance 90-10 adopted 11/1/90; Ordinance 92-14 adopted 11/5/92; Ordinance 93-07 adopted 1/18/93; 1994 Code, sec. 53.55; Ordinance 98-
08 adopted 4/2/98; Ordinance 99-19 adopted 7/1/99; Ordinance 00-25 adopted 9/7/00; Ordinance 02-04 adopted 1/3/02; Ordinance 02-19
adopted 9/5/02; Ordinance 02-24 adopted 11/7/02; Ordinance 02-26 adopted 12/5/02; Ordinance 2008-13 adopted 9/23/08; Ordinance 2010-03
adopted 2/2/10; Ordinance 2010-08 adopted 3/9/10; Ordinance 2011-24 adopted 9/6/11; Ordinance 2013-54 adopted 12/10/13; Ordinance
adopting 2016 Code; Ordinance 2017-31 adopted 12/1/17)
Sec. A6.122 Late payment penalty
There shall be added to each water account which is delinquent the sum of 10% of the account as penalty. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, secs. 15,
16; 1994 Code, sec. 53.56; Ordinance 01-15 adopted 7/10/01)
Sec. A6.123 Deposit upon installation of meter
All water patrons shall upon the installation of the meter pay a minimum deposit of $5.00. The amount of the deposit shall be based on the size
of the meter and shall be set by the city manager. (Ordinance adopted 4/8/63; 1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 6(a); Ordinance adopted 8/13/64;
Ordinance 65-4 adopted 3/10/65; 1994 Code, sec. 53.15)
Sec. A6.124 Charge for broken water cut-off
The charge for the repair and/or replacement of a broken water cut-off shall be 100% of the actual cost to the city. (1994 Code, sec. 53.29;
Ordinance 02-19 adopted 9/5/02)
Sec. A6.125 Relocation of meter
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/438
The charge for relocation of a water meter is $80.00, plus $35.00 per hour for backhoe, for each water meter relocated. (1994 Code, sec. 53.47;
Ordinance 00-05 adopted 2/3/00; Ordinance 02-19 adopted 9/5/02)
Sec. A6.126 Meter service calls
Charge for meter service calls:
(1) During regular business hours: $20.00.
(2) After-hours service calls: $40.00.
(1994 Code, sec. 53.48; Ordinance 00-05 adopted 2/3/00)
Sec. A6.127 Change of occupancy of building
Where any person, firm or corporation moves from a house or building and the same is thereafter occupied by another person, firm or
corporation, the other person, firm or corporation shall pay a fee of $1.00. (1966 Code, ch. 23, art. I, sec. 40; 1994 Code, sec. 53.60)
ARTICLE A7.000 PARK FEES
Sec. A7.001 Swimming pool fees
(a) Fee for private parties: $10.00 per hour, $20.00 minimum.
(b) Admission charge:
(1) $2.00 per person per day.
(2) Participants in public swimming classes for children: $0.25 per person per day.
(3) Adults or children taking private swimming lessons: $2.00 per person per day.
(4) City/Lions Club-sponsored swimming lessons: $0.10.
(1966 Code, ch. 18.0, art. I, sec. 5a; Ordinance 82-5 adopted 5/6/82; Ordinance 83-12 adopted 7/7/83; 1994 Code, sec. 99.15; Ordinance 99-30
adopted 11/4/99; Ordinance 2013-13 adopted 3/28/13)
ARTICLE A8.000 AIRPORT FEES
Sec. A8.001 Lease of hangar space and tie-down space
The fees, charges and expenses for the lease of hangar space and tie-down space located at the Cuero Municipal Airport are as follows:
(1) Tie-downs (daily rate):
(A) Single engine: $5.00.
(B) Twin engine: $10.00.
(2) Tie-downs (monthly):
(A) Single engine: $20.00.
(B) Twin engine: $40.00.
(3) Hangar rental fees (monthly):
(A) Quadraplex: $100.00.
(B) C5 hangar: $125.00.
(1994 Code, sec. 96.08; Ordinance 2012-08 adopted 2/1/12)
ARTICLE A9.000 DEVELOPMENT RELATED FEES
Sec. A9.001 Plat filing fees
The following schedule of fees and charges shall be collected by the city when any preliminary map or plat is tendered to the city. Each of the
fees and charges provided for herein shall be paid in advance, and no action of the council or any other board or agency shall be valid until the
fee shall have been paid the city.
(1) Preliminary plats: $200.00 plus $1.00/lot.
(2) Final plats: $200.00 plus $1.00/lot.
(3) Public notices: $50.00 (or actual cost if it exceeds $50.00 for notifications).
(Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. A9.002 Zoning change fees
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/438
The following schedule of fees and charges shall be collected by the city when any zoning change is tendered to the city. Each of the fees and
charges provided for herein shall be paid in advance, and no action of the council or any other board or agency shall be valid until the fee shall
have been paid the city.
(1) Application: $200.00.
(2) Conditional use: $200.00.
(3) Public notices: $50.00 (or actual cost if it exceeds $50.00 for notifications).
(Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)
Sec. A9.003 Variance/appeals fees
The following schedule of fees and charges shall be collected by the city when any variance/appeal is tendered to the city. Each of the fees and
charges provided for herein shall be paid in advance, and no action of the council or any other board or agency shall be valid until the fee shall
have been paid the city.
(1) Application: $200.00.
(2) Public notices $50.00 (or actual cost if it exceeds $50.00 for notifications).
(Ordinance adopting 2016 Code)