7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/244
City of Crandall
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 2
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through
Ordinance No. 060115 adopted 6/1/15.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Crandall, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Crandall, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/244
City and town. Each means the City of Crandall, Texas.
City administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city
administrator,” “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be
construed to mean the city administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal
officer or department, respectively, of the City of Crandall, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any
period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of
the City of Crandall, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Kaufman, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/244
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon’s Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/244
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly
into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the
new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of
the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/244
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning
or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental
state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the state.
(e) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 1.02.001 Title 28, chapters 1 through 10, Revised Civil Statutes adopted
At a regular meeting of the city council held on the 15th day of June, 1945, the city council accepted by
unanimous vote the provisions of title 28, chapters 1–10, Revised Civil Statutes of the state, and the subsequent
amendments thereto. The city shall also assume the corporate name of “The City of Crandall.” (1982 Code, ch.
1, sec. 7)
State law reference–Type A form of government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 5.001; sec. 22.001 et seq.
Sec. 1.02.002 Claims for damages against city
Before the city shall be liable for property damage or for damages for the death of or personal injury to any
person, the person injured, if living, or his representative, if dead, shall give the city notice in writing of such
death or injury or property damage, duly verified, within thirty (30) days after the same has been sustained,
stating in such written notice when, where, and how the death or injury or property damage occurred, and the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/244
apparent extent of any such injury, the amount of damages sustained, the actual residence of the claimant by
street and number at the date the claim is presented, the actual residence of such claimant for six (6) months
immediately preceding the occurrence of such death or injury, and the names and addresses of all the witnesses
upon whom it is relied to establish the claim for damages. Failure to so notify the city within the time and in the
manner specified herein shall exonerate, excuse, and exempt the city from any liability whatsoever.
Circumstances where good cause can be shown, civil rights claims, and actual notice of claims are exceptions to
the time limitations for filing claims. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 19; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Texas Tort Claims Act, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code, ch. 101.
Sec. 1.02.003 Emergency actions by city officers, agents or employees
Every officer, agent or employee of the city, while responding to emergency situations, is hereby authorized to
act in such a reasonable and prudent manner as to most effectively deal with the emergency. This provision shall
prevail over every other ordinance of the city, and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to so
authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the
employee shall be liable for any failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 25)
Sec. 1.02.004 Membership in North Central Texas Council of Governments
The city may be a member of the North Central Texas Council of Governments for the purpose of joint planning
and coordination of governmental services and policies as authorized by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code,
chapter 391, and the city secretary is hereby authorized to pay the annual dues required for membership in said
council of governments. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 20; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.02.005 Membership in Texas Municipal League
The city may be a member of the Texas Municipal League for the purpose of better representation, information,
advice, and other such services which may be provided. The city secretary is hereby authorized to pay the annual
dues required for membership in said league. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 21; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.03 CITY COUNCIL
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.03.001 Governing body established; composition; term of mayor and councilmembers
The city council shall be the governing body of the city. The city council shall consist of a mayor and five (5)
councilmembers, all of whom shall be elected at large. The mayor and two (2) councilmembers shall be elected
in odd-numbered years, and three (3) councilmembers shall be elected in even-numbered years. The terms of the
mayor and councilmembers shall be for two (2) years. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 8(A))
Sec. 1.03.002 Vacancies
(a) In the event of a vacancy or vacancies from any cause in the office of mayor or councilmember, such
vacancy or vacancies may be filled as follows:
(1) If no more than one (1) vacancy on the city council exists, a majority of the remaining
members of the city council may fill such vacancy by appointment and such appointee shall serve the
term of the vacated position until the next regular city election.
(2) In lieu of filling one (1) vacancy on the city council by appointment, as provided for above, a
special election may be called to fill such vacancy.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/244
(3) If two (2) or more vacancies on the city council exist at the same time, a special election shall
be called to fill such vacancies.
(b) When any special election is needed, they shall be ordered, held, and conducted in accordance with the
general laws of the state.
(1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 8(E))
State law reference–Special election to fill vacancy generally, V.T.C.A., Election Code, sec. 201.051 et seq.
Secs. 1.03.003–1.03.040 Reserved
Division 2. Ordinances and Resolutions
Sec. 1.03.041 Style
The style of all ordinances shall be “BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
CRANDALL,” and the style of all resolutions shall be “BE IT RESOLVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE
CITY OF CRANDALL.” (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 14(A))
Sec. 1.03.042 Introduction of ordinances; action on ordinances
All ordinances shall be in writing and shall be introduced by some member of the city council at an open
meeting of the city council when it shall be read and acted upon. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 14(B))
Sec. 1.03.043 Disposition of ordinances after passage; book of ordinances
All ordinances upon passage shall be approved by the mayor and attested by the city secretary, and shall be
recorded by the city secretary in such book of ordinances provided for such purpose by the city council, and
such book of ordinances shall by authority touch all questions arising under the laws and ordinances of the city.
(1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 14(C))
Sec. 1.03.044 Publication of ordinances
Every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, or forfeiture shall, after passage thereof, be published in one (1)
issue of the official newspaper, and such ordinances shall take effect and be in force from and after the
publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not required to be published shall take
effect from their passage, unless otherwise provided. In lieu of the publication of the entire ordinance, the city
council may in its discretion provide for the publication of a descriptive caption or title, stating in summary the
purpose of the ordinance and the penalty for violation thereof. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 14(D))
Secs. 1.03.045–1.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Meetings
Sec. 1.03.061 Authority
Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, section 22.038, as amended, the city has the authority to adopt rules
regulating council meetings.
Sec. 1.03.062 General rules
(a) Meetings to be public. All official meetings of the council and any boards and/or commissions authorized
by the council, except closed meetings permitted by the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act, chapter
551, Texas Government Code, as amended, shall be open to the public.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/244
(b) Applicability. These rules of procedure (“rules”) are enacted as guidelines to be followed by all persons in
the council chamber, including the city administrative staff, news media, and visitors.
(c) Citizen comment. During any public meeting, a reasonable opportunity shall be given for citizens to be
heard under these rules.
(d) Quorum. A majority of the number of councilmembers established by section 1.03.001 constitutes a
quorum. Texas Local Government Code, section 22.039.
(e) Compelling attendance. No councilmember shall be excused from attendance at a council meeting except
for good, valid reasons.
(f) Misconduct. The council may punish its own members for misconduct.
(g) Minutes of meetings. An account of all proceedings of the council shall be kept by the city secretary and
shall be entered in a book constituting the official record of the council. A certified agenda shall be prepared for
all closed meetings and shall be approved by the mayor in accordance with chapter 551, Texas Government
Code, as amended.
(h) Questions to contain one subject. All questions submitted for a vote shall contain only one subject. If two
or more points are involved, any member may require a division, if the question reasonably necessitates a
division.
(i) Right of floor. Any member desiring to speak shall be recognized by the mayor, and shall confine his or
her remarks to the subject under consideration or to be considered. No member shall be allowed to speak more
than once on any one subject until every member wishing to speak shall have spoken.
(j) City manager. The city manager, or acting city manager, shall attend all meetings of the council unless
excused. He or she may make recommendations to the council and shall respond to questions addressed to him
or her during discussions of the council, but shall have no vote.
(k) City attorney. The city attorney, or acting city attorney, shall be available upon request for all meetings of
the council, unless excused, and shall, upon request, give an opinion, either written or oral, on questions of law.
The city attorney shall act as the council’s parliamentarian.
(l) City secretary. The city secretary, or acting city secretary, shall attend all meetings of the city council,
unless excused, and shall keep the official minutes and perform such other duties as may be requested by the
council. The city secretary shall maintain a log of city council items that have been considered or discussed, but
no action taken. The city council shall reconsider a vote if no action has been taken in a three-month period.
(m) Officers and employees. Any officer or employee of the city, when requested by the city manager, shall
attend any meeting of the council. If requested to attend a meeting by the city manager regarding a specified
matter, such employee may present information relating to such matters before the council.
(n) Rules of order. These rules govern the proceedings of the council in all cases, except that where the rules
are silent, the most recent edition of Robert’s Rules of Order, as revised, shall govern.
(o) Suspension of rules. Any provision of these rules not governed by the city code or state law may be
temporarily suspended by the affirmative vote of a majority of the council. The vote on any such suspension
shall be taken by “yeas” or “nays” and entered into the minutes of the council.
(p) Amendment of rules. These rules may be amended, or new rules adopted by the affirmative vote of a
majority of the council, provided that the proposed amendments or new rules shall have been introduced before
the city council at a prior council meeting.
Sec. 1.03.063 Code of conduct
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/244
(a) Councilmembers.
(1) During council meetings, councilmembers shall preserve order and decorum and shall neither,
by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings nor refuse to observe these rules.
(2) A councilmember, once recognized, shall not be interrupted while speaking unless called to
order by the mayor or presiding officer, a point of order is raised by another member or the
parliamentarian, or the speaker chooses to yield to questions from another member. If a
councilmember is called to order while he or she is speaking, he or she shall cease speaking
immediately until the question or order is determined. If ruled to be in order, the councilmember shall
be permitted to proceed. If ruled to be not in order, the councilmember shall remain silent or shall
alter his or her remarks so as to comply with these rules.
(b) Administrative staff.
(1) Members of the administrative staff and city employees shall observe the same rules of
procedure and decorum applicable to members of the council, and shall have no voice unless and
until recognized by the presiding officer.
(2) While the presiding officer shall have the authority to preserve decorum in meetings as far as
staff members and city employees are concerned, the city manager also shall be responsible for the
orderly conduct and decorum of all city employees under his or her direction and control.
(3) The city manager shall take such disciplinary action as may be necessary to ensure that such
decorum is preserved at all times by city employees during council meetings.
(4) All remarks and questions addressed to the council shall be addressed to the council as a whole
and not to any individual member thereof.
(5) No staff member, other than a staff member having the floor, shall enter into any discussion
either directly or indirectly without permission of the presiding officer.
(c) Citizens.
(1) Citizens are welcome and invited to attend all meetings of the council, and will be admitted to
the council chamber up to the fire safety capacity of the room.
(2) All citizens, while the council is in session, will refrain from talking or making comments in
the chamber that may disrupt the meeting.
(3) Citizens attending council meetings shall observe the same rules of propriety, decorum, and
good conduct applicable to the administrative staff. Any person making personal, impertinent, or
slanderous remarks or who becomes boisterous while addressing the council or while attending the
council meeting shall be removed from the room by the police chief or his designee present at the
meeting, if so directed by the presiding officer.
(4) Unauthorized remarks from the audience, stamping of feet, applauding, whistles, yells, and
similar demonstrations shall not be permitted by the presiding officer, who shall direct the police
chief or his designee present at the meeting to remove such offenders from the room. In case the
presiding officer shall fail to act, any member of the council may move to require the presiding
officer to act to enforce the rules, and the affirmative vote of a majority of the council shall require
the presiding officer to act.
(5) No placards, banners or signs of any kind will be permitted in the council chamber except
exhibits, displays and visual aids used in connection with presentations to the council, provided that
such exhibits, displays and visual aids do not disrupt the meeting.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/244
(d) Enforcement. The city manager, in the absence of a designated law enforcement officer, shall act as the
police chief’s designee, and shall furnish whatever assistance is needed to enforce the rules of decorum herein
established.
(e) Seating arrangement. The city secretary, city manager and city attorney shall occupy the respective seats in
the council chamber assigned to them by the mayor, but any two (2) or more members of the council may
exchange seats.
Sec. 1.03.064 Types of meetings
(a) Regular meetings. The council shall hold at least 1 regular meeting(s) each month. The regular meeting(s)
of the council shall be held on the 1st Monday of each month at 6:30 p.m., unless postponed or canceled for
valid reasons, in city hall.
(b) Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the mayor, the city manager, or by any three (3)
members of the council. The call for a special meeting shall be filed with the city secretary in written form, and
he or she shall post notice thereof as provided by law.
(c) Workshop meetings. Workshop meetings or work sessions may be called using the same procedure
required for special meetings. The purpose of the workshop meeting is to discuss or explore matters of interest to
the city, to meet with a city board, commission, or committee members, city staff or officer of civic
organizations, governing bodies or individuals specifically invited to the session by the mayor, council or city
manager. These meetings are informational and no final action shall be taken unless the posted agenda indicates
otherwise. Citizens or other interested persons attending the work session will not be allowed to participate in
the session unless invited to do so by the mayor. Citizens should be advised of the nature of the work session and
that their input may be received and considered at a regularly scheduled council meeting where the agenda
provides for final action to be taken on the matter. The purpose of this procedure is to allow the citizens
attending the regular meeting the opportunity of hearing the views of their fellow citizens in a more formal
setting. Any citizen may supply the city council a written statement or report regarding the citizen’s opinion on a
matter being discussed in a work session. If the mayor invites citizens to participate in a work session, their
participation will cease at the point the mayor closes the session to public input in order to give city staff
direction as to needed information for the possible future meeting without further comment from the audience.
(d) Emergency meetings. In case of emergency or urgent public necessity, which shall be expressed in the
notice of the meeting, an emergency meeting may be called by the mayor, the city manager or by three members
of the council, and it shall be sufficient if the notice is posted two hours before the meeting is convened.
(e) Closed meetings. The council may meet in a closed meeting pursuant to the requirements of the Texas
Open Meetings Act, chapter 551, Texas Government Code, as amended.
(f) Recessed meetings. Any meeting of the council may be recessed to a later time, provided that no recess
shall be for a longer period than until the next regular meeting.
(g) Notice of meetings. The agenda for all meetings, including council board, commission or committee
meetings, shall be posted by the city secretary on the city’s official bulletin board and notice of all meetings shall
be given by the city secretary pursuant to the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act, chapter 551, Texas
Government Code, as amended.
Sec. 1.03.065 Presiding officer and duties
(a) Presiding officer. The mayor, or in the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro-tem, shall preside as presiding
officerman, or presiding officer at all meetings of the council. In the absence of both the mayor and mayor protem,
the council shall elect a temporary presiding officer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/244
(b) Call to order. The meetings of the council shall be called to order by the mayor, or in his or her absence,
by the mayor pro-tem. In the absence of both the mayor and mayor pro-tem, the meeting shall be called to order
by the city secretary, and a temporary presiding officer shall be elected as provided above.
(c) Preservation of order. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, and confine members in
debate to the question under discussion. The presiding officer shall call upon the police chief or his designee
present at the meeting as necessary to enforce compliance with the rules contained herein.
(d) Points of order. The presiding officer shall determine all points of order, subject to the right of any
member to appeal to the council. If any appeal is taken, the question shall be, “Shall the decision of the presiding
officer be sustained?” If a majority of the members present vote “No,” the ruling of the presiding officer is
overruled; otherwise, it is sustained.
(e) Questions to be stated. The presiding officer shall state all questions submitted for a vote and announce the
result. A roll call vote shall be taken upon the request of any member, and upon the passage of all ordinances and
resolutions.
(f) Substitution for presiding officer. The presiding officer may call any other member to take his or her place
as the presiding officer, such substitution not to continue beyond adjournment.
(g) Call for recess. The presiding officer may call for a recess of up to fifteen (15) minutes at regular intervals
of approximately one (1) hour at appropriate points in the meeting agenda, or if requested by any two (2)
members.
Sec. 1.03.066 Order of business
(a) Agenda. The order of business of each meeting shall be as contained in the agenda prepared by the city
manager. The agenda shall be a listing by topic of subjects to be considered by the council. Placement of items
on the agenda shall be governed by this section. Conduct of business at special meetings and board, commission
and council committee meetings will likewise be governed by an agenda and these rules.
(b) Pledge of Allegiance. Each agenda shall provide an item for the recital of the “Pledge of Allegiance” at the
regularly scheduled city council meetings. This item shall begin with the recital of the pledge of allegiance for
the United States flag in accordance with applicable state law.
(c) Presentation of proclamations. The agenda may provide a time for the presentation of proclamations. The
mayor or presiding officer may deliver and present proclamations upon the request of citizens. Proclamations
may encompass any activity or theme except that proclamations with a religious or partisan theme in nature shall
not be presented. Moreover, proclamations shall not be used for any commercial or advertising purpose.
(d) Presentations by citizens.
(1) Citizen comments. Any person who wishes to comment on a subject on the council agenda at a
regular city council meeting shall complete a “request to speak” form and return it to the city
secretary before the applicable council meeting. A time for citizen comments shall be provided on the
agenda after the pledge of allegiance, approval of the minutes, and the presentation of proclamations.
Any speaker providing a citizen comment shall speak for no longer than three (3) minutes on all
items that he or she may bring before the council at each meeting, unless the mayor or the majority of
the council grants an extension of time. No citizen may fill out a “request to speak” form or have an
opportunity to speak or comment on another citizen’s comment which is given at the same council
meeting.
(2) Speaking at public hearings. Any person who wishes to address the council at a public hearing
shall complete a “request to speak” form and return it to the city secretary before the applicable
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/244
hearing. The mayor will call upon the citizen to speak for no longer than three (3) minutes. Citizens
may not assign their allotted time to other citizens wishing to speak on the same issue.
(e) Consent agenda. The agenda may contain a consent agenda. Matters under the consent agenda are
considered to be routine by the council and will be enacted by one motion. There will not be separate discussion
of these items. If discussion is desired, that item will be removed from the consent agenda and will be
considered separately.
(f) Oral presentations by city manager. Matters on the agenda requiring the council’s attention or action which
may have developed after the deadline for delivery of the written communication to the council may be
presented orally by the city manager. Information relayed by the city manager during regular city staff updates
necessitating formal council action may be taken only after the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act have
been satisfied.
(g) Presentations by members of the council. The agenda shall provide a time when the mayor or any
councilmember may bring before the council any business that he or she feels should be deliberated upon by the
council. These matters need not be specifically listed on the agenda, but discussion and formal action on such
matters shall be deferred until a subsequent council meeting. Any member may suggest an item for discussion at
a future work session. The city manager or city staff shall only respond preliminarily on this item at the work
session. If the council believes the item requires a more detailed review, the council will give the city manager or
city staff direction to place the item on a future regular meeting agenda and advise staff as to the background
materials to be desired at such meeting.
Sec. 1.03.067 Consideration of ordinances, resolutions, and motions
(a) Printed or typewritten form. All ordinances and resolutions shall be presented to the council in printed or
typewritten form. The council may, by proper motion, amend any ordinance presented to it and direct that the
amended ordinance be placed on the next council agenda for first reading, except as otherwise provided by the
laws of the state. The council may, by proper motion, amend any resolution presented to it and direct that the
amended resolution be adopted.
(b) City attorney to approve. All ordinances, resolutions, and contracts and amendments thereto, shall be
approved as to form and legality by the city attorney.
(c) Distribution of ordinances and resolutions. The city manager shall prepare copies of all proposed
ordinances and resolutions for distribution to all members of the council at the meeting at which the ordinance or
resolution is introduced, or at such earlier time as is expedient.
(d) Recording of votes. The “yeas” and “nays” shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and
resolutions and the vote of each member shall be recorded in the minutes.
(e) Majority vote required. An affirmative vote of a majority of the members of council is necessary to repeal
any ordinance or take any official action in the name of the city except as otherwise provided by the laws of the
state or in section 1.03.069.
(f) Demand for roll call. Upon demand of any member, the roll shall be called for “yeas” and “nays” upon any
question before the council, with the exception of those circumstances set forth in subsection (l), “the previous
question.” It shall not be in order for members to explain their vote during the roll call.
(g) Personal privilege. The right of a member to address the council on a question of personal privilege shall
be limited to cases in which his or her integrity, character, or motives are assailed, questioned, or impugned.
(h) Dissents and protests. Any member shall have the right to express dissent from or protest against any
ordinance or resolution of the council and have the reason therefor entered upon the minutes. Such dissent or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/244
protest may be filed in writing, and presented to the council not later than the next regular meeting following the
date of passage of the ordinance or resolution to which objection is made.
(i) Voting required. No member shall be excused from voting except for lack of information and except on
matters involving the consideration of his or her own official conduct, or where his or her personal interests are
involved, and in these instances he or she shall abstain. Any member prohibited from voting by personal interest
shall announce at the commencement of consideration of the matter and shall not enter into discussion or debate
on any such matter and shall leave the meeting room. Having briefly stated the reason for his or her excuse, the
member’s abstention shall not be subject to debate.
(j) Order of precedence of motions.
(1) The following motions shall have priority in the order indicated:
(A) Adjourn (when unqualified) and is not debatable and may not be amended;
(B) Take a recess (when privileged);
(C) Raise a question of privilege;
(D) Lay on the table;
(E) Previous question (2/3 vote required);
(F) Limit or extend limits of debate (2/3 vote required);
(G) Postpone to a certain time;
(H) Commit or refer;
(I) Amend;
(J) Postpone indefinitely; and
(K) Main motion.
(2) The first two motions are not always privileged. To adjourn shall lose its privilege character
and be a main motion if in any way qualified. To take a recess shall be privileged only when other
business is pending.
(3) A motion to adjourn is not in order:
(A) When repeated without intervening business or discussion;
(B) When made as an interruption of a member while speaking; or
(C) While a vote is being taken.
(4) Only certain motions may be amended as provided in the most current edition of Robert’s
Rules of Order, as revised. A motion to amend shall be undebatable when the question to be amended
is undebatable.
(k) Reconsideration. A motion to reconsider any action of the council can be made not later than the next
succeeding official meeting of the council. Such a motion can only be made by a member who voted with the
prevailing side. It can be seconded by any member. In order to comply with the Texas Open Meetings Act, any
councilmember who wishes to make such a motion at a meeting succeeding the meeting where the action was
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/244
taken shall notify the city manager to place the item for reconsideration on the council agenda. No question shall
be twice reconsidered, except by unanimous consent of the council, except that action related to any contract
may be reconsidered at any time before the final execution thereof. A matter which was not timely reconsidered,
in the manner provided by this subsection, or was reconsidered but the action originally taken was not changed,
cannot be reintroduced to the council or placed on a council meeting agenda for a period of six (6) months,
unless this rule is suspended as provided for in these rules.
(l) The previous question. When the previous question is moved and seconded, it shall be put as follows,
“Shall the main question be now put?” There shall then be no further amendment or debate, except that nothing
herein shall allow the previous question to be called prior to at least one opportunity for each member of the
council to speak on the question before the council. Any pending amendments shall be put in their order before
the main question. If the motion for the previous question is lost, the main question remains before the council.
An affirmative vote of 3/5 of the council shall be required to move the previous question. To demand the
previous question is equivalent in effect to moving, “That debate now cease, and the council shall immediately
proceed the vote on the pending motion.” In practice, this is done with the phrase, “call for the question,” or
simply saying, “question.”
(m) Withdrawal of motions. A motion may be withdrawn, or modified, by the movant without asking
permission until the motion has been stated by the presiding officer. If the movant modifies his or her motion,
the seconding councilmember may withdraw his or her second. After the question has been stated, the movant
shall neither withdraw it nor modify it without the consent of the council. A subject different from that question
under consideration shall be admitted under color of amendment. A motion to amend an amendment shall be in
order, but one to amend an amendment to an amendment shall not be in order.
(n) Appropriations of money. Before formal approval by the council of motions providing for appropriation of
money, information must be presented to the council showing purpose of the appropriation. In addition, before
finally acting on such an appropriation, the council shall obtain a report from the city manager as to the
availability of funds and his or her recommendations as to the desirability of the appropriation.
(o) Transfer of appropriations. At the request of the city manager, the council may by resolution transfer an
unencumbered balance of an appropriation made for the use of departments, or a purpose, in accordance with
state law.
Sec. 1.03.068 Creation of committees, boards and commissions
(a) Council committees. The council may, as the need arises, authorize the appointment of one or more “ad
hoc” council committees. Any committee so created shall cease to exist upon the accomplishment of the special
purpose for which it was created or when abolished by a majority vote of the council.
(b) Citizen boards, commissions, and committees.
(1) The council may create other committees, boards and commissions to assist in the conduct of
the operation of the city government with such duties as the council may specify not inconsistent
with state law or this code. Memberships and selection of members shall be as provided by the
council, if not specified under state law or the code. Any committee, board, or commission so created
shall cease to exist upon the accomplishment of the special purpose for which it was created, or when
abolished by a majority of the vote of the council. No committee so appointed shall have powers
other than advisory to the council or to the city manager, except as otherwise specified by state law or
the code.
(2) Appointments.
(A) Individual councilmembers making nominations for members to citizen boards and
commissions will consider interested persons on a citywide basis.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/244
(B) The city council will make an effort to be inclusive of all segments of the community in
the board and commission appointment process. Councilmembers will consider ethnicity,
gender, socio-economic levels, and other factors to ensure a diverse representation of citizens.
(C) The city council will take into consideration an individual’s qualifications, willingness to
serve, and application information in selecting nominations for membership to each board and
commission.
(D) In an effort to ensure maximum citizen participation, city councilmembers will continue
the general practice of nominating new citizens to replace board members who have served
three (3) consecutive, full terms on the same board.
(c) Rules of procedure. Board and commission members shall comply with the provisions of this code. Each
board and commission shall be provided a copy of these rules and each advisory board shall adopt rules of
procedure governing the operation of its board, incorporating sections 1.03.062, 1.03.063, 1.03.065, and
1.03.067 hereof insofar as is possible.
Sec. 1.03.069 Votes required
Questions on which the voting requirement is varied by the state statutes and these rules are listed below:
(1) State statutory requirements.
(A) Levying taxes–three votes. Ordinances providing for the assessment and collection of
taxes require the approval of two-thirds of the members of the council.
(B) Changing paying assessment plans–three votes. Changes in plans for paying assessment
require a two-thirds vote of the council.
(C) Changes in zoning ordinance of zoning classifications. In cases of written protest of a
change in zoning regulation or zoning classification by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or
more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of the lots immediately
adjoining the same and extending two hundred feet (200') therefrom, such amendment shall not
become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of the city
council; a three-fourths (3/4) majority of the city council is required to override the decision of
the planning and zoning commission that a zoning change be denied.
(Ordinance 110311A adopted 11/3/11)
ARTICLE 1.04 ELECTIONS
Sec. 1.04.001 Applicability of state law
The provisions of V.T.C.A., Election Code, shall apply in all elections held in the city. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
ARTICLE 1.05 BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.05.001–1.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Finance Committee
Sec. 1.05.031 Adoption of Statement on Auditing Standards No. 112
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/244
The city hereby adopts the Statement on Auditing Standards No. 112 (“SAS 112”), as amended, as a guide for
the evaluation and recommendation by the finance committee of the city’s financial position and internal
controls.
Sec. 1.05.032 Created
There is hereby created a finance committee (“committee”) which shall be composed of five regular members. A
quorum must be present in order for the committee to take action.
Sec. 1.05.033 Ex officio members
(a) The city’s financial liaison and the city manager shall be ex officio, nonvoting members of the finance
committee.
(b) It shall be the duty of the ex officio members of the committee to provide a written report to the regular
members regarding the city’s financial position and internal controls at each meeting.
Sec. 1.05.034 Officers
At its first meeting of each year, the committee shall select from its members a chairperson, vice-chairperson and
a secretary of the committee.
Sec. 1.05.035 Rules and procedures
(a) Three members of the committee shall be required to constitute a quorum. A concurring vote of at least
three (3) members is necessary to take action on a recommendation to city council under this division.
(b) A committee member having a personal or financial interest in any matter before the committee shall
excuse himself from the discussion and the vote on that matter.
(c) The person acting as secretary to the committee shall make a record of all proceedings of the committee,
which shall set forth the particulars of the matter before the committee, the recommendation rendered by the
committee, the reason for the said recommendation and the vote of each member participating therein.
(d) The chairperson or city manager may call meetings of the committee when necessary to make a
recommendation regarding the city’s financial position and internal controls; however, the committee shall meet
at least one (1) time every three (3) months, with the first meeting to be held in October of each fiscal year, to
provide a recommendation to the city council on the current financial position and internal controls of the city.
(e) The committee shall establish such other rules and procedures it deems necessary for the election of
officers and the conduct of its business.
Sec. 1.05.036 Duties
The committee shall receive reports on the city’s financial position and internal controls from the ex officio
members and make recommendations to the city council regarding such matters.
(Ordinance 101509 adopted 10/15/09)
ARTICLE 1.06 FINANCES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.06.001 Fiscal year
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/244
The fiscal year of the city is hereby designated as beginning with the first day of October of each year and
ending the last day of September next ensuing thereafter. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 9)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to prescribe fiscal year, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 101.042.
Sec. 1.06.002 Depository; signing of checks
(a) The American National Bank, Crandall, Texas, is hereby designated as the official depository of the city.
Checking accounts or savings accounts, as authorized by the city council, shall be established at said bank with
the requirement that all checks written against any such account(s) shall be duly signed by any two of the
following officials:
(1) Mayor;
(2) Mayor pro tempore;
(3) City manager;
(4) City secretary.
(b) It shall be the duty of the city manager to forecast revenues and expenditures and invest all idle cash
balances in excess of immediate needs in certificates of deposit with said bank.
(Ordinance 718960 adopted 7/18/96)
Editor’s note–The authority for the mayor to sign checks was taken away by the city council at a council meeting held on July 2, 1987.
State law reference–Depositories for municipal funds, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 105.
Sec. 1.06.003 Audits
An audit of the books of account of the city shall be made and filed annually in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, chapter 103. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 12)
State law reference–Audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 103.
Sec. 1.06.004 Offset of delinquent accounts; denial of permit or privilege to persons in debt to city
(a) No money shall be paid by the city upon any claim, debt, demand or account to any person, firm or
corporation that is in arrears to the city for taxes, assessments, utility services or other debt or obligation. The
city shall be entitled to a counterclaim and offset against any such debt, claim, demand or account in the amount
of the taxes or other debt in arrears. No assignment or transfer of such debt, claim, demand or account, after said
taxes or other debts are due, shall affect the right of the city to offset.
(b) No person or entity that owes delinquent taxes, paving assessments, utility charges or any other delinquent
debt or obligation to the city shall be granted any permit, license or privilege until the debt or obligation has
been discharged by payment, or an arrangement satisfactory to the city manager has been made for the payment
of such debt or obligation.
(c) This section does not apply to any person or entity that has an existing bona fide dispute under claim or
litigation.
(Ordinance 050301, sec. 1, adopted 5/3/01)
Secs. 1.06.005–1.06.040 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/244
Division 2. Annual Budget*
Sec. 1.06.041 Budget officer
The budget officer of the city shall be the mayor of the city. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 11(A))
State law reference–Budget officer, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.001.
Sec. 1.06.042 Budget required; preparation
The budget officer shall, with the aid and counsel of the members of the city council and city staff, annually
prepare a budget to cover all proposed expenditures of the government of the city for the succeeding year, in
accordance with in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, section 102.002. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec.
11(B))
State law reference–Annual budget required, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.002.
Sec. 1.06.043 Contents
The budget shall show all expenditures proposed and shall be carefully itemized so as to make as clear a
comparison as practicable between expenditures included in the proposed budget and actual expenditures for the
same or similar purposes for the preceding year. The budget must also show as definitely as possible each of the
various projects for which appropriations are made in the budget and the budgeted sums for each of such
projects. The budget shall also contain a complete financial statement of the city showing all outstanding
obligations of such city, the cash on hand to the credit of each and every fund, the funds received from all
sources during the previous year, the funds available to cover the proposed budget, and the estimated rate of tax
which will be required. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 11(C))
State law reference–Itemized budget and contents, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.003.
Sec. 1.06.044 Cooperation by city officials
The mayor shall have the authority to require any officer or other unit of the city government to furnish such
information as may, in the mayor’s discretion, be necessary to afford proper preparation of the proposed budget.
(1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 11(D))
State law reference–Information furnished by municipal officers and boards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.004.
Sec. 1.06.045 Filing of proposed budget
The budget shall be filed with the city secretary not less than thirty (30) days prior to the time the council makes
its tax levy for the current fiscal year. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 11(E))
State law reference–Proposed budget filed with municipal clerk and public inspection, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
102.005.
Sec. 1.06.046 Public inspection of proposed budget
The budget filed with the city secretary shall be available for the inspection of any taxpayer during all
reasonable business hours. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 11(F))
Sec. 1.06.047 Public hearing; filing of adopted budget
A public hearing shall be had and the budget adopted thereafter shall be filed with the proper officials in
accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.008. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 11(G))
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/244
State law references–Public hearing on proposed budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.006; adoption of budget,
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 102.007; approved budget filed with municipal clerk, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec.
102.008.
ARTICLE 1.07 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.07.001 National Incident Management System adopted
The National Incident Management System (NIMS) is hereby adopted to be utilized for all emergency incident
management in the city. The city council further directs the city's emergency response personnel and supervisors
be trained in the use of NIMS. (Resolution 080405 adopted 8/4/05)
Secs. 1.07.002–1.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Emergency Management Program
Sec. 1.07.031 Emergency management organization
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(b) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(c) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the
county and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this division. He/she may delegate
authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall
remain with the director.
(d) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and
employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized
volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and
employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
(Ordinance 031600, sec. 2, adopted 3/16/00)
Sec. 1.07.032 Powers and duties of emergency management director
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property
within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the
implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such
hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary
for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of 7 days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and
general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/244
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this division. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated
promptly by means calculated to bring the contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well
as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located, and with
other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management
efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could
be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (V.T.C.A., Government Code
chapter 418).
(Ordinance 031600, sec. 3, adopted 3/16/00)
Sec. 1.07.033 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this division. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the
duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion
of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered
supplementary to this division and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. (Ordinance 031600, sec.
4, adopted 3/16/00)
Sec. 1.07.034 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge in the formation of an emergency management
council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency
management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/244
necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect
the city. (Ordinance 031600, sec. 5, adopted 3/16/00)
Sec. 1.07.035 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this division shall be in
effect, they shall be in effect, [sic] they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and
regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. (Ordinance 031600, sec. 6, adopted 3/16/00)
Sec. 1.07.036 Liability
This division is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace,
health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver,
firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this division shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or
parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice
enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly
liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license,
privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (Ordinance 031600, sec.
7, adopted 3/16/00)
Sec. 1.07.037 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this division without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any
right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council
unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds
of the county when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. (Ordinance
031600, sec. 8, adopted 3/16/00)
Sec. 1.07.038 Offenses; penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this division, or to do
any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this division.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning, or the
termination of a warning, shall be in violation of this division and may be subject to the penalties imposed by
this division.
(d) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this division shall be punishable by fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or confinement in jail for a term not to exceed 180 days.
(Ordinance 031600, sec. 9, adopted 3/16/00)
Sec. 1.07.039 Limitations
This division shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or
naval order, rule, or regulation. (Ordinance 031600, sec. 11, adopted 3/16/00)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/244
ARTICLE 1.08 DISCRIMINATION
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.08.001–1.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fair Housing
Sec. 1.08.031 Policy
It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city.
(Ordinance 21596B, sec. 1, adopted 2/15/96)
Sec. 1.08.032 Definitions
Discriminatory housing practice. An act that is unlawful under sections 1.08.033, 1.08.034, and 1.08.035 of this
division.
Dwelling. Any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for
occupancy as a residence for one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location thereon of any building, structure, or portion thereof.
Family. Includes a single individual.
Person. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
receivers and fiduciaries.
To rent. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy
premises not owned by the occupant.
(Ordinance 21596B, sec. 2, adopted 2/15/96)
Sec. 1.08.033 Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
It shall be unlawful:
(1) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fida offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the
sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of families
with children, handicapped persons, race, color, religion, sex or national origin.
(2) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a
dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of families with
children, handicapped persons, race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
(3) To make, print, or publish, or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or
advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference,
limitation, or discrimination based on families with children, handicapped persons, race, color,
religion, sex, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or
discrimination.
(4) To represent to any person because of families with children, handicapped persons, race, color,
religion, sex, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when
such dwelling is in fact so available.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/244
(5) For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by
representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons
of particular families with children, handicapped persons, race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
(Ordinance 21596B, sec. 3, adopted 2/15/96)
Sec. 1.08.034 Discrimination in financing of housing
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other corporation,
association, firm or enterprise, situated within the city limits, whose business consists in whole or in part in the
making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor
for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate
against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other
financial assistance, because of families with children, handicap, race, color, religion, sex, or national origin of
such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance, or
of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to
which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. (Ordinance 21596B, sec. 4, adopted
2/15/96)
Sec. 1.08.035 Discrimination in provision of brokerage services
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service,
real estate broker’s organization or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or
participation, on account of families with children, handicap, race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
(Ordinance 21596B, sec. 5, adopted 2/15/96)
Sec. 1.08.036 Religious organization or private club exemption
Nothing in this division shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit
institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for
other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons,
unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of families with children, handicap, race, color, or
national origin. (Ordinance 21596B, sec. 6, adopted 2/15/96)
Sec. 1.08.037 Administrator
The city council shall appoint a fair housing administrator whose specific duty shall be to insure the provisions
of this division are complied with. (Ordinance 21596B, sec. 7, adopted 2/15/96)
Sec. 1.08.038 Enforcement
(a) Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he
will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur, (hereinafter “person
aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the fair housing administrator. Complaints shall be in writing and shall
contain such information and be in such form as the administrator requires. Upon receipt of such complaint the
administrator shall furnish a copy of the same to the person or persons who allegedly committed or are about to
commit the alleged discriminatory housing practice. Within thirty days after receiving a complaint, or within
thirty days after the expiration of any period of reference under subsection (c) of this section, the administrator
shall investigate the complaint and give notice in writing to the person aggrieved whether he intends to resolve
it. If the administrator decides to resolve the complaint, he shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged
discriminatory housing practice by informal methods or conference, conciliation, and persuasion. Nothing said
or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent
proceeding without the written consent of the persons concerned.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/244
(b) A complaint under subsection (a) of this section shall be filed within one hundred eighty days after the
alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be in writing and shall state the facts upon
which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and fairly
amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint against him and with the leave of the
administrator, which shall be granted whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his answer
at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified.
(c) If, within thirty days after a complaint is filed with the administrator, he has been unable to obtain
voluntary compliance with this division, the person aggrieved may, within thirty days thereafter, commence a
civil action in any appropriate state court, against the respondent named in the complaint, to enforce the rights
granted or protected by this division, insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint. If the court
finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur, the court may, subject to the
provisions of this division, enjoin the respondent from engaging in such practice or order such affirmative action
as may be appropriate.
(d) In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of proof shall be on the complainant.
(e) Whenever an action filed by an individual, in state court, pursuant to this section, shall come to trial the
administrator shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary compliance.
(f) In lieu of the remedies above provided, the administrator may authorize the city attorney to institute such
legal proceedings deemed appropriate.
(g) Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to answer any lawful inquiry or to
produce records, documents, or other evidence, if in his power to do so, in obedience to the orders of the
administrator, shall be fined not more than $200.00. Any person who, with intent thereby to mislead the
administrator, shall make or cause to be made any false entry or statement of fact in any report, account, record,
or other document submitted to the administrator pursuant to his orders, or shall willfully neglect or fail to make
or cause to be made full, true, and correct entries in such reports, accounts, records, or other documents, or shall
willfully mutilate, alter, or by any other means falsify any documentary evidence, shall be fined not more than
$200.00.
(Ordinance 21596B, sec. 8, adopted 2/15/96)
Sec. 1.08.039 Cooperation with the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development; utilization of
services and personnel; written agreements
The administrator may cooperate with state and federal agencies charged with the administration of state and
federal fair housing laws and, with the consent of such agencies, utilize the services of such agencies and their
employees. In furtherance of such cooperative efforts, the administrator may enter into written agreements with
such state or federal agencies. (Ordinance 21596B, sec. 9, adopted 2/15/96)
Sec. 1.08.040 Penalties
Any person who is convicted of violating this division shall be fined up to $200.00. (Ordinance 21596B, sec. 10,
adopted 2/15/96)
ARTICLE 1.09 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION*
Sec. 1.09.001 Created
The city council hereby finds and determines that it is advisable that the city economic development corporation
be authorized and created under the provisions of the Texas Non-Profit Corporation Act and section 4B, article
5190.6 of Vernon’s Texas Civil Statutes, as amended, the Development Corporation Act of 1979. (Resolution
06-20-96, sec. 1, adopted 6/20/96)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/244
Sec. 1.09.002 Articles of incorporation approved
The articles of incorporation for the corporation, a true copy of which is attached to Resolution 06-20-96 as
exhibit A and made a part hereof for all purposes, are hereby approved for organizing the corporation.
(Resolution 06-20-96, sec. 2, adopted 6/20/96)
Sec. 1.09.003 Filing of articles of incorporation
The city manager is hereby authorized to act as the incorporator of the corporation and to file the articles of
incorporation of the corporation with the secretary of state in the manner provided by law. (Resolution 06-20-96,
sec. 3, adopted 6/20/96)
Sec. 1.09.004 Powers
The city council specifically authorizes the corporation to act on its behalf to further the public purposes stated
in the articles, such purposes being those recited in the election ballots submitted to and approved by the voters
of the city on May 4, 1996, to authorize the levy of an additional one-half of one percent sales and use tax to be
used for the purposes authorized by section 4B, article 5190.6. (Resolution 06-20-96, sec. 4, adopted 6/20/96)
ARTICLE 1.10 LIBRARY*
Sec. 1.10.001 Acceptance of designation as community library
(a) The city hereby accepts the designation of a community library as authorized by the state library and
archives commission, pursuant to the authority vested in the commission by the Texas Library Systems Act, also
being known as V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 441.121 et seq.
(b) Such community library as herein designated shall be a member of the Northeast Texas Library System
with its major resource center library at Garland, Texas.
(Ordinance 12-04-97, secs. 1, 2, adopted 12/4/97)
ARTICLE 1.11 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
Sec. 1.11.001 Enforcement
The following regulations govern the public use of all parks in the city. The city manager, the police department,
the Crandall Volunteer Fire Department, and the city’s code enforcement officials, as well as all applicable
federal, state and local agencies, shall diligently enforce the provisions of this article and shall have the authority
to issue or cause to have issued citations or to eject or cause to have ejected from any park area any person
acting in violation of this article, in accordance with applicable law.
Sec. 1.11.002 Applicability
(a) The regulations covered in this article shall be applicable to park lands and facilities (“park land”) owned
or leased by the city, completed or under construction, administered by the city.
(b) The city authorizes the city manager to manage the natural, cultural and developed park land resources in
the public interest, providing the public with safe and healthful recreational opportunities while protecting and
enhancing these resources.
Sec. 1.11.003 Definitions
Park land. Generally refers to the areas of any park lands and park facilities, including waterways and lakes,
developed and operated by the city. Specifically, this article applies to park land currently identified as Webb
Park.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/244
Vehicles. All vehicles, motorized and nonmotorized, including, without limitation, automobiles, trucks,
recreational vehicles, motorcycles, mini-bikes, skateboards, all-terrain vehicles, dune buggies, and trailers,
campers, bicycles or any other such similar vehicles.
(1) The operator of any vehicle as described in this article shall be presumed to be responsible for
its use on park land. In the event an operator cannot be determined, the registered owner of vehicle,
whether attended or unattended, will be presumed responsible.
(1) The presumptions stated herein are rebuttable and shall have the effects and consequences set
forth in section 2.05 of the Texas Penal Code. The state department of transportation’s computergenerated
record of the registered vehicle owner is prima facie evidence of the contents of the record.
Sec. 1.11.004 Vehicles
(a) Prohibited vehicles. The use of recreational motorized vehicles, including, without limitation, motorcycles,
mini-bikes, all-terrain vehicles, motorized bicycles, dune buggies and motorized scooters, is prohibited on park
land.
(b) Authorized vehicles.
(1) Vehicles shall obey posted restrictions and regulations and shall not be parked or operated in a
manner so as to obstruct or impede normal or emergency traffic movement or the parking of other
vehicles, create a safety hazard or endanger any person, property or environmental feature. Vehicles
so parked are subject to removal and impoundment at the owner’s expense.
(2) The operation and/or parking of a vehicle off authorized roadways is prohibited except at
locations and times designated by the city manager. The operation or placement of any vehicle
through, around or beyond a restrictive sign, barricade, fence, or traffic-control device is prohibited.
(3) At designated recreation areas, vehicles shall be used only to enter or leave the area, individual
sites or facilities unless otherwise posted.
(4) Any motorized vehicle shall be operated only with a proper and effective exhaust muffler as
defined and required by state and local laws.
(5) All vehicles shall be operated in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws.
Sec. 1.11.005 Swimming
(a) All swimming or wading shall be undertaken at the person’s own risk.
(b) Diving, jumping or swinging from trees, bridges or other structures that span or are adjacent to city-owned
or leased lands and waters is prohibited.
Sec. 1.11.006 Picnicking
Picnicking and related day-use activities are permitted, except in those areas where prohibited by the city
manager. The registered user of a campsite, picnic area, or other facility shall be responsible for its use.
Sec. 1.11.007 Hunting, fishing and trapping
(a) Hunting. Hunting and discharging firearms is prohibited in all park land.
(b) Trapping. Trapping is prohibited in all park land.
(c) Fishing. Fishing is permitted except in swimming areas or other areas designated by the city manager.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/244
(d) Regulation. All applicable federal, state and local laws will regulate these activities on city-owned or
leased property.
Sec. 1.11.008 Sanitation
(a) Removal of waste materials. Garbage, trash, rubbish, litter or any other waste material or waste liquid
generated on park land and incidental to authorized recreational activities shall either be removed from park land
or deposited in receptacles provided for that purpose. The improper disposal of such wastes, human and animal
waste included, on park land is prohibited.
(b) Disposal and discharge of waste materials on park land prohibited.
(1) No person may dispose of or dump onto park land any household or commercial garbage, trash,
rubbish, debris, dead animals or litter of any kind. Park land trash receptacles shall only be used for
approved waste disposal as stated herein and shall not be used for waste generated by nonpark land
users. No person shall bring trash, rubbish, garbage or waste of any kind onto park land for disposal.
(2) The spilling, pumping, discharge or disposal of contaminants, pollutants or other wastes,
including, but not limited to, human or animal waste, petroleum, industrial and commercial products
and by-products, on park land is prohibited.
(c) Removal of litter from picnic sites. Picnickers and all other persons using a city-owned or leased property
shall keep their sites free of trash and litter and shall remove all personal equipment and clean their sites upon
departure. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this article.
(d) Disposal of waste materials from vehicles prohibited.
(1) The discharge or placing of sewage, garbage, refuse or pollutants onto park land from any
vehicle is prohibited.
(2) The disposal of any garbage, trash, rubbish, debris, dead animals or litter of any kind from a
vehicle shall be the responsibility of the registered owner of the vehicle.
Sec. 1.11.009 Fires
(a) Restriction of gasoline and other accelerants. Gasoline and other accelerants, except that which is
contained in storage tanks of vehicles, camping equipment or hand-portable containers designed for such
purpose, shall not be carried onto or stored on the park land without written permission of the city manager, the
fire chief or fire marshal.
(b) Confinement of authorized fires.
(1) Fires shall be confined to those areas designated by the city manager, and shall be contained in
fireplaces, grills or other facilities designated for this purpose. Fires shall not be left unattended and
must be completely extinguished prior to departure. The burning of materials that produce toxic
fumes, including but not limited to tires, plastic and other floatation materials or treated wood
product, is prohibited.
(2) Open burning of any type is prohibited.
(c) Improper disposal of burning material prohibited. Improper disposal of lighted smoking materials, matches
or other burning material is prohibited.
(d) Containment of fires. All fires shall be contained, to the extent permitted, in accordance with the fire code,
as it may be adopted or amended, and all fire-related activities shall be conducted and regulated in accordance
with and by applicable federal, state and local laws.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/244
Sec. 1.11.010 Control of animals
(a) Domesticated animals permitted. Domesticated animals, such as dogs and cats, shall be permitted in
developed recreation areas or adjacent waters provided the animal is penned, caged, on a leash or chain of
sufficient strength and length to control the animal, or otherwise physically restrained. Animals shall not be
allowed to impede or restrict full and free use of park land and waters by the public. Animals, except properly
trained animals assisting those with disabilities (such as seeing-eye dogs), are prohibited in sanitary facilities,
playgrounds and any other areas so designated by the city manager.
(b) Abandoned animals. Abandonment of any animal on city-owned or leased land or waters is prohibited.
(1) Unclaimed or unattended animals are subject to immediate impoundment in accordance with
city ordinances.
(2) Any animal impounded under the provisions of this article shall be subject to all appropriate
fees and expenses upon recoupment by the owner or other person with care, custody or control of the
animal. All fees shall be paid before the impounded animal is returned to its owner(s).
(c) Unreasonable noise. No person shall allow animals to bark or emit other noise that unreasonably disturbs
persons in the park land. It shall be prima facie evidence of unreasonable disturbance if the animal barks or
emits other noise for longer than 15 minutes.
(d) Removal of pet waste. Persons bringing or allowing animals in designated public use areas shall be
responsible for proper removal and disposal of any waste/feces produced by these animals.
(e) Prohibited animals. Wild or exotic pets and animals (including but not limited to cougars, lions, bears,
bobcats, wolves and snakes), or any pets or animals displaying vicious or aggressive behavior or otherwise
posing a threat to public safety or deemed a public nuisance, are prohibited from park land, unless otherwise
permitted by ordinance, and are subject to removal in accordance with federal, state and local laws.
Sec. 1.11.011 Explosives, firearms, other weapons and fireworks
(a) Prohibited weapons: exceptions. The possession of loaded firearms, ammunition, loaded projectile firing
devices, bows and arrows, crossbows or other weapons is prohibited unless:
(1) In the possession of a federal, state or local law enforcement officer;
(2) Written permission has been received from the city manager; or
(3) The person is in possession of the firearm consistent with the state’s concealed handgun law,
subchapter H, chapter 411, of the Texas Government Code, as it may be amended.
(b) Pyrotechnical devices prohibited, exceptions. Possession of explosives or explosive devices of any kind,
including fireworks or other pyrotechnics, is prohibited unless written permission has been received from the
city manager, the fire chief or fire marshal.
(c) Applicable law. All such activities and possession shall be regulated by the applicable federal, state and
local laws.
Sec. 1.11.012 Public property
(a) Destruction, removal and alteration of public property prohibited. Destruction, injury, defacement, removal
or any alteration of public property, including, without limitation, developed facilities, natural formations,
mineral deposits, historical and archaeological features, paleontological resources, boundary monumentation or
markers and vegetative growth, is prohibited except when in accordance with written permission granted by the
city manager.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/244
(b) Use and removal of wood.
(1) Cutting or gathering of trees or parts of trees and/or the removal of wood from city-owned or
leased lands is prohibited without written permission of the city manager.
(2) Gathering of dead wood on the ground for use in designated recreation areas as firewood is
permitted, unless prohibited and posted by the city manager. Firewood shall be used only as provided
by this article, or the fire code, as adopted or amended.
(c) Metal detector restrictions. Metal detectors may only be used in designated use areas in accordance with
city policy. All items found must be turned in to the city manager or the chief of police as unclaimed or
abandoned personal property, subject to disposition in accordance with the provisions herein and state law.
Sec. 1.11.013 Abandonment and impoundment of personal property
(a) Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply to all property not subject to section 18.17 of the
Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) Disposition of abandoned and unattended property.
(1) Personal property of any kind shall not be abandoned, stored or left unattended upon park land
or waters. After a period of 24 hours, or at any time after a posted closure hour in a public area or for
the purpose of providing public safety or resource protection, unattended personal property shall be
presumed to be abandoned and may be impounded and stored at a storage point designated by the
city manager, who may assess a reasonable impoundment fee, in accordance with the city’s fee
ordinance, against any person who provides proof of ownership and seeks to reclaim such property.
Such fee shall be paid before the impounded property is returned to its owner.
(2) Abandoned or unclaimed personal property may be disposed of after 30 days, except that if it
has a fair market value of $100 or more, the property may not be disposed of until 90 days after the
date it is received at the storage point designated by the city manager. The net proceeds from the sale
of property shall be conveyed into a designated fund that is consistent with city policy and
ordinances.
(3) The city manager shall cause, by public or private sale or otherwise, to dispose of all lost,
abandoned or unclaimed personal property that comes into city custody or control, consistent with
city policies and procedures; however, property may not be disposed of until diligent effort has been
made to find the owner, heirs, next of kin or legal representative(s). If the owner, heirs, next of kin or
legal representative(s) are determined but not found, the property may not be disposed of until the
expiration of 30 days after the date when notice, giving the time and place of the intended sale or
other disposition, has been sent by certified or registered mail to the person at the last known address.
When diligent efforts to determine the owner, heirs, next of kin or legal representative(s) are
unsuccessful, the property may be placed in line for sale, upon the expiration of 30 days from the
date of impoundment, consistent with city policies and procedures.
Sec. 1.11.014 Special events
(a) Special events, including, without limitation, music festivals, dramatic presentations or other special
recreation programs, are permitted only by written permission from the city manager, consistent with city
policies and ordinances. The city manager will coordinate with the appropriate authorities to gain permission to
permit the above-referenced special events while coordinating the scheduling and details of tournaments with
the city and program calendar. The appropriate fees will be assessed in accordance with city ordinances.
(b) The public may be charged a fee by the sponsor of special events. Proposed fee schedules must be
approved in writing by the city manager. The city manager shall have authority to revoke permission, require
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/244
removal of any equipment, and require restoration of an area to pre-event condition, upon failure of the sponsor
to comply with terms and conditions of the authorization.
Sec. 1.11.015 Unauthorized occupation of structures; trespass
(a) Unauthorized occupation.
(1) Occupation of any park lands shall be in strict conformance with the policies set forth herein
and as may be published by the city manager or by city ordinance.
(2) Use of city-owned or leased lands or waters shall not be for agricultural purposes, unless set
forth by city ordinance or agreement.
(b) Trespass. It shall be unlawful for a person to enter onto or remain on park land if he receives notice to
depart and fails to do so. Notice for purpose of this article shall mean the oral or written communication by the
city manager or the chief of police, or their designee. Such also may constitute criminal trespass in accordance
with section 30.05 of the Texas Penal Code. Written notice shall be deemed delivered when personal delivery is
accomplished, or a notice is posted either on the vehicle occupying the site, on a public marker identifying the
site or on a stake in the ground within the site.
Sec. 1.11.016 Miscellaneous
(a) Lost and found articles. All articles found shall be deposited by the finder with the city manager at
Crandall City Hall. Articles will be held for 30 days. Disposition of the property may be had in accordance with
the abandoned or unclaimed property procedures set forth herein.
(b) Advertising and solicitation.
(1) Advertising and the distribution of printed matter must be in accordance with city ordinance.
(2) Engaging in or soliciting business on park land without the express written permission of the
city manager is prohibited.
(c) State and local laws.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this article or by federal law or regulation, state and local laws
and ordinances shall apply on park land, including, but not limited to, state and local laws and
ordinances governing:
(A) Operation and use of motor vehicles;
(B) Hunting, fishing and trapping;
(C) Use or possession of firearms or other weapons;
(D) Civil disobedience and criminal acts;
(E) Littering, sanitation and pollution;
(F) Alcohol or other controlled substances;
(G) Fires; and
(H) Explosives, firearms, other weapons and fireworks.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/244
(2) These state and local laws and ordinances may be enforced by the police, fire and code
enforcement departments and other federal, state and local enforcement agencies established and
authorized for that purpose.
Sec. 1.11.017 Nondiscrimination clause
All park land open for public use shall be available to the public without regard to sex, race, color, creed, age,
nationality or place of origin. No lessee, licensee or concessionaire shall discriminate against any person because
of sex, race, color, creed, age, nationality or place of origin.
Sec. 1.11.018 Restrictions and violations
(a) Park land hours of operation.
(1) The city manager may establish and post a schedule of visiting hours and/or restrictions on the
public use of park land. The city manager may close or restrict the use of park land when necessitated
by reason of public health, public safety, maintenance, resource protection or other reasons in the
public interest. Entering or using park land in a manner that is contrary to the schedule of visiting
hours, closures or restrictions is prohibited.
(2) The hours of operation for Webb Park, during which it will be open to the public, are 7:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m.
(b) Prohibited and restricted conduct.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commit any act that is prohibited by
this article.
(2) Quiet shall be maintained in all public use areas between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Excessive noise between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. that unreasonably disturbs persons in
other sites is prohibited.
(3) Any act or conduct by any person that interferes with, impedes or disrupts the use of park land
or impairs the safety of any person is prohibited. Individuals who are loud, boisterous, rowdy or
disorderly, or who otherwise disturb the peace may be requested to leave or may be subject to
ejection, consistent with state and local laws and ordinances.
(4) The operation or use of any sound-producing or motorized equipment in such a manner as to
unreasonably annoy or endanger persons at any time or exceed state or local laws governing noise
levels from motorized equipment is prohibited.
(5) The possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages on any portion of park land is
prohibited.
(6) The use of glass containers on park land is prohibited.
(7) Smoking is prohibited in restrooms, enclosed park buildings and in those areas posted to
restrict smoking.
(8) Children under the age of 10 must be supervised by a parent or other responsible adult 18 years
of age or older.
(9) The city manager or chief of police may refuse entry to any person for a period of up to one
year on the following bases:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/244
(A) Any breach of the peace that has occurred on public lands within the preceding twelve
months;
(B) Any person who occupies a site without a valid permit and/or fails to leave upon the
expiration of a permit;
(C) Any person who has failed to pay the appropriate fee and failed to cure within ten (10)
days of demand;
(D) Any person who has violated any term or condition of the permit requirement.
(10) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined, upon
conviction, an amount not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for proof of an offense committed
under this article, unless otherwise specifically required by law for the particular offenses.
(11) Consistent with state law, the city shall not be liable for any injury to a person who enters onto
park land for any purpose.
(Ordinance 022003, sec. 2, adopted 2/20/03; Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this
section:
Dog. All domesticated members of the canine family, but shall not include wolves, jackals, foxes or any other
wild or dangerous member of such family. An adult dog is one which is more than six (6) months of age.
(Ordinance 010600, sec. 1(A), adopted 1/6/00)
Local rabies control authority. The person designated by the city council as the local health authority who has
the duties as described in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.017(c). (Ordinance adopting Code)
Wild animal. Any wild animal, amphibian, reptile or fowl which is not naturally tame or gentle, but is of a wild
nature or disposition and which, because of its size, vicious nature or other characteristics, would constitute a
danger to human life or property if it is not kept or maintained in a safe manner or in secure quarters. Such
animals shall include, but not be limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, bears, wolves, alligators, crocodiles,
apes, foxes, elephants, rhinoceroses and all forms of poisonous reptiles and other like animals. (Ordinance
010600, sec. 1(A), adopted 1/6/00)
Sec. 2.01.002 Penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/244
Any person, firm, corporation or organization who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who shall
fail to comply with any provisions hereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject
to a fine as provided in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each day that such violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ordinance 010600, sec. 5, adopted 1/6/00; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 2.01.003 Running at large
(a) Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person raising or keeping any animal to fail to prevent such animal
from running at large within the city or from going upon the premises of another.
(b) Dogs. It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any dog to permit such dog to run at large upon the
streets, alleys or any public place within the city. Such dog, when off the premises of its owner, shall be under
the control of its owner, a member of the owner’s family, his servant or agent, by means of a leash or chain of
sufficient strength and length to control the actions of such dog. At all other times, the dog shall be confined to
the premises of the owner by a substantial fence of sufficient strength and a height to prevent the dog from
escaping therefrom, or inside the house, or secured on the premises by a leash consisting of a metal chain of
sufficient strength to prevent the dog from escaping from the premises and so arranged that the dog will remain
upon the premises when the leash is extended to full length.
(Ordinance 010600, sec. 1(B), adopted 1/6/00)
State law references–Animals at large, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 215.026; restraint, impoundment and disposition of
dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033.
Sec. 2.01.004 Limitation on number of dogs or cats
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or raise, or permit to be kept, maintained or raised, at any
one time, more than four (4) adult dogs or cats or any combination thereof in any house, barn, building, shack,
shed, yard, open space or other place in the city limits. For the purposes of this section, an adult dog or cat shall
be defined as any dog six (6) months of age or over or any dog weighing more than thirty (30) pounds. The
provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any properly zoned veterinarian hospital, veterinarian clinic,
kennel or place of scientific research. (Ordinance 010600, sec. 1(C), adopted 1/6/00; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.01.005 Dangerous wild animals or dangerous dogs
(a) Dangerous wild animals, as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, section 822.101, shall be
regulated in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A, Health and Safety Code, chapter 822, subchapter E,
section 822.101 et seq.
(b) Dangerous dogs, as defined in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, section 822.041, shall be regulated in
accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 822, subchapter D, section 822.041
et seq.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.01.006 Noisy animals
(a) No person shall harbor or keep on his premises or elsewhere any animal of any kind that makes or creates
an unreasonable disturbance of the peace of the neighbors or occupants of adjacent premises, or people living in
the vicinity thereof, or suffer or permit such animal to make or create unusual noises by howling, barking,
bawling or otherwise.
(b) A person shall be deemed to have violated the terms of this section if such person shall have been notified
by the neighbors, the chief of police or his designated representative of such disturbance and shall have failed,
for a period of twenty-four (24) hours, to correct such disturbance and prevent its recurrence.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/244
(Ordinance 010600, sec. 1(E), adopted 1/6/00)
Sec. 2.01.007 Authority to destroy injured or sick animals
Any animal impounded or found at large within the city may be destroyed upon determination by a licensed
veterinarian that such animal has been injured or is sick and in such a state that its recovery is seriously in doubt,
or that such animal’s sickness endangers the health of other animals or persons. (Ordinance 010600, sec. 2(D),
adopted 1/6/00)
ARTICLE 2.02 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 2.02.001 Vaccination
All dogs or cats sixteen (16) weeks of age or over within the city are required to be immunized against rabies
annually in accordance with Texas Administrative Code, section 169.29. (Ordinance 010600, sec. 2(A), adopted
1/6/00; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.021 et seq.
Sec. 2.02.002 Confinement of animals attacking person; confinement of suspected rabid animals
(a) Any animal that bites, scratches or otherwise attacks any person within the city limits shall be immediately
and securely confined by the owner, or one having custody, at premises acceptable to the chief of police, for a
period of ten (10) days following a bite, scratch or attack, subject to inspection from time to time so as to be able
to determine whether such animal is affected by rabies, or such animal may be quarantined and held by the city
manager. After such period of time and in the event such animal is determined to be free from rabies, such
animal may be returned to its owner, or, if not claimed thereafter, may be given to another owner or destroyed if
a new owner cannot be found.
(b) Any animal that has rabies or symptoms thereof shall be immediately and securely confined to a veterinary
hospital approved by the chief of police and kept from contact with any other animal until such animal dies or
recovers.
(c) Any animal which has been exposed to rabies shall be immediately and securely confined to a veterinary
hospital approved by the chief of police and kept from contact with any other animal for a period of six (6)
months; upon authorization by a licensed veterinarian and consent of the owner, such animal may be destroyed.
At the discretion of a licensed veterinarian or his representative from time to time so as to be able to determine
whether such animal is affected by rabies, such animal may be confined by the owner of such animal at the
owner’s premises or at a veterinary hospital.
(d) If an animal dies while under quarantine or if an animal is determined by a veterinarian to have rabies, the
head of such animal shall be sent to the department of state health services for examination.
(Ordinance 010600, sec. 2(B), adopted 1/6/00)
Sec. 2.02.003 Report of rabies or other disease communicable to humans
It shall be the duty of the owner or the harborer of any animal or practicing veterinarian to report to the chief of
police all cases of rabies or other disease communicable to human beings with which his attention has been
directed. This report shall be made immediately upon diagnosis or suspicion of such cases. (Ordinance 010600,
sec. 2(C), adopted 1/6/00)
ARTICLE 2.03 IMPOUNDMENT*
Sec. 2.03.001 Authorized
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/244
(a) The chief of police or his designated representative shall take up and impound any animal found running at
large in the city and shall have power and authority to use a tranquilizer gun to capture such animal when
deemed necessary.
(b) If any animal is found upon the premises of anyone other than the owner of such animal, the owner or
occupant of such premises shall have the right to confine such animal. He shall notify the chief of police within a
reasonable length of time to come and impound such animal. When so notified, it shall be the duty of such
officers to immediately cause such animal to be impounded.
(Ordinance 010600, sec. 3(A), adopted 1/6/00)
State law references–Animals at large, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 215.026; authority to regulate the capture and
impoundment of animals, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 215.026(c).
Sec. 2.03.002 Notice to owner
Upon the impoundment of an animal under this article, the chief of police or his authorized representative shall
immediately notify the owner, by telephone and in writing, that the animal has been seized and impounded while
at large within the city. Such notice shall state the amount of fees and cost which have accrued because of
impoundment, the time of accrual and the time at which disposition of the animal will be made unless redeemed.
When the owner is unknown, notice shall be posted at city hall for seventy-two (72) hours giving a description
of the animal, location of impoundment and date of impoundment. (Ordinance 010600, sec. 3(B), adopted
1/6/00)
Sec. 2.03.003 Fees
(a) Animals other than dogs. For each animal other than a dog impounded under this article, the following
fees shall be charged:
(1) For taking up the animal, hauling it to the place of impoundment in a standard city vehicle
assigned to the pound and impounding:
(A) First (1st) offense: $25.00.
(B) Second (2nd) offense: $50.00.
(C) Subsequent offenses: $75.00.
(2) For an animal which cannot be properly transported in the standard city vehicle assigned to the
pound, for taking up, hauling to place of impoundment and impounding: The addition of actual costs
incurred plus the fees in subsection (1) above.
(3) For newspaper advertisement: Actual costs incurred.
(b) Dogs. For each dog impounded under this article, the following fees shall be charged:
(1) First (1st) offense: $20.00.
(2) Second (2nd) offense: $30.00.
(3) Maintenance for each day or portion thereof of impoundment: $2.00.
(Ordinance 010600, sec. 3(C), adopted 1/6/00)
Sec. 2.03.004 Redemption of impounded animals
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/244
(a) Animals other than dogs. The owner of any animal, other than a dog, which is impounded under this
article may redeem it by paying all expenses of impoundment and keeping, together with the cost of advertising
and fines, at any time prior to the disposition of such animal in accord with section 2.03.005.
(b) Dogs. The owner of any dog impounded under the terms of this article may redeem such dog within
seventy-two (72) hours after impoundment, by paying fees prescribed in section 2.03.003(b). In order for the
owner of a dog not vaccinated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter to obtain its release, such owner
must sign a statement giving the name of the owner and the address where such dog shall be immediately
confined, and stating that he will have the dog vaccinated immediately in accordance with the provisions of
section 2.02.001. Failure to have such dog immediately [vaccinated shall result in] return of the dog to the city
pound and such dog may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of in accord with this chapter.
(Ordinance 010600, sec. 3(D), adopted 1/6/00)
Sec. 2.03.005 Disposition of unredeemed animals other than dogs
(a) After the notice required by section 2.03.002 has been given and the owner has failed to redeem the animal
within seventy-two (72) hours after impoundment, the chief of police or his designated representative shall
proceed to sell such animal at public auction for the highest bid that may be obtained for the animal. Notice of
the time and place of such public auction shall be published at least two (2) times in the official newspaper, the
first notice appearing in such newspaper at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the sale of such animal.
(b) If any animal impounded under this article is not redeemed by the owner and cannot be sold, it may be
given away; if an animal cannot be sold and has not been given away or redeemed, it shall be forthwith
humanely destroyed.
(c) This section shall not apply to unredeemed dogs, which shall be disposed of in accord with section
2.03.006.
(d) The redemption of wild animals or animals of unknown vicious propensity shall not be permitted. If the
animal cannot be sold to a party who will keep it outside the city limits or given away to an institution suitable
for the keeping and care of wild animals, it shall forthwith be humanely destroyed.
(Ordinance 010600, sec. 3(E), adopted 1/6/00)
Sec. 2.03.006 Disposition of unredeemed dogs
All impounded dogs which are not redeemed within seventy-two (72) hours after their capture and impoundment
shall be given to new owners, upon payment of the pound fees set forth in this article. If no new owner is found,
the dog shall be humanely destroyed. (Ordinance 010600, sec. 3(F), adopted 1/6/00)
Sec. 2.03.007 Records
The chief of police or his designated representative shall cause to be kept a record, giving the description of all
animals impounded by him, the date of impounding, the date of sale or release to the owner, the amount realized
for such animals, if sold, and the name and address of the purchaser or person obtaining the release of the
animal. All money collected shall be deposited into the general fund of the city. (Ordinance 010600, sec. 3(G),
adopted 1/6/00)
Sec. 2.03.008 Enforcement; issuance of citations
(a) In addition to all other remedies, which are cumulative, the city may apply to courts of competent
jurisdiction for an injunction to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and may seek to recover its expenses from
any violator.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/244
(b) The chief of police or his designated representative is authorized to issue citations to any person violating
this chapter of the Code of Ordinances. Fine to be assessed: Not less than two dollars ($2.00) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
(Ordinance 010600, sec. 3(H), adopted 1/6/00)
ARTICLE 2.04 FOWL, SWINE AND LIVESTOCK*
Sec. 2.04.001 Keeping of fowl
(a) Purpose. The following regulations will govern the keeping of chickens and are designed to prevent
nuisances and prevent conditions that are unsanitary or unsafe. No person shall keep chickens unless the
following regulations are followed:
(1) Location. Chickens are allowed only in the “Old Town Crandall” (OTC) zoning district.
Chickens are prohibited outside the “(OTC)” zoning district.
(2) Number. No more than ten (10) hens shall be allowed for each single-family dwelling.
(3) Setbacks. Coops or cages housing chickens shall be kept at least twenty-five (25) feet from the
door or window of any dwelling or occupied structure other than the owner’s dwelling. Coops and
cages shall not be located within five (5) feet of a side yard lot line, nor within eighteen (18) inches
of a rear-yard lot line. Coops and cages shall not be located in the front yard.
(4) Enclosure. Hens shall be provided with a covered, predator-proof coop or cage that is well
ventilated and designed to be easily accessed for cleaning. The coop shall allow at least two square
feet per hen. Hens shall have access to an outdoor enclosure that is adequately fenced to contain the
birds on the property and to prevent predators from access to the birds. Hens shall not be allowed out
of these enclosures unless a responsible individual, over 18 years of age, is directly monitoring the
hens and able to immediately return the hens to the cage or coop if necessary.
(5) Sanitation. The coop and outdoor enclosure must be kept in a sanitary condition and free from
offensive odors. The coop and outdoor enclosure must be cleaned on a regular basis to prevent the
accumulation of waste.
(6) Slaughtering. There shall be no outdoor slaughtering of chickens.
(7) Roosters. It is unlawful for any person to keep roosters.
(b) Permit. A permit shall be required. The permit fee is $50.00 a year. An application for a permit must
contain the following items:
(1) The name, phone number, and address of the applicant.
(2) The size and location of the subject property.
(3) A proposal containing the following information.
(A) The number of hens the applicant seeks to keep on the property.
(B) A description of any coops or cages or outdoor enclosures providing precise dimensions
and the precise location of these enclosures in relation to property lines and adjacent properties.
(c) Permit renewal. Permits will be granted on an annual basis. Applicant will reapply for a permit every year,
if the city receives no complaints regarding the permit holder’s keeping of chickens, the permit will be renewed
and the applicant may continue to keep chickens under the terms and condition of the initial permit. The city
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/244
may revoke the permit at any time if the applicant does not follow the terms of the permit, if the city receives
complaints regarding the permit holder’s keeping of chickens, or the city finds that the permit holder has not
maintained the chickens, coops, or outdoor enclosures in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ordinance 020915 adopted 2/9/15)
Sec. 2.04.002 Keeping of swine prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to raise, keep, breed, or maintain swine within the city limits. (Ordinance
010600, sec. 4(B), adopted 1/6/00)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 3.01.001 Standard specifications for public works construction adopted
The latest edition of the manual entitled “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction” prepared by
North Central Texas Council of Governments shall govern the construction of all public works facilities and
subdivision improvements, as well as establishing standards for materials to be used, unless otherwise stipulated
by the city. The manual is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference to the same [extent] as if fully
copied at length, and a copy thereof shall be kept on file with the city secretary and shall be subject to public
inspection at all times during regular business hours. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 11)
ARTICLE 3.02 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.02.001 Permitting fee schedule
(a) Permit fees. The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in table 1-A.
Table 1-A Building Permit Fees
Valuation Fee
$1.00 to $2,000.00 $50.00
$2,001.00 to $10,000.00 $100.00
$10,001.00 to $25,000.00 $100.00 for the first $10,000.00 plus $14.00 for
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/244
each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to
and including $25,000.00
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $391.25 for the first $25,000.00 plus $10.10 for
each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to
and including $50,000.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $643.75 for the first $50,000.00 plus $7.00 for
each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to
and including $100,000.00
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $993.75 for the first $100,000.00 plus $5.60 for
each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to
and including $500,000.00
$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $3,233.75 for the first $500,000.00 plus $4.75 for
each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof, to
and including $1,000,000.00
$1,000,001.00 and up $5,608.75 for the first $1,000,000.00 plus $3.15
for each additional $1,000.00, or fraction thereof
(Ordinance 030509, sec. 2, adopted 3/5/09)
(b) Plan review fees. When submittal documents are required by section 106.3.2, a plan review fee shall be
paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. The plan review fees specified in this
section are in addition to the permit fees. Plan review fee shall be 65 percent of the building permit fee as shown
in table 1-A.
Other Inspections and Fees Hourly Charge
Inspections outside of normal business
hours
$47.00 per hour* (minimum charge–two
hours)
Re-inspection fees assessed under
provisions of section 305.8
$47.00 per hour*
Inspections for which no fee is
specifically indicated
$47.00 per hour* (minimum charge–onehalf
hour)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/244
Additional plan review required by
changes, additions or revisions to plans
$47.00 per hour* (minimum charge–onehalf
hour)
For use of outside consultants for plan
checking inspections, or both
Actual costs**
*Or the total hourly cost to the jurisdiction, whichever is the greatest. This cost shall include supervision,
overhead, equipment, hourly wages and fringe benefits of the employees involved.
**Actual costs include administrative and overhead costs.
(c) Building permit valuation.
(1) The building permit fee charged to build a new building, to add on to an existing building, to
remodel or to alter an existing building shall be based on the declared valuation of the proposed
work.
(2) One- and two-family dwellings: The value of $60.00 per square foot of total area under roof
shall be used to determine the valuation for the purpose of computing permit fees in accordance with
table 1-A.
(3) Commercial projects: The value of $80.00 per square foot of total area under roof shall be used
to determine the valuation for the purpose of computing permit fees in accordance with table 1-A.
(4) The building official may require the applicant to verify the declared value. The building
permit fee shall be calculated based upon figures from table 1-A.
(Ordinance 091808B, sec. 2, adopted 9/18/08)
(d) Residential.
(1) Single-family residential - remodel: $50.00 plus $0.25/square foot.
(2) Accessory building (without foundation): $45.00.
(3) Accessory building (with foundation): $70.00.
(4) Fence: $25.00.
(5) Multifamily residential - new construction: $100.00 plus $0.25/square foot.
(6) Multifamily residential - additions and remodel: $100.00 plus $0.25/square foot.
(e) Commercial.
(1) New construction: $100.00 plus $0.25/square foot.
(2) Additions and remodel: $100.00 plus $0.25/square foot.
(3) Fence: $75.00.
(Ordinance 101906A, sec. 2, adopted 9/11/06)
(f) Inspection fees.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/244
(1) All reinspect fees: $50.00.
(2) Emergency inspection (less than 24 hours notice): $50.00 extra.
(g) Penalty fee. If any work is performed on items requiring a building permit before obtaining the permit, the
fee shall be twice (2 times) the original fee as set forth in this section.
(Ordinance 091996, sec. 2, adopted 9/19/96)
(h) Certificate of occupancy.
(1) Existing buildings: $100.00.
(2) New construction: Cost of certificate of occupancy is included in building permit fee.
(Ordinance 091808B, sec. 2, adopted 9/18/08)
(i) Plumbing.
(1) Residential - additions and remodels (includes swimming pools and water wells): $50.00.
(2) Residential - sprinkler system: $50.00.
(3) Residential sprinkler system annual reinspection (per state law): $45.00.
(4) Residential septic system (in city limits where unavailable): $150.00.
(5) Commercial - new construction: $150.00.
(6) Commercial - additions and remodel: $150.00.
(7) Commercial sprinkler system: $75.00.
(8) Commercial sprinkler system annual inspection (per state law): $75.00.
(9) Commercial septic system (in city limits where available): $300.00.
(Ordinance 101906A, sec. 2, adopted 9/11/06)
(10) Emergency inspection (less than 24 hours notice): $50.00 extra. (Ordinance 091996, sec. 3,
adopted 9/19/96)
(j) Electrical.
(1) Commercial - new construction: $150.00.
(2) Commercial - additions and remodel: $75.00.
(3) Residential - additions and remodels (includes swimming pools and water wells): $50.00.
(Ordinance 101906A, sec. 2, adopted 9/11/06)
(4) Residential - for electrical system installations in new building construction: $100.00.
(5) Reinspection fee: $50.00.
(6) Emergency inspection (less than 24 hours notice): $50.00 extra.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/244
(7) Temporary service permit: $50.00.
(Ordinance 091996, sec. 1, adopted 9/19/96)
(k) Curb, gutter, sidewalk and driveway (flatwork).
(1) Residential (except with new residential building permit): $35.00 plus $0.05/square foot.
(2) Commercial: $100.00 plus $0.05/square foot.
(l) Culvert.
(1) Culvert (up to 20-foot with resident supplying culvert): $100.00.
(2) Culvert (over 20-foot with resident supplying culvert): $100.00 + $1.50/square foot
[$1.50/foot].
(m) Water well.
(1) Residential water well: $150.00.
(Ordinance 101906A, sec. 2, adopted 9/11/06)
(n) Fire alarm fees and fire sprinkler fees: Each of the two sets of fees is based on the total construction
valuation of the project.
(1) Fire code plan review services (fire alarm and fire sprinkler systems).
Total Valuation Fees
$1,000.00 and less $45.00
$1,001.00 to $25,000.00 $189.00
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $315.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $515.00
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $850.00
$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $1,100.00
$1,000,001.00 to
$3,000,000.00
$1,600.00
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/244
$3,000,001.00 to
$6,000,000.00
$2,400.00
$6,000,001.00 and up $2,400.00 plus $0.25 for each additional
$1,000.00
(2) Fire code inspection services (fire alarm and fire sprinkler systems).
Total Valuation Fees
$1,000.00 and less $45.00
$1,001.00 to $25,000.00 $250.00
$25,001.00 to $50,000.00 $550.00
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $850.00
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $1050.00
$500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00 $1,350.00
$1,000,001.00 to
$3,000,000.00
$1,900.00
$3,000,001.00 to
$6,000,000.00
$2,850.00
$6,000,001.00 and up $2,850.00 plus $0.25 for each additional
$1,000.00
(Ordinance 030509, sec. 3, adopted 3/5/09)
(o) Contractor registration. All contractors performing work within the city must meet the state requirements
and maintain a valid state license and proof of liability insurance with the state department of licensing and
registration before a permit will be issued. There is no fee required by the city. (Ordinance 091808B, sec. 2,
adopted 9/18/08)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/244
Secs. 3.02.002–3.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Building Code*
Sec. 3.02.051 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the erection,
construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment,
use, height, areas and maintenance of buildings or structures, that certain building code, known as the
International Building Code, 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council. One copy of the code is
on file in the office of the city secretary. This code shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and
other structures within the city limits.
Sec. 3.02.052 Amendments
The provisions attached to Ordinance 060412 as exhibit A, are local amendments to the International Building
Code, 2009 edition. Each provision is a substitute for the identically numbered provision or is an addition to the
International Building Code, 2006 [2009] edition.
(Ordinance 060412, sec. 2, adopted 6/4/12)
Sec. 3.02.053 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec.
1(B))
Sec. 3.02.054 Expiration of permit
Said permit shall expire if the work authorized therein is not commenced within three (3) months of the date of
the permit. Authorized work must be substantially complete within six (6) months of the date of the permit.
(Ordinance 091996, sec. 2, adopted 9/19/96)
Secs. 3.02.055–3.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Plumbing*
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.02.101 Licensing of plumbers
(a) License required. All persons who engage in or work at the actual installation, alteration, repair and
renovating of plumbing shall possess either a master or journeyman plumber’s license or an apprentice
registration card in accordance with the provisions of the state Plumbing License Law.
(b) Exemptions. The following acts, work and conduct shall be expressly permitted without license:
(1) Plumbing work done by a property owner in a building owned or occupied by him as his
homestead;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/244
(2) Plumbing work done by anyone who is regularly employed as or acting as a maintenance man
or maintenance engineer, incidental to and in connection with the business in which he is employed
or engaged, and who does not engage in the occupation of a plumber for the general public;
construction, installation and maintenance work done upon the premises or equipment of a railroad
by an employee thereof who does not engage in the occupation of a plumber for the general public;
and plumbing work done by persons engaged by any public service company in the laying,
maintenance and operation of its service mains or lines to the point of measurement and the
installation, alteration, adjustment, repair, removal and renovation of all types of appurtenances,
equipment and appliances usable or serviceable; appliance installation and service work done by
anyone who is an appliance dealer or is employed by an appliance dealer, and acting as an appliance
installation man or appliance serviceman in connecting appliances to existing piping installations;
and water treatment installations, exchanges, services or repairs. Provided, however, that all work and
service herein named or referred to shall be subject to inspection and approval in accordance with the
terms of all local valid city or municipal ordinances;
(3) Plumbing work done by a licensed irrigator or licensed installer when working and licensed
under the Licensed Irrigators Act, as amended;
(4) Plumbing work done by an LP gas installer when working and licensed under chapter 113,
Natural Resources Code, as amended; and
(5) Any water treatment dealer or his employee when certified in accordance with section 3A of
the Plumbing License Law.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 2(D))
State law reference–Plumbing License Law, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1301.
Sec. 3.02.102 Registration of plumbers
(a) Required; fee; expiration. No individual, firm or corporation shall install, alter, repair or renovate any
plumbing until such individual, firm or corporation has registered with the city and obtained a registration
license therefor. No plumbing permit will be issued unless such person performing such work has first registered
with the city and paid an annual license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and shall possess a master plumber’s
license in accordance with the provisions of the state Plumbing License Law. Such registration license shall
expire on the thirty-first (31st) day of December next following issuance thereof.
(b) Exemptions. Those who are exempt from the license requirement under section 3.02.101 shall also be
exempt from registration requirements.
(c) Application; changes in information. Any individual, firm or corporation desiring a registration license
shall make application to the city plumbing inspector. Such application shall contain the person’s name, address,
telephone and state master plumber’s license number. Any changes in address shall be immediately filed with
the city plumbing inspector. Where the holder of a registration changes the firm name or additional members are
taken into the firm, or where the firm is incorporated, a notice of such change shall be forwarded to the city
plumbing inspector; otherwise such registration license is liable to be revoked because of its questionable
ownership.
(d) Transfer; allowing use by other person. It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm or corporation holding
a registration license issued by the city to transfer same or allow the use of same, directly or indirectly, by any
other person for obtaining a permit to do any plumbing work herein specified.
(e) Revocation. Any failure on the part of the holder of such registration license to comply with the provisions
of any section hereof or any applicable ordinance of the city regulating plumbing work or to faithfully carry out
the conditions of a contract for plumbing work shall be deemed sufficient cause for revoking said registration
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/244
license together with all rights and privileges thereunder. The city may also refuse to issue a registration license
to any person associated with such previous holder of a revoked registration license.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 2(E))
Sec. 3.02.103 Expiration of permit
Said permit shall expire if the work authorized therein is not commenced within three (3) months of the date of
the permit. Authorized work must be substantially complete within six (6) months of the date of the permit.
(Ordinance 091996, sec. 3, adopted 9/19/96)
Secs. 3.02.104–3.02.140 Reserved
Part II. Plumbing Code
Sec. 3.02.141 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing installation, alteration,
repair and replacement of plumbing, piping, fittings, fixtures and equipment that may be connected to any water
and sewer system in the city, that certain plumbing code known as the International Plumbing Code, 2009
edition, published by the International Code Council. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city
secretary.
Sec. 3.02.142 Amendments
The provisions attached to Ordinance 060412 as exhibit B, are local amendments to the International Plumbing
Code, 2009 edition. Each provision is a substitute for the identically numbered provision or is an addition to the
International Plumbing Code, 2006 [2009] edition.
(Ordinance 060412, sec. 3, adopted 6/4/12)
Sec. 3.02.143 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec.
2(B))
Secs. 3.02.144–3.02.190 Reserved
Division 4. Electricity*
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.02.191 Scope
The provisions of this division shall apply to all installations of electrical conductors, fittings, devices, signs,
fixtures, motors, generators, starters, controls, and raceways, hereinafter referred to as “electrical equipment,”
within or on public and private buildings and premises within the city. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 3(C))
Sec. 3.02.192 Liability of city
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/244
This division shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating,
controlling, or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or property which were caused by any
defect in such equipment or in the installation thereof, nor shall the city be held as assuming any liability by
reason of the inspection, failure to inspect, or reinspection authorized herein or the certificates of conformance
or nonconformance issued as herein provided, or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any equipment
authorized herein. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 3(D))
Sec. 3.02.193 Electrical inspector
(a) Office created; appointment; compensation. The office of electrical inspector of the city is hereby created.
Such electrical inspector shall be competent to perform the duties of this office and shall be appointed by the
mayor and shall receive such compensation as fixed by the city council.
(b) Duties. It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector to see that all provisions of this division are fully
complied with, and make inspections of electrical installations. The electrical inspector shall keep complete
records of all permits issued, inspections made, and any other official work performed. It shall be the duty of the
electrical inspector to inspect all electrical wiring and apparatus in the city at any time in order to ascertain
whether such electrical wiring or apparatus is in any respect dangerous to life or property, and if any part of said
electrical wiring or apparatus shall be found to be defective or in dangerous condition, he shall notify in writing
the owner of such wiring or equipment to have the defect corrected within a reasonable time. It shall be the duty
of the electrical inspector to notify the service company, firm, or individual furnishing electric current to such
defective wiring or equipment to cease to supply electricity to same. Upon receipt of such notice, the service
company, firm, or individual furnishing electric current to such defective wiring or equipment shall immediately
disconnect the service or feed wires and cease to supply current to the defective installation until the defects
have been corrected.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 3(E))
Sec. 3.02.194 Appeals
Any person aggrieved by any interpretation of the electrical code adopted by reference within this division, or by
any decision or ruling by the city’s designated inspector, shall have the right to make an appeal to the city
council. Such appeal shall be perfected by written notice submitted to the city secretary and addressed to the
mayor and city council asking for a hearing by the council, and the action of the city council thereon shall be
final. Prior to rendering a decision on any appeal, the city council shall seek expert advice and counsel. (1982
Code, ch. 3, sec. 3(M))
Sec. 3.02.195 Registration of electricians
(a) Required; fee; expiration. No individual, firm, or corporation shall erect, construct, alter, or change any
electrical installation, work, wiring, or setting of electrical machinery or equipment until such individual, firm,
or corporation has registered with the city and obtained a registration license therefor. No electrical permit will
be issued unless such person performing such work has first registered with the city and paid an annual license
fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Such registration license shall expire on the thirty-first (31st) day of
December next following issuance thereof.
(b) Application; changes in information. Any individual, firm, or corporation desiring a registration license
shall make application to the city secretary. Such application shall contain the person’s name, address, telephone,
and any other information that might seem pertinent or necessary. Any changes in address shall be immediately
filed with the city secretary. Where the holder of a registration license changes the firm name or where
additional members are taken into the firm, or where the firm is incorporated, a notice of such change shall be
forwarded to the city secretary; otherwise such registration license is liable to be revoked because of its
questionable ownership.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/244
(c) Transfer; allowing use by other person. It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm, or corporation holding
a registration license issued by the city to transfer same or to allow the use of same, directly or indirectly, by any
other person for the purpose of obtaining a permit to do any electrical work herein specified.
(d) Revocation. Any failure on the part of the holder of such registration license to comply with the provisions
of any section hereof or any other applicable ordinance of the city regulating electrical work or to faithfully
carry out the conditions of a contract for electrical work shall be deemed sufficient cause for revoking said
registration license together with all rights and privileges thereunder. The city may also refuse to issue a
registration license to any person associated with such previous holder of a revoked registration license.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 3(G))
Sec. 3.02.196 Permit required
(a) No individual, firm, or corporation shall erect, construct, alter, or change any electrical installation,
machinery, apparatus, work, or wiring in the city until a permit has been issued by the city. When required by the
electrical inspector, plans and specifications for the proposed work must be filed before the permit is granted.
(b) No permit will be required for the installation of wires to operate electrical bells, gas lighting apparatus,
house annunciators, burglar alarms, telephones, telegraphs, district messengers, watch clocks, fire alarms, or
other similar instruments if the current operating is of less than twenty-five (25) volts potential.
(c) When any wiring or apparatus is installed in such a manner that the same could be used for electric light or
power purposes under the provisions of this division, it shall be deemed that the wiring or apparatus is to be used
for such purposes and a permit shall be required and inspection made as provided for such.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 3(F))
(d) Expiration. Said permit shall expire if the work authorized therein is not commenced within three (3)
months of the date of the permit. Authorized work must be substantially complete within six (6) months of the
date of the permit. (Ordinance 091996, sec. 1, adopted 9/19/96)
Sec. 3.02.197 Permit for temporary wiring
Temporary electrical power and lighting installations may be permitted during the period of construction,
remodeling, maintenance, repair, or demolition of buildings, structures, equipment, or similar activities where,
for good and sufficient causes, it is necessary to have electricity on any such installation before a final certificate
can be issued, provided that all parts to which the current is applied are in safe condition and meet all applicable
requirements hereof. A permit will be required for any such temporary service. Application for a temporary
service permit shall be made to the city secretary, and, before such permit is issued, a fee as provided in section
3.02.001 shall be paid by the applicant. (Ordinance 091996, sec. 1, adopted 9/19/96; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.02.198 Knob-and-tube wiring
Knob-and-tube wiring shall not be permitted when installing or repairing electrical installations. (1982 Code, ch.
3, sec. 3(I))
Sec. 3.02.199 Authorization required prior to connecting electrical service
It shall be unlawful for any electric, light, heat, or power company to do any wiring of any nature in or on any
building (except power houses and substations of electric, light, heat, and power companies operating under a
franchise granted by the city) or to make any electrical connection to any building or electrical wiring or
apparatus until a certificate stating that electric wiring has been approved, or written permit authorizing
connection, has been issued by the electrical inspector. All firms, corporations, or individuals, whether operating
under a regular franchise granted by the city or not, shall upon written notice by the electrical inspector
disconnect from any such circuit, including main service wires, branch feeder wires or distribution as designated
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/244
by any said notice, and shall not reconnect to said installation except upon written notice from the electrical
inspector. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 3(J))
Sec. 3.02.200 Disconnection of wires in emergency situations
Every company, firm, copartnership, corporation, or individual owning or controlling electrical wires and
apparatus for the transmission of light, heat, or power shall, in time of fire or in case of severe climatic
conditions or any other emergency wherein lives or property of the citizens of the city may be endangered by the
operation of such wires and apparatus, upon notice by the electrical inspector, the mayor, or the chief of the fire
department or chief of police, disconnect such dangerous wires from current or service as are designated by the
electrical inspector. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 3(K))
Sec. 3.02.201 EMT required for certain buildings
All electrical wiring hereafter installed in or on all metal buildings, public buildings with a seating capacity of
one hundred (100) or more, churches, and schools located within the city limits shall be installed in electrical
metallic tubing (EMT). (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 3(L))
Secs. 3.02.202–3.02.240 Reserved
Part II. Electrical Code
Sec. 3.02.241 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing the general standard for electrical equipment
and installations in the city that certain electrical code known as the National Electrical Code, 2011 edition, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city
secretary. All electrical equipment installed or used in the city shall be reasonably safe to persons and property,
and shall be in conformity with applicable state statutes, and any rules and regulations issued by authority of
such statutes.
Sec. 3.02.242 Amendments
The provisions attached to Ordinance 060412 as exhibit C, are local amendments to the National Electrical
Code, 2011 edition. Each provision is a substitute for the identically numbered provision or is an addition to the
National Electrical Code, 2011 edition.
Sec. 3.02.243 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code are concerned.
(Ordinance 060412, sec. 4, adopted 6/4/12)
Sec. 3.02.244 Conflicting regulations
In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the electrical code adopted by reference in section 3.02.241
and any provision of the city Code of Ordinances, the provisions of the Code of Ordinances shall prevail. (1982
Code, ch. 3, sec. 3(B))
Secs. 3.02.245–3.02.300 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/244
Division 5. Energy Conservation Code*
Sec. 3.02.301 Adopted
The International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, is
hereby adopted by reference as though it were copied herein fully.
Sec. 3.02.302 Amendments
The provisions attached to Ordinance 060412 as exhibit D, are local amendments to the International Energy
Conservation Code, 2006 [2009] edition. Each provision is a substitute for the identically numbered provision or
is an addition to the International Energy Conservation Code, 2006 [2009] edition.
(Ordinance 060412, sec. 5(2), adopted 6/4/12)
Sec. 3.02.303 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec.
15(B))
Secs. 3.02.304–3.02.350 Reserved
Division 6. Fuel Gas Code*
Sec. 3.02.351 Adopted
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted
by reference as though it were copied herein fully.
Sec. 3.02.352 Amendments
The provisions attached to Ordinance 060412 as exhibit E, are local amendments to the International Fuel Gas
Code, 2006 [2009] edition. Each provision is a substitute for the identically numbered provision or is an addition
to the International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 [2009] edition.
(Ordinance 060412, sec. 5(3), adopted 6/4/12)
Sec. 3.02.353 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec.
15(B))
Secs. 3.02.354–3.02.400 Reserved
Division 7. Mechanical Code†
Sec. 3.02.401 Adopted
The International Mechanical Code, 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted by reference as though it were copied herein fully.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/244
Sec. 3.02.402 Amendments
The provisions attached to Ordinance 060412 as exhibit F, are local amendments to the International Mechanical
Code, 2006 [2009] edition. Each provision is a substitute for the identically numbered provision or is an addition
to the International Mechanical Code, 2006 [2009] edition.
(Ordinance 060412, sec. 5(4), adopted 6/4/12)
Sec. 3.02.403 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec.
15(B))
Secs. 3.02.404–3.02.450 Reserved
Division 8. Residential Code*
Sec. 3.02.451 Adopted
The International Residential Code, 2009 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted by reference as though it were copied herein fully.
Sec. 3.02.452 Amendments
The provisions attached to Ordinance 060412 as exhibit G, are local amendments to the International Residential
Code, 2009 edition. Each provision is a substitute for the identically numbered provision or is an addition to the
International Residential Code, 2009 edition.
(Ordinance 060412, sec. 5(5), adopted 6/4/12)
Sec. 3.02.453 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec.
15(B))
Secs. 3.02.454–3.02.600 Reserved
Division 9. Unsafe Building Abatement Code†
Sec. 3.02.601 Adopted
The Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, 1985 edition, is hereby adopted by reference as though it were
copied herein fully. (Ordinance 060412, sec. 5(6), adopted 6/4/12)
Sec. 3.02.602 Inconsistent provisions
To the extent the provisions of the code adopted by reference in this division are inconsistent with the codes
adopted by divisions 5 through 8 of this article, the codes adopted by divisions 5 through 8 shall control.
(Ordinance 060412, sec. 5(7), adopted 6/4/12)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/244
Sec. 3.02.603 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec.
15(B))
Secs. 3.02.604–3.02.650 Reserved
Division 10. Property Maintenance Code
Sec. 3.02.651 Adoption
There is hereby adopted by the city council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property, that certain code known as the 2003 edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code (“code”), as amended herein. Copies of the code, and the amendments thereto, as referenced
herein, are on file in the office of the city secretary for permanent record and inspection.
Sec. 3.02.652 Amendments
The following language is hereby adopted to amend the listed sections of the code for the purpose of clarity in
the code:
(1) Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of
Crandall, Texas, referred to as the “Code.”
(2) Section 103.5 Fees and Fines. The fees for activities and services performed by the City in
carrying out its responsibilities under this Code and the fines charged for failure to comply with this
Code shall be as set forth in the City of Crandall, Texas, Code of Ordinances, as amended.
(3) Section 304.14 Insect Screens. During the period from March 1 to November 1, every door,
window and other outside structure opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms shall be
supplied with approved, tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25
mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working
condition.
(4) Section 602.3 Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets
one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory, or guestroom on terms, either expressed or
implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof, shall supply heat during the period from October 1
to April 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
(5) Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with
heat during the period from October 1 to April 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees
Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) during the period the spaces are occupied.
(Ordinance 100109, sec. 2, adopted 10/1/09)
Secs. 3.02.653–3.02.700 Reserved
Division 11. Amusement Device Code
Sec. 3.02.701 Adopted
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/244
The Standard Amusement Device Code, 1985 edition, is hereby adopted by reference as though it were copied
herein fully. (Ordinance 060412, sec. 5(1), adopted 6/4/12)
Sec. 3.02.702 Inconsistent provisions
To the extent the provisions of the code adopted by reference in this division are inconsistent with the codes
adopted by divisions 5 through 8 of this article, the codes adopted by divisions 5 through 8 shall control.
(Ordinance 060412, sec. 5(7), adopted 6/4/12)
Sec. 3.02.703 Enforcement officers
Within said code, when reference is made to the duties of a certain official named therein, that designated
official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to
be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec.
15(B))
ARTICLE 3.03 COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS
Sec. 3.03.001 Glass and windows
Highly reflective glass may not be used as an exterior building material on any commercial building or structure.
Highly reflective glass is defined as glass with a exterior reflectance percentage in excess of 27 percent. Visible
reflectance is the percentage of available visible light energy reflected away from the exterior surface of the
glass. Windows and window walls shall not be glazed or reglazed with mirrored glass except upon approval.
When approving the use of mirrored glass windows or glass exterior facades, orientation of the structure relative
to public streets and sun angle must be considered to prevent reflective blind spots, particularly along U.S. 175.
Sec. 3.03.002 Fire escapes
Exterior fire escapes will not be permitted.
Sec. 3.03.003 Parking areas
(a) Any and all parking areas for buildings constructed shall have continuous curbing between the designated
entrances and exits.
(b) The parking area shall be used for employee and customer vehicles only, and in no case shall be used for
vehicle sales, repair work, storage, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies.
(c) Surface parking may extend to the front property line, except for required screening and landscaping as set
forth in this article.
(d) Parking facilities shall have an all-weather surfacing and shall be connected by an all-weather surfaced
driveway to a street or alley. An all-weather surface parking facility shall be of concrete or asphalt construction
only.
(e) Parking spaces shall be striped or otherwise clearly designated on the parking facility surface, and shall
include disabled parking spaces as required by the Americans with Disabilities Act, and any fire lane or other
area necessary for aisles or maneuvering of vehicles.
Sec. 3.03.004 Screening
(a) Prior to any new commercial construction requiring a permit on any property within a business district, the
property owner shall submit to the city’s planning and zoning commission a screening plan in conformity with
the requirements of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/244
(b) All dumpsters and outside storage shall be screened so that they cannot be seen from public streets and
adjacent properties.
(c) All ground-mounted equipment, including pad-mounted transformers, telephone switch boxes and gas
meters, shall be reasonably screened from the view of public streets and from the view of adjacent properties.
Whenever possible, appurtenances for utility services shall be installed at the rear of the structures which they
service.
(d) Reasonably screened shall mean screening to the greatest extent possible and shall be toward the goal of
balancing the negative aesthetic impact of the appurtenance without interference with the safe operation and
maintenance of the equipment being screened.
(e) Acceptable means of screening are landscaping, including trees or evergreen shrubbery, earthen berms in
conjunction with landscaping, and masonry walls in conjunction with landscaping.
(f) Wall-mounted equipment, including various meters (such as electric meters), shall be screened, but not
obstructed from view, by landscaping, including trees or evergreen shrubbery, masonry walls in conjunction with
landscaping, or wall-mounted screening devices such as cabinets or partitions which are architecturally
compatible with the structure.
(g) Where recreational uses (athletic courts and fields) are adjacent to residential uses, separation by streets
notwithstanding, live screens consisting of large trees, in addition to fence requirements set forth in the zoning
ordinances of the city, shall be planted along each property line which is contiguous with the residential use.
(h) All roof-mounted equipment, including, but not limited to, fans, vents and cooling towers, shall be
screened so as not to be visible to the immediate ground level and the ground level of adjacent properties.
Overall screening height shall be the height of the highest element of roof-mounted equipment. Roof color shall
be compatible with building color. Roof-mounted equipment and the rear sides of visual screens shall be painted
or otherwise treated in such a manner as to match the color of the roof. All roof-mounted equipment shall be
placed in a uniform and linear manner except for normal plumbing vents or flues.
Sec. 3.03.005 Lighting
(a) Lighting facilities, if provided, shall be so arranged as to be reflected away from property zoned or used
for residential purposes. They shall provide illumination within the parking facility and shall distribute not more
than 0.25 of one footcandle of light upon any adjacent residentially zoned district or onto a public street. Light
measurement should be checked with horizontal meter measurement at ground level on affected property. It shall
be prohibited for lighting to spill over into residential property.
(b) No light standard shall exceed a height of 30 feet. Standards, poles and fixtures shall be of a single color,
compatible with the architecture of the building. All lighting fixtures shall be restricted to down-light or cut-off
types. Low-pressure sodium lighting shall not be used.
(c) For walkway lighting, standard pole, bollard and wall-mounted fixtures shall be allowed. Light pole and
standard height shall be limited to a maximum of 12 feet for walkway lighting. Pole and wall-mounted walkway
fixtures mounted above seven feet shall be of a down-light or cut-off type.
(d) For accent light, up-lighting shall be concealed or otherwise positioned in such a manner that the light
source cannot be seen from any property line of the site on which the light is located. Floodlighting or
spotlighting of architecture, graphics, or natural features shall not create spillage of light onto adjacent
properties.
(e) Where recreational uses requiring lighting (athletic courts and fields) are adjacent to residential uses,
separation by streets notwithstanding, live screens consisting of large trees, in addition to fence requirements as
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/244
set forth in the zoning ordinance of the city, shall be planted along each property line which is contiguous with
the residential use.
Sec. 3.03.006 Landscaping
(a) Prior to any new commercial construction requiring a permit on any property within a business district, the
property owner shall submit to the city’s planning and zoning commission a landscaping plan in conformity with
the requirements of this section. No building permit shall be issued to the property owner until the planning and
zoning commission has approved the proposed landscaping plan.
(b) Not less than five percent (5%) of the total property area, exclusive of the building and improvements,
shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, grass and/or approved ground vegetation. Not less than fifty percent
(50%) of the aforesaid area, properly landscaped, shall be located at the entrance area of the property between
the front property line or street line and the building setback line.
(c) The landscaped areas of the property shall be located within seventy-five feet (75') of a water source or the
landscaped areas shall be properly irrigated to ensure proper maintenance and care.
(d) Property entrances facing a public street shall have at least one (1) three-inch (3") caliper tree, or larger,
for every forty feet (40') of said frontage.
(e) On a property having twelve (12) or more parking spaces, ninety (90) square feet of landscaping
containing trees, shrubs, grasses and/or approved ground vegetation is required for every twelve (12) parking
spaces.
(Ordinance 022097A, sec. 1, adopted 2/20/97)
ARTICLE 3.04 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.04.001 Adoption of state law
The city hereby adopts chapter 214, subchapter A, of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, and the
following minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings regardless of the date of their
construction; the following provisions for giving proper notice to the owner of a building; and the following
provisions for a public hearing to determine compliance of real property, buildings, structures, premises and
vacant lots. In the event that any provision of this article conflicts with said chapter 214, subchapter A, or in the
event that any provision of said chapter 214, subchapter A has been omitted from this article, the city shall be
entitled to pursue its remedies in conformity with said state law, as hereafter amended.
Sec. 3.04.002 Building standards commission
(a) Created. There is hereby created a building standards commission, which shall consist of the city council.
All cases to be heard by the commission shall be heard by a panel of at least four members.
(b) Ex officio members. The fire marshal, the building official and the health officer of the city shall be ex
officio, nonvoting members of the building standards commission. It shall be the duty of the ex officio members
of the building standards commission to inspect all buildings or structures reported to be or believed to be
substandard and present a report of such inspection to the city manager.
(c) Officers of the commission. At its first meeting of each year, the commission shall select from its members
a chairperson, vice-chairperson and a secretary of the commission.
(d) Rules and procedures.
(1) Four members of the commission shall be required to constitute a quorum and the concurring
vote of four members of the commission is necessary to take any action under this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/244
(2) A commission member having a personal or financial interest in any matter before the
commission shall excuse himself from the discussion and the vote on that matter.
(3) The person acting as secretary to the commission shall make a record of all proceedings of the
commission, which shall set forth the particulars of the matter before the commission, the decision
rendered by the commission, the reason for the said decision and the vote of each member
participating therein.
(4) The chairperson or city manager may call meetings of the commission when necessary to rule
on any case brought before it regarding substandard building nuisances.
(5) The commission shall establish such other rules and procedures it deems necessary for the
election of officers and the conduct of its business.
(e) Duties. The commission shall hear any case dealing with substandard building nuisances and make a
ruling as to whether such building is a public nuisance and whether such building or structure should be
repaired, vacated and/or demolished.
Sec. 3.04.003 Alterations, additions, and repairs
All buildings or structures that are required to be repaired under the provisions of this article shall be subject to
all applicable sections of the building code, as amended, and as adopted by the city council.
Sec. 3.04.004 Declaration of public nuisance
Any real property, building, structure, or any portion thereof, or any premises, including a vacant lot, in or on
which there exists a condition not in compliance with this article shall be deemed and is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance, a violation of this article and subject to the penalty clauses and remedies available to the city
hereunder and under the common law or equity jurisprudence of the state.
Sec. 3.04.005 Definitions
Terms, words, phrases and their derivatives used, but not specifically defined in this article, shall have the
meanings defined in Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary. Words used in the singular include the plural and the
plural the singular. Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the feminine the masculine.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly
indicates that a different meaning is intended:
Enforcement officer. The chief of police, building official, code enforcement officer, or health officer, or their
designated representatives, charged with any enforcement and administration of this article.
Inspection. The examination of property by the enforcement officer or his authorized representative for the
purpose of evaluating its condition as provided for in this article.
Manifestly unsafe. A building that is a public nuisance, as that term is defined in this section, or unsafe for
human occupation, whether temporary or permanent, and a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare.
Owner. Any person, agent, firm, corporation, association or other entity having a legal or equitable interest in a
property as shown on the most recent tax roll.
Person. Any person, agent, firm, corporation, association or other legal entity, or tenant as that term is defined in
this section.
Public nuisance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/244
(1) The physical condition or use of any premises regarded as a public nuisance at common law or
as defined elsewhere in the Code of Ordinances;
(2) Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances considered an
attractive nuisance to children, including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations and unsafe fences or structures;
(3) Any premises that is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard, or is manifestly unsafe or
unsecure as to endanger life, limb or property;
(4) Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or facilities required by the Code of
Ordinances have been removed, or from which utilities have been disconnected, destroyed, removed,
or rendered ineffective, or the required precautions against unauthorized use or entry have not been
provided;
(5) Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay, faulty
construction, overcrowded, open, vacant or abandoned, damaged by fire to the extent as not to
provide shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and dangerous to anyone on or near the premises;
(6) Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its appurtenances that is
dangerous to the physical health or safety of an occupant or other person; or
(7) Because of violations of section 3.04.007 of this article, the state of disrepair is such that it
could reasonably cause injury, damage, or harm to a considerable portion of the community in the use
and enjoyment of property, materially interfering with the proper use or comfort and enjoyment of
surrounding property, taking into consideration the nature and use of the properties in the area and the
character of the community in which they are situated, which condition would be substantially
offensive and annoying to persons of ordinary sensibilities living in the community.
Tenant. Any person, agent, firm, corporation, or association who occupies a property or premises and who is not
the owner.
Sec. 3.04.006 Specific nuisances
Without limiting the power of the city council to hereafter declare as public nuisances any other act, condition or
thing, by ordinance, the following specific acts, conditions and things are, each and all of them, hereby declared
to be and constitute public nuisances:
(1) Any building, structure, or any portion thereof that is:
(A) Dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health,
safety, and welfare;
(B) Regardless of its structural condition, unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees
and is unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by
vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by
children; or
(C) Boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if:
(i) The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
(ii) The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry
or use of the building.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/244
(2) Any building or structure that has any or all of the conditions or defects hereinafter described
shall be deemed to be a dangerous building, provided that such conditions or defects exist to the
extent that the life, health, property or safety of the public or its occupants is endangered:
(A) Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit is not of sufficient
width or size or is not arranged so as to provide safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire
or panic.
(B) Whenever the walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit
is so warped, worn, loose, torn or otherwise unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means
of exit in case of fire or panic.
(C) Whenever the stress in any materials, member or portion thereof, due to all dead and live
loads, is more than one and one-half times the working stress or stresses allowed in the building
code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
(D) Whenever any portion of a building or structure has been damaged by fire, earthquake,
wind, flood or by any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability
thereof is materially less than it was before such a catastrophe and is less than the minimum
requirements of the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or location.
(E) Whenever any portion of a building or structure, or member or appurtenance thereof, is
likely to fail, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or
damage property.
(F) Whenever any portion of a building or structure, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof, is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so
anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of onehalf
of that specified in the building code for new buildings of similar structure, purpose or
location without exceeding the working stresses permitted in the building code for such
buildings.
(G) Whenever any portion of a building or structure has cracked, warped, buckled or settled
to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to wind
or earthquakes than is required in the case of similar new construction.
(H) Whenever the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly unsafe because
of:
(i) Dilapidation, deterioration or decay;
(ii) Faulty construction;
(iii) The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for
the purpose of supporting such building;
(iv) The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or
(v) Any other cause, or is likely to partially or completely collapse.
(I) Whenever, for any reason, the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is manifestly
unsafe for the purpose for which it is being used.
(J) Whenever the exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to
such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the
middle one-third of the base.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/244
(K) Whenever the building or structure, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three
percent (33%) or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or fifty
percent (50%) or more damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or
outside walls or coverings.
(L) Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake or
flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to:
(i) Become an attractive nuisance to children;
(ii) Become a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or
(iii) Enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral
acts.
(M) Whenever any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is maintained in
violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure
provided by the building regulations of this jurisdiction, as specified in the International
Building Code or International Property Maintenance Code, or of any law or ordinance of this
state or jurisdiction relating to the condition, location or structure of buildings.
(N) Whenever any building or structure which, whether or not erected in accordance with all
applicable laws and ordinances, has in any nonsupporting part, member or portion less than
fifty percent (50%), or in any supporting part, member or portion less than sixty-six percent
(66%) of the:
(i) Strength;
(ii) Fire-resisting qualities or characteristics; or
(iii) Weather-resisting qualities or characteristics
required by law in the case of a newly constructed building of like area, height and
occupancy in the same location.
(O) Whenever a building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes,
because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or
arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise, is determined by the
enforcement officer to be unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such a condition that it is
likely to cause sickness or disease.
(P) Whenever any building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition,
deterioration, damage, inadequate exits, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty
electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus, or other cause, is determined by the fire
marshal to be a fire hazard.
(Q) Whenever any building or structure is in such a condition as to constitute a public
nuisance known to the common law or in equity jurisprudence.
(R) Whenever any portion of a building or structure remains on a site after the demolition or
destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building or structure is abandoned for a
period in excess of six (6) months so as to constitute such building or portion thereof an
attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
(S) Whenever water heating facilities are not properly installed or maintained in a safe and
good working condition and/or such water heating facilities are not capable of heating water to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/244
such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required
kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than one hundred
twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°). Such water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the
requirements of this subsection when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities required
under the provisions of this subsection are not in operation.
(T) Whenever any minimum standards provided by the International Building Code, the
International Property Maintenance Code, the International Residential Code, the International
Fire Code, the International Mechanical Code, the International Plumbing Code, the
International Fuel Gas Code or National Electrical Code, as amended, and as adopted by the
city council, are not met for any building or structure.
Sec. 3.04.007 Minimum standards
(a) The minimum standards for the continued use and occupancy of all buildings, regardless of the date of
construction thereof, shall be those established by the International Property Maintenance Code, which standards
are hereby adopted, as well as those standards established by the International Building Code as promulgated by
the International Conference of Building Officials as heretofore previously adopted or hereafter adopted or
amended by the city and those standards established by this article.
(b) Those standards specified and enumerated in section 3.04.006 of this article.
(Ordinance 030509A, sec. 2, adopted 3/5/09)
Sec. 3.04.008 Notice to property owners and others of public hearing
(a) If the building official determines that the nuisance requires the vacation, securing, repair, or removal of a
building, structure, or nuisance condition on the property, or the relocation of the occupants of the property, the
building official shall:
(1) Give notice of the nuisance:
(A) By personal delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record owners
of the affected property, and each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as
shown by the records in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the affected
property is located if the address of the lienholder can be ascertained from the deed of trust
establishing the lien and/or other applicable instruments on file in the office of the county clerk;
and
(B) To all unknown owners, by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each
improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable.
(Ordinance 030509A, sec. 2, adopted 3/5/09; Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) Provide detail in such notice of the standard(s) violated under this article and the necessary
action to abate the nuisance (a copy of the building official’s report is sufficient for this purpose);
(3) Advise such owner, tenant or occupant of the date and time of the public hearing at which a
determination will be made by the building standards commission as to whether the nuisance exists
and whether the real property, building, structure, premises or any portion thereof complies with the
standards of this article;
(4) Include a statement in such notice that the owner, lienholder or mortgagee will be required to
submit proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it
will take to reasonably perform the work; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/244
(5) Provide a copy of such notice of nuisance, details thereof, the required action necessary to
abate the nuisance, and the date and time of the public hearing to any mortgagee or lienholder of
record after a diligent effort to discover such mortgagee or lienholder.
(b) If the city mails a notice in accordance with this article to a property owner, lienholder, or mortgagee and
the United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not
affected, and the notice is considered delivered.
(c) The city satisfies the requirements of this article to make a diligent effort, to use its best efforts, or to make
a reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lienholder, or a mortgagee if the city
searches the following records:
(1) The county real property records;
(2) The county appraisal district records;
(3) Records of the secretary of state;
(4) Assumed name records of the county;
(5) Tax records of the city; and
(6) Utility records of the city.
Sec. 3.04.009 Date of public hearing
The date of the public hearing before the building standards commission shall not be fewer than thirty (30) days
from the date of personal service or deposit of same in the U.S. Mail, whichever is earliest.
Sec. 3.04.010 Filing of notice of public hearing in public records
The city secretary shall file a notice of public hearing in the county real property records at least ten (10) days
before the date of the public hearing. The notice of public hearing shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the affected real property, if that information can be
determined from a reasonable search of the instruments on file with the county clerk;
(2) A legal description of the property; and
(3) A description of the hearing.
Sec. 3.04.011 Effect of filing of notice in public records
The filing of the notice of public hearing under section 3.04.010 of this article shall be binding upon subsequent
grantees, lienholders, or other transferees of any interest in the property who acquire such interest after the filing
of the notice, and constitutes notice of the hearing on any subsequent recipient of any interest in the property
who acquires such interest after the filing of the notice.
Sec. 3.04.012 Conduct of public hearing
The building standards commission shall conduct the public hearing to determine compliance with the standards
set out in this article. At the public hearing, the owner, lienholder or mortgagee shall have the burden of proof to
demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the time it will take to
reasonably perform the work.
Sec. 3.04.013 Orders and notice after public hearing
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/244
(a) If, after a public hearing, the building standards commission finds that a nuisance exists pursuant to this
article, the building standards commission shall require the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the real property,
building, structure or premises to within thirty (30) days:
(1) Secure the offending building or structure from unauthorized entry; or
(2) Abate the nuisance or repair, remove or demolish the building unless the owner, mortgagee or
lienholder establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be performed within the thirty
(30) days allowed. The building standards commission shall establish specific time schedules for the
commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to
secure the property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being
performed.
(b) If, after the public hearing, a building, structure or premises is found to be in violation of the standards set
forth in this article, the building standards commission may order that the building, structure, or premises be
vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished by the owner within a reasonable time as provided by this
section. The building standards commission also may order that the occupants be relocated within a reasonable
time, at the cost of the owner. The building standards commission reserves the right to determine what is a
reasonable amount of time to perform the ordered work or what is a reasonable amount of time to relocate
occupants. In the event the owner fails to comply with the order within the time provided for action by the
owner, the building standards commission may order any of the mortgagees or lienholders of the building,
structure, or premises to be vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished to comply with the order within
a reasonable time as provided by this section. The building standards commission also may order that the
occupants be relocated within a reasonable time, at the cost of any of the mortgagees or lienholders. Under this
section, the city is not required to furnish any notice to a mortgagee or lienholder other than a copy of the order
in the event the owner fails to timely take the ordered action.
(c) If the owner, lienholder or mortgagee establishes at the public hearing that the work cannot be reasonably
completed within ninety (90) days because of the scope and complexity of the work, and if the owner, lienholder
or mortgagee has submitted at the hearing a detailed plan and time schedule, and the building standards
commission allows the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee more than ninety (90) days to complete any part of the
work required to abate the nuisance or repair, remove or demolish the building or structure, the building
standards commission shall require the owner, lienholder or mortgagee to regularly submit progress reports to
the building standards commission through the building official to demonstrate compliance with time schedules
for commencement and performance of the work and may require appearance before the building official, the
building standards commission, or their designees, to demonstrate compliance. If the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee owns property, including structures or improvements on property, within the city’s boundaries that
exceeds $100,000 in total value, the building standards commission may require the owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee to post a cash or surety bond in an amount adequate to cover the cost of repairing, removing, or
demolishing a building under this subsection. In lieu of a bond, the building standards commission may require
the owner, lienholder, or mortgagee to provide a letter of credit from a financial institution or a guaranty from a
third party approved by the building standards commission. The bond must be posted, or the letter of credit or
third-party guaranty provided, not later than the 30th day after the date the city issues the order.
(d) Within ten (10) days after the date that the order is issued, the city secretary shall:
(1) File a copy of the order in the city secretary’s office; and
(2) Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice containing:
(A) The street address or legal description of the property;
(B) The date of the hearing;
(C) A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/244
(D) Instructions stating where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
(e) After the public hearing, the city secretary shall promptly mail by certified mail with return receipt
requested, deliver by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, or personally deliver
a copy of the order to the owner of the building and to any lienholder or mortgagee of the building. The city
shall use its best efforts to determine the identity and address of any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of the
building, structure or premises
(f) If the building, structure or premises is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or the
occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove, or demolish the
building or relocate the occupants at its own expense. This subsection does not limit the ability of the city to
collect on a bond or other financial guaranty that may be required by subsection (c) of this section.
Sec. 3.04.014 Repair, vacation or demolition
The following standards shall be followed by the building standards commission in ordering the repair, vacation
or demolition of any building, structure, or premise, and any building, structure, or premises declared a nuisance
under this article shall be made to comply with one or more of the following:
(1) The building, structure, or premises shall be repaired in accordance with the current building
code or other current codes applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair.
(2) Repairs shall be deemed feasible only if less than fifty percent (50%) of the building or
structure must be repaired or replaced, and the repairs amount to less than fifty percent (50%) of the
building or structure’s value.
(3) If the building or structure is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety
and welfare of the occupants, it shall be ordered vacated and secured from unlawful entry.
(4) If the building or structure requires repairs over greater than fifty percent (50%) of its surface
or amounting to greater than fifty percent (50%) of its value, it shall be demolished. Further, if a
building cannot be repaired so that it will be brought into compliance with this article, it shall be
demolished. Additionally, if the building as it stands presents an incurable fire hazard in violation of
the terms of this article or any ordinance of the city or statute of the state, it shall be demolished. For
the purpose of this article, the term “demolished” includes the cleaning and grading of the property
and the removal of all debris and trash.
(5) If the building or structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed or demolished, or the
occupants are not relocated within the allotted time, the city may vacate, secure, remove or demolish
the building or structure or relocate the occupants at its own expense, and may thereafter assess
expenses, and establish a lien against the property, as set forth in section 3.04.020 of this article.
(6) If, after the expiration of the time allotted under section 3.04.013 of this article, the owner,
lienholder or mortgagee fails to comply, the city may do or cause to be done the repairs necessary to
bring the building into compliance with this article and only if the building is a residential building
with ten (10) or fewer dwelling units. The repairs may not improve the building to the extent that the
building exceeds the minimum standards, as defined by this article, and expenses may be assessed as
provided in section 3.04.020 of this article.
Sec. 3.04.015 Designation of enforcement officer
The enforcement officer, or his designated representative(s), are hereby directed and authorized to administer
and enforce the provisions of this article. Nothing contained herein is meant to limit discretion of any
enforcement officer in evaluating and directing compliance with this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/244
Sec. 3.04.016 Enforcement authority and liability
The enforcement officer, or his designated representative(s), acting in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his duties. Any
suit brought against the enforcement officer, or his designated representative(s), because of such act or omission
performed in the enforcement of any provision of this article, shall be defended by legal counsel provided by the
city until final termination of such proceedings.
Sec. 3.04.017 Twenty-four hour abatement under certain circumstances
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the requirement for abatement within twenty-four (24) hours, or a period of
time less than as prescribed herein for public hearings, notice thereof, or the recovery of costs and establishment
of liens, when a nuisance has been declared an immediate threat to health and safety by any enforcement
personnel.
Sec. 3.04.018 Remedies
To enforce any requirement of this article, any enforcement personnel may gain compliance by any or all of the
following:
(1) Taking such action as the enforcement officer deems appropriate within the authorization
provided for in this article or any other ordinances of the city.
(2) Causing appropriate action to be instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(3) Ordering the abatement of the nuisance and assessing the costs of abatement against the
property if the owner of the property does not abate same after the required notice.
(4) Any other remedies permitted or authorized at law or in equity.
Sec. 3.04.019 Contracting for abatement
Whenever the property owner, agent, or tenant fails to abate the nuisance within the time allowed, the
enforcement officer is hereby authorized to contract with a contractor to perform such work as may be required
to abate the nuisance.
Sec. 3.04.020 Recovery of costs
(a) Whenever the city enters upon the premises and causes any work to be performed to abate a nuisance, or if
the building or structure is not vacated, secured, repaired, removed, or demolished, or if the occupants are not
relocated within the allotted time, the city may take such action at its own expense, and a charge will be made to
the property owner, agent, or tenant to recover the costs associated with the abatement. The charge shall be the
actual cost of abatement, plus applicable sales taxes.
(b) An administrative fee of $200.00 shall be assessed for each such charge.
(c) If the actual charge and the administrative fee are not paid to the city within thirty (30) days after billing,
the city shall file a lien against the property. Said lien shall be filed in the deed records of the county. The
charges shown on the lien shall bear interest at the rate of eight (8) percent per annum from the due date until
paid. The lien shall be collected under the same terms and provisions of law as on city ad valorem taxes. The
lien may be extinguished prior to foreclosure if the owner or other person having an interest in the legal title to
the property reimburses the city for its expenses. If the notice is given pursuant to section 3.04.010, and the
opportunity to abate the nuisance or repair, remove, or demolish the building or structure is afforded to each
mortgagee or lienholder under said section 3.04.010 of this article, the lien is a privileged lien subordinate only
to tax liens as authorized by Texas Local Government Code section 214.001(o).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/244
Sec. 3.04.021 Penalty
(a) Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision, requirement or order issued pursuant to this
article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined as provided in section
1.01.009 of this code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a
violation or failure to comply occurs or continues to occur.
(b) In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained in this section, the city may enforce the provisions
of this article pursuant to the applicable provisions of Texas Local Government Code, chapter 54, which chapter
provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances.
(c) Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of an offense defined by
this article.
Sec. 3.04.022 Judicial review
Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee aggrieved by an order of the building standards commission issued under
this article shall be entitled to review by a state district court pursuant to section 214.0012 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended, and the city shall be entitled to an award of attorney’s fees, costs and expenses,
and judgment therefor, pursuant to and as authorized by section 214.0012(h) of the Texas Local Government
Code.
Sec. 3.04.023 Municipal court proceedings not affected
Action taken by the city pursuant to this article shall not affect the ability of the city to proceed under the
jurisdiction of the city’s municipal court.
(Ordinance 030509A, sec. 2, adopted 3/5/09)
ARTICLE 3.05 MOBILE HOMES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.05.001–3.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Parks
Sec. 3.05.031 Definitions
The following words, when used in this division, shall have the meaning respectively ascribed:
Building official. A person authorized by the city council to perform the duties prescribed in this division.
Licensee. A person to whom a license for construction and/or operation and maintenance of a park has been
issued.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 7(A))
HUD-code manufactured home.
(1) Means a structure:
(A) Constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/244
(B) Built on a permanent chassis;
(C) Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the
structure is connected to the required utilities;
(D) Transportable in one or more sections; and
(E) In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length
or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet;
(2) Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home; and
(3) Does not include a recreational vehicle as defined by 24 C.F.R. section 3282.8(g).
Unless otherwise specifically distinguished, the terms “HUD-code manufactured home” and “mobile home”
shall have the same meaning with regard to this article.
Mobile home.
(1) Means a structure:
(A) Constructed before June 15, 1976;
(B) Built on a permanent chassis;
(C) Designed for use as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when the
structure is connected to the required utilities;
(D) Transportable in one or more sections; and
(E) In the traveling mode, at least eight body feet in width or at least 40 body feet in length
or, when erected on site, at least 320 square feet; and
(2) Includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems of the home.
Unless otherwise specifically distinguished, the terms “HUD-code manufactured home” and “mobile home”
shall have the same meaning with regard to this article.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Mobile home space. The ground area allocated for occupancy by one (1) mobile home in the layout of a park.
Off-street parking space. An unobstructed area of minimum nine feet (9') by eighteen feet (18') dimensions,
allocated for parking a vehicle in the layout of a park.
Park. A plot of ground under single person ownership, upon which two (2) or more mobile homes occupied as
dwellings are located.
Permittee. A person to whom a nonconforming use permit for operation and maintenance of a park has been
issued.
Person. Any individual, corporation, or legal entity.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 7(A))
Sec. 3.05.032 License required for proposed parks
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/244
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, or operate a park within the city limits without a
license therefor. A fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be required for each mobile home park license.
A license shall be issued by the city council subject to compliance with the terms and provisions of this division.
No utility service shall be provided until the permit or license herein provided for shall have been issued.
Written application for a license, signed by the applicant and accompanied by the exhibits listed below, shall be
submitted to the city secretary. The application shall state the applicant’s address and the legal description of the
land wherein construction of a park is proposed and shall be accompanied by the following exhibits: (1982
Code, ch. 3, sec. 7(B); Ordinance 091996, sec. 1, adopted 9/19/96)
(1) A plot plan drawn to a scale of 1" = 100' showing the location and configuration of the
proposed park, including the layout of its mobile home spaces, streets, parking spaces, walkways, and
utility service lines. This plot plan does not replace or supersede the subdivision plat of the property
required by state law to be recorded in the county records of the county in which the property is
located after review and approval of the city.
(2) Plans and specifications for all buildings and service facilities.
(b) Upon approval by the city council, the city secretary will issue a license.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 7(B))
Sec. 3.05.033 License or nonconforming use permit required for existing parks
(a) Application for license. Every person operating a park within the city limits on the effective date of this
division shall, within sixty (60) days after that date, submit a written application for a license, accompanied by
exhibits as provided in section 3.05.032(a)(1) and (2). The planning and zoning commission will review each
license application and make recommendations thereon to the city council. In considering the disposal of any
such application, the city council may take into account the character of the neighborhood, with respect to
present and anticipated land use and development, wherein the park is located or is in operation. On approval of
an application by the city council, the city secretary will issue a license.
(b) Nonconforming use permit. If the city council denies a license to any applicant whose park was in
operation on the effective date of this division, the city secretary will issue to such applicant a nonconforming
use permit that specifies the nonconformities with provisions of this division responsible for denial of the license
and authorizes continued operation of the park, subject to the permittee’s compliance with all provisions of this
division pertaining to park operation and maintenance. However, the permit does not make lawful the extension
or enlargement of a specified nonconformity, either within the present confines of a park or by expanding its
boundaries. After the remedy or suspension of a nonconforming use such use shall not be restored or resumed;
for example, if a nonconforming mobile home space is vacated, it shall not be occupied again by a mobile home.
The fee for issuance of a nonconforming use permit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 7(C))
Sec. 3.05.034 Renewal or transfer of license or permit
For validity, a license or nonconforming use permit shall be renewed each year. Upon inspection by the building
official and with his approval and payment of an annual fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) by the licensee or
permittee, renewal will be effected by the city secretary. To transfer a license or permit, a written request to do so
shall be submitted to the city secretary. Upon inspection of the park by the building official, and with his
approval, the city secretary will issue a transfer, the fee therefor being twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The building
official shall refuse to issue a renewal or transfer if the mobile home park is in violation of any condition
contained in the original license or permit or any regulation contained herein applicable to operation and
maintenance of the mobile home park. In the event of denial by the building official, the applicant may appeal
such denial to the city council by written notice to the city secretary within ten (10) days of such denial. (1982
Code, ch. 3, sec. 7(D))
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/244
Sec. 3.05.035 Revocation of license or permit
A license or permit may be revoked by the city council when the licensee or permittee is found to be in violation
of any provision of this division or the terms of a nonconforming use permit after a public hearing is held before
the city council according to written notice given to the licensee or permittee at least ten (10) days prior to such
hearing. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 7(E))
Sec. 3.05.036 Design and construction standards
After the effective date of this division, all mobile home parks shall meet the following design and construction
standards:
(1) Size of park; spacing and clearance for mobile homes. Shall be as provided in the zoning
ordinance.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) Off-street parking. Off-street parking in the form of parking bays, provided such parking bays
are within two hundred feet (200') of the mobile home space, or individual parking spaces on each lot
should be provided to reduce traffic hazards and improve the appearance of the mobile home park.
Where individual parking spaces are used, parking may be in tandem. In addition, an additional one
hundred fifty (150) square feet for each two (2) mobile home spaces shall be provided in common
area for the storage of boats and visitor parking. All parking areas shall be hard surfaced with allweather
material and located to eliminate interference with access to parking areas provided for other
mobile homes and common parking areas within the park. Each parking space shall be maintained by
the owner or agent, free of cracks, holes, or other hazards.
(3) Streets and walkways. Internal streets, no-parking area signs, and street name signs shall be
privately owned, built, and maintained. Streets shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all
spaces and to facilities for common use of park residents. Internal streets shall be kept open and free
of obstruction in order that police and fire vehicles may have access to any areas of the mobile home
park. The police department shall be authorized to issue citations for the violation of the provisions
hereof and to remove and impound offending vehicles. All internal streets shall be paved and
constructed to specifications established by the city and shall be maintained by the owner or agent
free of cracks, holes, and other hazards. Every mobile home park shall have direct access from a
public street and each mobile home space shall have direct access to a public street or to an internal
street. Where an internal street provides access, the same shall be dedicated to the public as an
emergency access easement to allow for the rapid and safe movement of vehicles used for the
purpose of providing emergency health or public safety purposes. Each emergency access easement
shall have a clear unobstructed width of at least thirty feet (30') and shall connect at each end to a
dedicated public street, or shall have a turnaround of minimum sixty feet (60') diameter. Internal
streets shall be named, and mobile home spaces numbered to conform with block numbers on
adjacent public streets. Street signs shall be of a color and size contrasting with those on public
streets so that there is no confusion regarding which are private and which are public streets. These
signs and numbers shall be of standard size and placement to facilitate location by emergency
vehicles. All parks shall provide concrete walkways of minimum thirty inches (30") in width for
pedestrian access to each mobile home from a street constructed to specifications approved by the
city.
(4) Electrical and telephone service. All electrical wiring in the mobile home park shall be
underground and installed in accordance with the city’s electrical regulations. All telephone lines in
the mobile home park shall also be installed underground.
(5) Water supply. An adequate supply of potable water shall be supplied through the public water
supply system to each mobile home space through piping conforming with the city’s plumbing
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/244
regulations, and an outdoor hydrant shall be installed at each mobile home space, at least four inches
(4") above the ground. All mobile homes shall be within five hundred feet (500') of a fire hydrant.
(6) Sewage disposal. Each mobile home space shall be provided with a sewer riser pipe of
minimum of four inches (4") diameter. The individual sewer connections and all other elements in the
park sewer system shall conform with the city’s plumbing regulations. Disposal shall be into the
public sewer system.
(7) Drainage. The park shall be located and graded as to drain away all surface water in a safe and
efficient manner. Accumulations of stagnant water will not be permitted. Culverts and drainage
ditches shall be maintained free of dirt and debris by the owner or agent.
(8) Fire protection. Service buildings (office, laundry facilities, repair shops, etc.) shall be provided
with emergency fire extinguishing apparatus of such types and sizes as may be prescribed by the city
council. Fire resistant skirting with the necessary vents, screens, and/or openings shall be installed on
each mobile home within ten (10) days after its emplacement in the park. Each mobile home shall be
equipped with an operable smoke detector. To insure compliance by the mobile home owner with
these requirements, the licensee shall make such compliance and conformation thereto a condition in
the agreement for rental of a mobile home space.
(9) Fuel supply. Gas piping systems shall be installed underground in accordance with city
regulations. Gas outlets shall be capped when the mobile home spaces they serve are vacant. Natural
gas shall be supplied except that a liquefied petroleum gas system may be installed if the nearest
available natural gas supply is more than one thousand feet (1,000') from the park. LPG systems shall
conform with applicable codes and regulations by the state railroad commission pertaining thereto.
(10) Extensions of mobile homes. No structural extension shall be attached to a mobile home in
violation of the spacing and clearance requirements of this division. An extension that does not
violate those requirements may be installed if it meets the following requirements:
(A) Constructed of metal, fire-resistive, double-wall panels with mechanically connected
joints.
(B) Length no greater than that of the mobile home to which it is accessory.
(C) To be dismantled on removal from the park of the mobile home to which it is accessory.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 7(F))
Sec. 3.05.037 Operation and maintenance
All mobile home parks shall comply with the following operation and maintenance regulations:
(1) The licensee shall keep up to date, and have available for inspection at the park, a register of
park occupancy that shall contain the following information:
(A) Name and legal address of park residents.
(B) Mobile home registration data, including make, length, width, year of manufacture, and
identification number.
(C) Location of each mobile home by street name and number.
A new register shall be initiated on January 1st of each year and the old register retired but
retained on the park premises for at least three (3) years thereafter.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/244
(2) The licensee shall be responsible for keeping the park in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition
free of accumulations of rubbish and of rank growth of grass or weeds that might constitute a fire
hazard or give harborage to noxious insects. Walks, streets, and parking spaces shall be maintained in
a serviceable all-weather condition.
(3) No open fires shall be permitted in the park except for outdoor cooking on camper type stoves
or charcoal grills. No flammable liquids shall be stored beneath mobile homes. The fire resistant
skirting specified in section 3.05.036(8) shall be maintained intact to prevent accumulations of
flammable materials beneath mobile homes. Emergency fire extinguishing apparatus, if required,
shall be inspected and tested at intervals of time suggested by the manufacturer.
(4) The storage, collection, and disposal of refuse and garbage shall be so conducted as to create no
health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding grounds, fire hazards, litter, or air pollution. Each
mobile home space shall be provided with rodentproof garbage receptacles of sufficient number and
size to store properly all refuse and garbage between collections.
(5) The licensee shall provide that all mobile homes located in the park be installed and anchored
in accordance with state department of housing and community affairs rules and regulations.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 7(G))
Sec. 3.05.038 Approval of plats for parks in extraterritorial jurisdiction
No person shall subdivide land within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of creating a
mobile home park until a plat of the proposed park has been approved by the city council. All plats shall be
submitted in accordance with the procedures as outlined in the city’s subdivision regulations. Such plats shall be
accompanied by the information outlined in section 3.05.032(a)(1) and (2) hereof, and shall conform to the
design requirements as provided in section 3.05.036 hereof. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 7(H))
Sec. 3.05.039 Liability of city
Neither the city nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this division shall be liable or have any
liability by reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this division. (1982 Code, ch.
3, sec. 7(I))
Secs. 3.05.040–3.05.070 Reserved
Division 3. Mobile Homes Outside Parks
Sec. 3.05.071 Definitions
The following words, when used in this division, shall have the meaning respectively ascribed:
Building official. A person authorized by the city council to perform the duties described in this division.
Mobile home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet
(8') or more in width or forty body feet (40') or more in length, or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square
feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning
and electrical systems.
Permittee. A person for whom a permit has been issued to place or use a mobile home outside a licensed mobile
home park.
Person. Any individual, corporation, or legal entity.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/244
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 8(A))
Sec. 3.05.072 Permit required for installation
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to locate or maintain any mobile home in any place in the city, other
than a duly licensed and lawful mobile home park, unless such person shall first secure a permit from the city
council upon written application therefor filed with the city secretary giving the name and address of the
applicant and a description of the property upon which said mobile home is to be located. The city council shall
refuse to grant any such permit unless the applicant first shows to the satisfaction of the city council that there
are adequate water and sanitary facilities available within reasonable distance of such mobile home location, or
that the applicant, upon locating upon said premises, shall provide or cause to be provided the same. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to maintain or live in any such mobile home without first obtaining
such permit from the city. No permit shall be issued by the city council unless the applicant can demonstrate
ability to comply with all the terms and provisions of this division. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 8(B)
Sec. 3.05.073 Application for permit; fee; renewal
An application for a permit to locate a mobile home outside a licensed mobile home park shall be submitted to
the city secretary accompanied by a complete description of the mobile home and a plot plan showing the
proposed location of the mobile home. A nonrefundable permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be submitted
with the application. All permits issued shall be subject to annual renewal except as otherwise provided for
herein. The permit renewal fee shall be five dollars ($5.00). (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 8(C))
Sec. 3.05.074 Permit for existing mobile homes
(a) Application. Every person maintaining a mobile home in the city shall, within sixty (60) days after the
effective date of this division, submit a written application for a permit. The building official will review each
permit application and make recommendations thereon to the city council. In considering the disposal of any
such application, the city council may take into account the character of the neighborhood, with respect to
present and anticipated land use and development, wherein the mobile home is located. On approval of an
application by the city council, the city secretary will issue a permit.
(b) Nonconforming use permit. If the city council denies a permit to any applicant whose mobile home was in
place on the effective date of this division, the city secretary will issue to such applicant a nonconforming use
permit that specifies the nonconformities with provisions of this division responsible for denial of the permit and
authorizes continued use of the mobile home, subject to the permittee’s compliance with all provisions of this
division pertaining to mobile home use and maintenance. However, the permit does not make lawful the
extension or enlargement of a specified nonconformity. After the remedy or suspension of a nonconforming use
such use shall not be restored or resumed. The fee for issuance of a nonconforming use permit shall be ten
dollars ($10.00).
(c) Renewal; transfer. For validity, such permits shall be renewed each year. Upon inspection by the building
official and with his approval and payment of an annual fee of five dollars ($5.00) by the permittee, renewal will
be effected by the city secretary. To transfer a permit, a written request to do so shall be submitted to the city
secretary. Upon inspection of the mobile home by the building official, and with his approval, the city secretary
will issue a transfer, the fee therefor being five dollars ($5.00). The building official shall refuse to issue a
renewal or transfer if the mobile home is in violation of any condition contained in the original permit or any
regulation contained herein applicable to use or maintenance of the mobile home. In the event of denial by the
building official, the applicant may appeal such denial to the city council by written notice to the city secretary
within ten (10) days of such denial.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 8(D))
Sec. 3.05.075 Standards
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/244
The following use and maintenance regulations shall be applicable to mobile homes located within the city:
(1) All mobile homes shall be installed and anchored in accordance with state department of
housing and community affairs rules and regulations.
(2) All mobile homes occupied as living quarters shall contain operable smoke detectors.
(3) No mobile home manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, shall be occupied as living quarters
within the city.
(4) All mobile homes occupied as living quarters shall be located in residential areas and placed on
separate lots with the front door facing the street in the same manner as other residential structures in
the block in order to conform as closely as possible. All building setback requirements shall be
followed when placing a mobile home for permanent occupancy as provided for in the zoning
regulations.
(5) The temporary parking of only one (1) mobile home belonging to the owner or tenant of the
dwelling upon the lot on which the mobile home is placed may be permitted behind the front building
setback line of the lot, provided no living quarters shall be maintained in such mobile home while
such mobile home is parked or stored. The mobile home so stored shall not be closer than twenty feet
(20') to an occupied residential structure. Removal of wheels and skirting requirements shall not be
applicable to such temporarily stored, unoccupied mobile homes.
(6) All mobile homes located outside mobile home parks shall have the wheels removed, and be
mounted upon a permanent type foundation or have fire resistant skirting installed around the bottom
of the mobile home. Annual permit renewal is not required if such mobile home is mounted upon a
permanent type foundation.
(7) All permits shall be issued subject to compliance with all other applicable codes and ordinances
of the city, and with all applicable deed restrictions.
(8) No driveway shall be permitted in the front yard of any mobile home lot being occupied as
living quarters except along either side of the lot at a right angle to the street.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 8(E))
Sec. 3.05.076 Exceptions
No permit shall be required and the provisions of this division shall not be applicable to unoccupied mobile
homes displayed for sale on mobile home sales lots and mobile homes in storage on mobile home manufacturing
plant premises. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 8(F))
Sec. 3.05.077 Future mobile home placement
From and after the effective date hereof, the placement or movement of any mobile home, as specifically
distinguished from a manufactured home, as defined herein, shall be prohibited in the city limits. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
ARTICLE 3.06 MOVING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES
Sec. 3.06.001 Definitions
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meaning respectively ascribed:
Building official. A person authorized by the city council to perform the duties prescribed in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/244
Permittee. A person to whom a permit to move or relocate any old or used house, building, or structure, or
portion thereof, within the corporate limits of the city has been issued.
Person. Any individual, corporation, or legal entity.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 9(A))
Sec. 3.06.002 Permit required
It shall be unlawful for any person to move from or into or to relocate any old or used house, building, structure,
or portion thereof, within the corporate limits of the city, for the purpose of placing such house, building, or
structure upon any lot or tract of ground for any use or occupancy of any nature whatsoever, without first
obtaining a permit from the city council. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 9(B))
Sec. 3.06.003 Application for permit
Any person desiring to move or relocate any old or used house, building, or structure within the corporate limits
shall file an application with the city secretary requesting that he be permitted to do so. Upon filing an
application for a permit, the applicant shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to help defray the cost of
processing the permit application. The application shall contain the following information: (1982 Code, ch. 3,
sec. 9(C); Ordinance 091996, sec. 1, adopted 9/19/96)
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) Description and size of the house, building, or structure to be moved, together with a picture
thereof.
(3) Legal description of the lot and the local address upon which the house, building, or structure is
to be moved or relocated on if a permit is granted by the city council.
(4) A drawing or plot plan showing the dimensions of the lot or tract of land upon which the house,
building, or structure is to be moved or relocated, and the location of existing buildings or structures
upon the lot, if any, together with the location of existing buildings or structures upon adjoining lots.
(5) The proposed route, including the time and date, when the applicant proposes to move or
relocate the house, building, or structure.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 9(C))
Sec. 3.06.004 Investigation and recommendation by building official
Upon filing of the application, the building official shall investigate the application by inspecting the house,
building, or structure to be moved or relocated upon the lot or tract of land, and the lot or tract of land upon
which the house, building, or structure is to be located. He shall then advise the city council as to whether the
house, building, or structure meets the requirements of the building code and other applicable ordinances of the
city, and whether or not the lot and house, building, or structure, if allowed to be moved onto the designated lot
or tract of land, would meet all of the requirements of the building code and other applicable regulations of the
city. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 9(D))
Sec. 3.06.005 Hearing; issuance or denial of permit
(a) After receiving the application and report of the building official, the city council shall set a date for a
public hearing on the application. After such public hearing, the city council shall either grant or deny the
request, taking into consideration the location and size of the lot upon which the house, building, or structure is
to be located, the size and construction of the house, building, or structure to be moved, the population density of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/244
the area, the location and use of buildings, structures, and land in the area, and the condition that the premises is
to be left; provided that no request shall be granted if the city council shall find:
(1) The house, building, or structure to be moved does not meet all of the requirements of all
applicable ordinances of the city.
(2) The lot or tract of land with the house, building, or structure thereon would not meet all of the
requirements of the applicable ordinances of the city.
(3) The house, building, or structure to be moved has deteriorated more than fifty percent (50%) of
its original value by virtue of fire or by virtue of age or normal wear and tear or other elements.
(4) The moving of such house, building, or structure upon or from the lot or tract of land would
cause injury to persons or property or damage to the streets or other public improvements.
(5) The applicant cannot ensure that he has the financial resources to bring the building up to city
standards within ninety (90) days after completion of the move.
(b) If the city council shall grant the request to move such house, building, or structure, the city council shall
cause a special permit to be issued authorizing the moving of such house, building, or structure upon or from the
lot or tract of land under such conditions, requirements, or restrictions as the city council shall determine. All
permits issued are valid for only six (6) months and are nontransferable.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 9(E))
Sec. 3.06.006 Issuance of certificate of occupancy and compliance
No person shall occupy such house, building or structure permitted to be moved until the city secretary issues
the permittee a certificate of occupancy and compliance. No certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be
issued until the house, building or structure complies with all conditions of the permit and all requirements of all
applicable ordinances of the city. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 9(F))
Sec. 3.06.007 Liability of city
Neither the city nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this article shall be liable or have any liability
by reason of orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this article. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec.
9(G))
ARTICLE 3.07 SWIMMING POOLS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.07.001–3.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Enclosures*
Sec. 3.07.031 Definition
The term “swimming pool,” as used herein, shall mean a body of water in an artificial or semi-artificial
receptacle or other container located outdoors, used or intended to be used for public, semipublic, or private
swimming by adults or children, or both adults and children, operated and maintained by any person, whether he
be an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, and shall include swimming pools used or intended to
be used solely by the owner or friends invited to use it without payment of any fee; provided, however, that the
requirements of this division shall not apply to a swimming pool constructed, operated, and maintained in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/244
conjunction with a motel, hotel, or like business which operates on a twenty-four-hour per day basis and which
provides such pool for the use of its tenants and their guests. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 10(E))
Sec. 3.07.032 Enclosure required
Every outdoor swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence which shall be a minimum of five feet
(5') in height and a maximum of ten feet (10') in height and shall be so constructed as not to have openings,
holes or gaps larger than four inches (4") in any dimension except for doors and gates, and if a picket fence is
erected or maintained the horizontal spacing between pickets shall not exceed four inches (4"). A dwelling,
house, or accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 10(A))
Sec. 3.07.033 Gates or doors
All gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing device for keeping the
gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling or accessory
building which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 10(B))
Sec. 3.07.034 Applicability
This requirement shall be applicable to all new swimming pools hereafter constructed, other than indoor pools,
and shall apply to all existing pools which have a depth of twenty-four inches (24") or more of water at any
point except for inflatable or portable tot pools. No person in possession of land within the city, whether as
owner, purchaser, lessee, or tenant, upon which is situated a swimming pool having a depth of twenty-four
inches (24") or more of water at any point shall fail to provide and maintain such a fence or wall as provided for
in this division. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 10(C))
Sec. 3.07.035 Modification of requirements
The city council may make modifications in individual cases, upon a showing of good cause, with respect to the
height, nature or location of the fence, wall, gates or latches, or the necessity therefor, provided the protection as
sought hereunder is not reduced thereby. The council may permit other protective devices or structures to be
used so long as the degree of protection afforded by the substitute devices or structures is not less than the
protection afforded by the fence, gates, and latch described herein. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 10(D))
ARTICLE 3.08 SIGNS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.08.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
Attached sign. Any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by any part of a building (including canopy fascia,
exterior walls and awnings).
Freestanding sign. Any sign connected to the ground which is not an attached sign, portable sign, or traffic sign.
Off-premises sign. A sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity,
event, place, service or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises on
which the sign is located.
On-premises sign. A sign identifying or advertising a business, person or activity and installed and maintained
on the same premises as the business, person or activity.
Person. An individual, partnership, firm, company, association or corporation of any kind.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/244
Political sign. A sign relating to the election of a person to public office, relating to a political party, or relating
to a matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body.
Portable sign. A sign which is easily moved from one location to another, including signs which are mounted on
skids, trailers, wheels, legs or stakes and which are not fixed permanently to the ground.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(A))
Prohibited signs. Flashing or moving signs or those signs which create an illusion of movement. (Ordinance
022097A, sec. 2, adopted 2/20/97)
Sign.
(1) Sign means an outdoor structure, sign, display, light device, painting, drawing, message,
plaque, poster, billboard or other thing that is designed, intended or used to advertise, inform, or
attract the attention of persons not on that premises, excluding those lights and landscape features
which display is words or symbols and temporary holiday decorations. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(A))
(2) The following shall not be considered signs: Lettering and symbols less than 10 inches in
height which are carved into or attached to a commercial building facade in such a manner as to
constitute an architectural detail provided that such symbols or letters are not internally illuminated
or made of a material which is reflective or which sharply contrasts with the color of the building.
(Ordinance 022097A, sec. 2, adopted 2/20/97)
Sign content. All signs shall be limited to site or activity identifications, unless specifically exempted as
auxiliary signs. (Ordinance 022097A, sec. 2, adopted 2/20/97)
Sec. 3.08.002 Compliance with state law and city ordinances; conflicting regulations
All signs erected or maintained pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be erected and maintained in
compliance with all applicable state laws and with the city’s building code, electrical code, and zoning
ordinance. In the event of conflict between this article and other laws, codes, or ordinances, the most restrictive
standard shall apply. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(B))
Sec. 3.08.003 Maintenance
All signs shall be maintained in good and safe structural condition, shall be painted on all exterior parts, unless
coated or made of rust resistible material, and shall be maintained in good condition of appearance. (1982 Code,
ch. 3, sec. 12(T))
Sec. 3.08.004 Inspections
The building official shall be notified by the permittee when erection of the sign is complete, and he shall make
an inspection to determine if the sign conforms to city ordinances and codes. The building official shall inspect
annually, or at such other times as he deems necessary, each sign regulated by this article for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the same is secure or insecure, whether it still serves a useful purpose and whether it is in
need of removal or repair. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(U))
Sec. 3.08.005 Nonconforming signs
(a) It is the declared purpose of this article that, in time, all privately owned signs shall either conform to the
provisions of this article or be removed. By the passage of this article and its amendments, no presently illegal
sign shall be deemed to have been legalized unless such sign complies with all current standards under the terms
of this article and all other ordinances of the city. Any sign which does not conform to all provisions of this
article and which existed on the effective date of article shall be considered as a nonconforming sign. All
nonconforming signs shall be permitted in the same manner as any other legally existing sign or proposed sign.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/244
(b) Whenever any nonconforming sign no longer advertises a bona fide business or a business which has
moved away or closed, a product sold, or service rendered, such sign shall be removed within sixty (60) days of
notice by the city to the sign owner. If such is a wall sign, the wall sign shall be removed and painted over with a
color that resembles or matches the wall of the building. If the owner of or the person responsible for the sign, or
if the tenant closing the business, fails to remove or paint over the sign, the owner of the premises shall be
responsible and the work shall be done within thirty (30) days following such notice.
(c) No nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered in a way which would increase its nonconformity.
(d) Should any nonconforming sign be damaged by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%)
of its replacement cost at time of damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions
of this article.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(V))
Sec. 3.08.006 Variances
The city council shall be empowered to vary the provisions of this article if it appears that the provisions would
work a manifest injustice, considering such factors as the sign, location, and other pertinent factors. Such
decision of the council should not, however, conflict with the spirit of this article, which is one of safety,
provision of adequate light, open space and air, conservation of land and building values and to encourage the
most appropriate use of land. All variances to these sign regulations will require a special use permit. (1982
Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(W))
Sec. 3.08.007 Repair or removal of unsafe or unlawful signs
(a) If the building inspector shall find that any sign regulated herein is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to
the public, or is abandoned or is maintained in a dilapidated condition, or has been constructed or erected or is
being maintained in violation of this article, or not permitted as required herein, he shall give the sign or
property owner written notice to repair or remove such sign within ten (10) days after such notice. If the sign or
property owner or permittee fails to remove, repair, or permit such structure so as to comply with all sign
standards or regulations, the building inspector shall cause the sign to be either removed or repaired and such
cost shall be charged to and paid by the owner or permittee. If such demolition or repair expenses are not paid by
the owner within thirty (30) days of such billing, then such expenses shall constitute a valid lien against the
property. Such notice shall also provide the owner an opportunity to bring the sign into compliance or to request
a hearing before the city council to determine whether the sign should be repaired or removed. Such appeal must
be filed in writing with the city secretary within ten (10) days of the notice. After consideration of all facts, the
city council shall rule upon the appeal.
(b) The building official may cause any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed
summarily and without notice.
(c) Any sign located in a public right-of-way [shall] be immediately removed by the building inspector
without notice to the owner.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(X))
Sec. 3.08.008 Signs imitating traffic or emergency signs
No person shall cause to be erected or maintained any sign using any combination of forms, words, colors, or
lights which imitate standard public traffic regulatory [or] emergency signs or signals. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec.
12(C))
Sec. 3.08.009 Roof signs; signs projecting over roof
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/244
In no case shall a sign project above the site roof or parapet wall heights, whichever is greater, or be located on
the roof of a commercial building. (Ordinance 022097A, sec. 2, adopted 2/20/97)
Sec. 3.08.010 Signs in right-of-way
No sign shall be erected or affixed within or project over any public right-of-way or across the public right-ofway
line extended across a railroad right-of-way. This section shall not be construed so as to prohibit vehicular
signs as long as such comply with other provisions of this article, nor to prohibit the carrying or display of signs
by a person or persons as long as such sign is not connected or affixed to the real property comprising the public
right-of-way, its fixtures and appurtenances. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(E))
Sec. 3.08.011 Signs on public property
No person shall attach any sign, paper or other material or paint, stencil or write any name or number or
otherwise mark on any sidewalk, curb, gutter, street, tree, utility pole, public building, public fence or public
structure. This section shall not prohibit the posting of governmental signs or the painting or attachment of street
address numbers to curbs. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(F))
Sec. 3.08.012 Balloons or other floating devices
Advertisement by means of a balloon or other floating device anchored to the ground, a building or other
structure is prohibited. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(G))
Sec. 3.08.013 Government signs
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent or affect the display of a national or state flag, or to limit
flags, insignia, legal notices or informational, directional or traffic signs which are legally required or necessary
to the essential functions of government agencies. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(H))
Sec. 3.08.014 Real estate signs
Any realtor or property owner may erect a sign for the purpose of advertising the sale or lease of the real
property on which such sign is located, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Signs advertising the sale or lease of nonbusiness property shall not exceed eight (8) square
feet in area nor five (5) feet in height.
(2) Signs advertising the sale or lease of a business property shall not exceed sixteen (16) square
feet in area or eight (8) feet in height.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(I))
Sec. 3.08.015 Garage or yard sale signs
Any person may erect a sign on his own property, or property of another with the owner’s permission, for the
purpose of advertising a garage or yard sale. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(J))
Sec. 3.08.016 Political signs
Political signs may be erected on any private property without limit as to number, provided that such signs
comply with other applicable requirements of this article, and provided further that the owner or occupant of the
property on which such sign is displayed:
(1) Shall not erect or cause to be erected special purpose political signs until forty-five (45) days
prior to any primary or general election; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/244
(2) Shall remove the signs within ten (10) days after the general or runoff election to which a sign
pertains or after the termination of a candidacy, whichever occurs first.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(K))
Sec. 3.08.017 Temporary construction signs
Signs attached to screening or decorative walls for the purpose of announcing a commercial subdivision and
whose primary objective is decoration shall be allowed. However, they shall not exceed 8 feet in height as
measured from ground level and 16 square feet in area. Temporary construction signs denoting the future
location of a business or other concern shall be allowed one sign per adjacent street. In no case shall the height
exceed 14 feet as measured from ground level or the area exceed 32 square feet, provided that such signs are
located on the premises where the construction or location being advertised is or will be occurring. Said signs
shall be removed upon issuance of an occupancy permit. (Ordinance 022097A, sec. 2, adopted 2/20/97)
Sec. 3.08.018 Homebuilder and subdivision signs
Freestanding signs for the purpose of identifying the location of or direction to subdivisions or major
homebuilder sites are allowed. Such signs shall be on-premises and shall not exceed one hundred (100) square
feet in area nor extend higher than fifteen (15) feet in height. A homebuilder with ten (10) lots or more qualifies
as a major homebuilder. One such sign may be allowed for subdivisions and major homebuilders sites. One
additional sign shall be allowed for each additional ten (10) acres. Such signs shall be removed upon completion
of the project. No such sign shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to a residential dwelling not
within the subdivision. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(M))
Sec. 3.08.019 Off-premises signs
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any off-premises sign within the city except within
zoned or unzoned commercial and industrial areas within six hundred and sixty feet (660') of the nearest edge of
the right-of-way of all portions of an interstate or primary system within the state, as further defined in the Texas
Highway Beautification Act - Outdoor Advertising Signs, provided a license has been secured from the state
department of transportation commission for such.
(b) The maximum size of any off-premises sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet nor have luminance
greater than two hundred (200) footlamberts. A minimum setback of ten (10) feet from the public right-of-way is
required, and at least five (5) feet from any building line. No sign shall exceed thirty (30) feet in height. Any
sign located in such a manner that it is likely to allow the passage of vehicular traffic beneath it shall have a
minimum clearance distance of fourteen (14) feet as measured from the bottom of the sign to the ground
immediately below. Any sign located in a manner to allow the passage of pedestrian traffic beneath it shall have
a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet. No portable or attached signs shall be permitted as off-premises signs.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(N))
Sec. 3.08.020 On-premises signs
A freestanding, portable or attached sign may be erected and maintained upon any commercial- or industrialzoned
property, unless otherwise prohibited or restricted herein, provided that all on-premises signs shall be
designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than thirty pounds (30#) per square foot of
area, and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the building code or other ordinances of the
city.
(1) Freestanding signs. (Refer to zoning for setback requirements.)
(A) Generally. No more than one freestanding sign shall be allowed per site unless
specifically exempted as an auxiliary sign. No freestanding sign structure shall be used to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/244
support more than one sign unless specifically exempted as an auxiliary sign. Freestanding
signs shall be erected no closer than 100 feet to another freestanding or monument sign. Where
a site possesses frontage on at least two nonintersecting streets, a maximum of two monument
signs may be used in lieu of a single freestanding sign. Any sign standing on a pole or
freestanding must be engineered to withstand 100-mph winds.
(B) Dimensions and height. Freestanding signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and
shall not exceed 22 feet in height, with the following exception: Tier One (any property within
300 feet of the right-of-way line for U.S. Highway 175 and any other highway or major
thoroughfare, type B on the Thoroughfare Plan, and on any nonresidentially zoned property that
adjoins or has some portion of the property within the 300-foot distance from U.S. Highway
175 and any other highway or major thoroughfare): freestanding signs shall not exceed 150
square feet in area and shall not exceed 50 feet in height.
(C) Projection over roof; clearance from ground. Except by variance, no freestanding sign
shall project beyond the roof or parapet wall lines of a building located on the same site. Any
freestanding sign that is located in such a manner or that is likely to allow the passage of
vehicular traffic beneath shall have a minimum clearance distance of twelve (12) feet as
measured from the bottom of the sign to the ground immediately below. Any sign located in a
manner to allow the passage of pedestrian traffic beneath it shall have a minimum clearance of
seven (7) feet as measured from the bottom of the sign to the ground immediately below.
(Ordinance 021904, sec 3, adopted 2/19/04)
(2) Portable signs. The maximum size of any portable sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square
feet. Where such portable signs are electric signs, no electric extension cords shall be run across any
sidewalk, street, or public rights-of-way. No portable sign shall be placed or maintained on any
sidewalk, street, or other public rights-of-way. No portable sign shall have a luminance greater than
200 footlamberts. All portable signs shall be anchored to withstand a minimum of thirty (30) mph
winds. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(O))
(3) Attached signs.
(A) Generally. Attached signs shall be allowed only when the activity individually possesses
a public entrance on the exterior of the building which fronts and is immediately accessible to
and from a public street or a street, walkway, or driveway used by the public. Where an
autonomous nonresidential building houses a single activity, a total of two (2) attached signs
shall be allowed when such building fronts two or more streets. No more than one attached sign
shall be allowed on any facade of the building. Where a nonresidential building houses more
than one activity, one attached sign shall be permitted per public entrance, provided that not
more than one attached sign shall be used per portion of the building facade occupied by the
activity. Non-illuminated street address numbers and placards which identify the activity may
be used in addition to other attached signs. Where used, such signs shall not exceed 10 square
feet in effective area for single-tenant buildings or six (6) square feet for multiple-tenant
buildings. Architectural elements to which signs may be attached shall be limited to building
wall surfaces, canopy fascia, or sign bands. Each activity shall attach signs to no more than one
type of architectural element (if signs are attached to a canopy fascia, additional signs shall not
be attached to building wall surfaces).
(B) Location, height, dimensions and clearance. Where an activity is located in a one-story
building, the wall sign shall be placed no higher than the roof line of the architectural element
to which it is affixed. Where an activity is located on the first floor of a multi-story building, an
attached sign shall be placed no higher than the floor level of the second story. Where an
activity is located on the second floor of a multi-story building, an attached sign shall be placed
no higher than the floor of the third floor or, in case of a two-story building, the roof line of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/244
building. Where signs are attached to a canopy fascia, such signs shall not protrude above or
below the canopy fascia. No attached sign shall project a distance greater than 18 inches from
the architectural element to which it is affixed. Where an attached sign is placed in such a
manner as to project a distance greater than two (2) inches into a private driveway or other
private area likely to be used by vehicular traffic, or where such sign is placed in a manner
which allows the passage of vehicular traffic beneath it, there shall be a minimum distance of
12 feet as measured from the bottom of the sign to the ground immediately below. Where an
attached sign is placed in such a manner as to project a distance greater than two inches into a
private pedestrian walkway or other private area likely to be used by pedestrian traffic, or where
such sign is placed in a manner which allows the passage of pedestrian traffic beneath it, there
shall be a minimum distance of seven (7) feet as measured from the bottom of the sign to the
ground immediately below. Attached signs shall not exceed 30 percent of a signable area or 40
square feet in area, whichever is less; however, attached signs on any property within 300 feet
of the right-of-way line for U.S. Highway 175 and any other highway or major thoroughfare,
type B on the thoroughfare plan, and on any nonresidentially zoned property that adjoins or has
some portion of the property within the 300-foot distance from U.S. Highway 175 and any
other highway or major thoroughfare (Tier One), shall not exceed 50 square feet in area.
Projecting signs which are mounted on a wall of a building or other architectural element in
such a manner that the sign face is not parallel with the face of the wall, building or other
architectural element to which the sign is mounted will be prohibited.
(4) Monument signs. Monument signs shall be erected no closer than 20 feet to a frontage property
line adjacent to a street. They shall be erected no closer than 10 feet from a property line which abuts
a nonresidential or multifamily use, and 20 feet from a side property line which abuts a single-family
use. They shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height as measured from the top of the most immediately
adjacent curb. Monument signs in excess of 50 square feet shall erected no closer than 100 feet
adjacent to another freestanding or monument sign.
(Ordinance 021904, sec 3, adopted 2/19/04)
(5) Banners, flags, and pennants. Banners, flags, and pennants may be used in all nonresidential
areas on a temporary basis for three 14-day periods per year at 90-day intervals.
(Ordinance 022097A, sec. 2, adopted 2/20/97)
Secs. 3.08.021–3.08.060 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 3.08.061 Required; fee
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or relocate any off-premises sign, homebuilder and
subdivision signs, and freestanding, portable, and attached on-premises signs within the city without first
obtaining a sign permit from the building official, except that all off-premises signs located within the “highway
control zone” shall be subject to only a license issued by the state department of transportation commission.
(b) Owners of all signs existing upon the effective date of this article shall make application for a sign permit
within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this article. Failure to do so shall make such sign an illegal sign.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(P))
(c) Each and every person seeking a sign permit under the provisions herein shall pay an application fee as
follows:
(1) On-premises: $200.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/244
(2) Off-premises: $500.00.
Such fee shall be paid at the time of the application. This fee shall be charged to help defray the cost of
inspection incident to said permit. The fee shall not be prorated nor refunded to the applicant regardless of
whether a permit is issued or not.
(Ordinance 091996, sec. 1, adopted 9/19/96)
(d) When a sign is erected, placed, moved, or maintained or work started thereon before obtaining a sign
permit, there shall be a late fee equal to twice the amount of the regular sign permit fee. However, the payment
of any late fee shall not excuse full compliance with any sign regulations. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(P))
Sec. 3.08.062 Application
Application for permits shall contain or have attached thereto the following information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) Location of the building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign or other advertising
structure is to be attached or erected.
(3) Two (2) sets of plans shall be submitted showing the sign location in relationship to nearby
buildings or structures, signs, property lines, driveways, public streets, fences, and sidewalks.
(4) Two (2) blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications showing method of
construction, and attachment to the building or ground, size, type, height, construction materials, and
such other information as the building official may require. The building official may require plans to
be prepared by a registered professional engineer or architect.
(5) Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure is designed for dead load and wind
pressure in any direction in the amount required by this article and all other laws and ordinances of
the city.
(6) Name of the person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the structure.
(7) Any electrical permit required and issued for said permit.
(8) Zoning classification carried by the property.
(9) Cost or estimated value of the sign.
(10) Such other information as the building official shall require to show full compliance with this
article and all other laws and ordinances of the city.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(Q))
Sec. 3.08.063 Approval of illuminated signs by electrical inspector
The application for a permit for erection of a sign in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall
be submitted to the electrical inspector. The electrical inspector shall examine the plans and specifications
respecting all wiring and connections to determine if the same comply with the electrical code of the city. In
addition, all illuminated signs shall bear the Underwriters’ Laboratory label or be built to comply with
Underwriters’ requirements. The electrical inspector shall approve said permit if the same plans and
specifications comply with these requirements or disapprove the application if noncompliance is found. This
said action of the electrical inspector shall be taken prior to submission of the application to the building official
for final approval or disapproval of the erection permit. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(R))
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/244
Sec. 3.08.064 Issuance
It shall be the duty of the building official, upon the filing of an application for a sign permit, to examine such
plans and specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect the sign. If shall
appear that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this article, the building code,
and all other laws and ordinances of the city, he shall then issue the sign permit. If the work authorized under a
sign has not been completed within sixty (60) days after issuance, the permit shall become null and void. (1982
Code, ch. 3, sec. 12(S))
ARTICLE 3.09 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Sec. 3.09.001 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, section 16.315, delegated
the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore,
the city does ordain as follows.
Sec. 3.09.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in results in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and
general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
Sec. 3.09.003 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 3.09.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/244
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 3.09.005 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates
at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance
(100 year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed rate-making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A,
VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any
given year - also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/244
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing construction. For which the “start of construction” commenced January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before referred to as “existing structures.”
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by the administrator, where the
boundaries of the flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards have been
designated as zones A, M, and/or E.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See flood elevation study.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/244
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway. See regulatory floodway [sic].
Functionally dependent use. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary [of the Interior] to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/244
“manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the “start of
construction” commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974,
whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management
purposes, “new construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured
home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the
main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/244
damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before “start of construction” of
the improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community’s floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
Sec. 3.09.006 Lands to which this article applies
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
Sec. 3.09.007 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) or flood hazard boundary map (FHBM), Community Number, 480409 dated
_______ and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
Sec. 3.09.008 Establishment of development permit
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 3.09.009 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
Sec. 3.09.010 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Sec. 3.09.011 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/244
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
Sec. 3.09.012 Warning and disclaimer or liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
Sec. 3.09.013 Designation of the floodplain administrator
The city planner is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of
this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood
Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
Sec. 3.09.014 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is
the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.09.007, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
sections 3.09.017–3.09.020.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/244
Sec. 3.09.015 Permit procedures
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on
forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures,
including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special
flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
and substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.09.018(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 3.09.014.
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on
all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
Sec. 3.09.016 Variance procedures
(a) The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for
variances from the requirements of this article.
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/244
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures
set forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 3.09.015(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
article (section 3.09.003).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure
and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or articles.
(3) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure
will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a)–(i) of this section are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Sec. 3.09.017 General standards for flood hazard reduction
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/244
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
Sec. 3.09.018 Specific standards for flood hazard reduction
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section
3.09.007, section 3.09.014(8), or section 3.09.019(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 3.09.015(a)
(1), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/244
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than 1
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community’s
FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. For the
purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s FIRM on sites:
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured
home has incurred “substantial damage” as a result of a flood;
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured
home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community’s FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation;
or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
Sec. 3.09.019 Standards for subdivision proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be
consistent with sections 3.09.002, 3.09.003, and 3.09.004 of this article.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 3.09.008; section 3.09.015;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/244
and the provisions of sections 3.09.017–3.09.020 of this article.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development
including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.09.007 or section 3.09.014(8) of this article.
(d) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
Sec. 3.09.020 Penalties for noncompliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full
compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ordinance 070212 adopted 8/6/12)
ARTICLE 3.10 BUILDING ADDRESS NUMBERING
Sec. 3.10.001 Posting of numbers required; standards
The owner or occupant of each building within the city limits shall place and maintain an official building
number of at least three (3) inches in height, composed of a durable material and of a color which provides a
contrast to the building’s background, in a conspicuous place on the front of the building, in such a manner as to
be plainly visible and legible from the public street. Every building complex composed of multiple structures
within the city must have an official number assigned to each building. Each unit within a building complex
must also be assigned an official number. If there is sufficient street frontage, each unit or building may be
assigned an official street address number. The official number must be prominently posted on the building so
that it is visible, where possible, from the nearest vehicular access. The official number for each unit within a
building complex must be conspicuously posted on the unit. This official numbering requirement does not apply
to accessory buildings as defined in the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec.
14(A))
Sec. 3.10.002 Directional signs for building complexes
In the event a unit within a building complex is situated in such a way that it is not visible to vehicular access,
then the owner of the business complex shall post and maintain directional signs along the nearest vehicular
access indicating the location of the building by building number and unit numbers. If a building complex is
composed of multiple structures within the city which contains internal vehicular accesses and each office
building number is not visible from the public street, then the owner of the building complex shall post
directional signs at each entrance to the building complex and at each intersection of vehicular access, other than
public streets, within the building complex. The directional signs must indicate the direction to the buildings and
units by number, must be visible from vehicular access, and must be painted with a color which is in contrast to
the background. For purposes of this section, “entrance” to a building complex is a point at which vehicular
access to the building complex, other than a public street, intersects with a public street. (1982 Code, ch. 3, sec.
14(B))
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/244
Sec. 3.10.003 Responsibility for posting; time for compliance
(a) The address numbering of buildings shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or occupant of each
building within the city limits.
(b) Buildings must be numbered in compliance with this article and in accordance with the plan delineating
and prescribing the method of numbering buildings which is on file in the office of the building official. The
building official shall designate the official number which is to be placed on each building.
(c) An official building number must be placed within ten (10) [days] after a new building is complete.
(d) The requirements for the posting of an official building number on each building shall be fully complied
with on or about thirty (30) days after the effective date of this article. After such date, any failure of any such
owner or occupant of a building within the city limits to post and display an official building number so as to be
plainly visible and legible from the public street, if any, at all times shall constitute violation of this article and
be subject to the general penalty provided in this code.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 14(C))
ARTICLE 3.11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.11.001 Permit for curb, gutter, driveway and culvert installations
(a) Required; application; fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct, or repair any
driveway, sidewalk, curb, gutter, or drainage facility in the streets and alleys of the city without first obtaining a
permit. To obtain such permit an application must be filed with the city describing the abutting property to which
the proposed work on the public property is to be done either by lot, block, or tract and house number, location
on the street or similar description which will readily identify and definitely locate the site of proposed work; a
description of the proposed work to be performed; and any other pertinent information as shall be required by
the city. The fee for such permit shall be as provided in section 3.02.001.
(b) Expiration; approval of plans. Said permit shall expire if the work authorized therein is not commenced
within three (3) months of the date of the permit. Plans for such work shall be approved by the director of public
works prior to issuance of any permit.
(Ordinance 091996, sec. 1, adopted 9/19/96; Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 3.11.002–3.11.030 Reserved
Division 2. Excavations*
Sec. 3.11.031 Warning devices required
Any person, firm, or corporation making any excavation or embankment in any street, alley, or public easement
in the city shall provide, erect, place, and maintain all warning signs, lighting devices, and barricades and
channelizing devices required in part VI, Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Construction and Maintenance
Operation, of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. (1982 Code, ch.
3, sec. 5(A))
Sec. 3.11.032 Restoration of street and premises
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/244
Upon completion of any work involving excavation in any street, alley, or public easement in the city, the
person, firm, or corporation making such excavation shall remove all equipment, men, materials, and debris as
soon as possible and restore the street and premises in as good a condition as existed prior to the excavation.
(1982 Code, ch. 3, sec. 5(B))
ARTICLE 3.12 RENTAL REGISTRATION
Sec. 3.12.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Building official. The building official for the city or his designee.
Commercial unit. A space rented or leased for commercial purposes.
Dwelling unit. One or more habitable rooms, including an efficiency unit, which is intended to be occupied by
one or more persons for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation purposes.
Multifamily dwelling complex.
(1) This term includes:
(A) Three (3) or more dwelling units that are under common ownership or that are managed
by the same person, and that are on the same lot or tract or on adjoining lots or tracts; and/or
(B) A lodging house or boarding house.
(2) The term also includes any accessory structures and facilities incidental to the use thereof,
including but not limited to yards, courts, parking areas, storage buildings, offices, maintenance
buildings, equipment buildings, mail rooms, laundry facilities, swimming pools, spas, ponds, wells,
cabanas, play rooms and play yards, recreational and picnic facilities, public assembly rooms,
garages, carports, fences, walls, and all other similar buildings, structures, and facilities on the
premises.
(3) The term shall not include hotels, motels, or congregate residences. The term also shall not
include dwelling units that are owner-occupied.
Multifamily dwelling unit. A dwelling unit within a multifamily dwelling complex.
One-family dwelling unit. A dwelling designed exclusively for residential occupancy by not more than one
family, including a community-based residential home as defined by the Community Homes for Disabled
Persons Location Act, chapter 123.001, Texas Human Resources Code. A one-family dwelling shall not include
a two-family dwelling or a multifamily dwelling, as defined by this section.
Owner. The person claiming, or in whom is invested, the ownership, dominion, or title of real property
including, but not limited to: holder of fee-simple title, holder of life estate, holder of leasehold estate for an
interim term of five (5) years or more; a buyer under contract for deed; a mortgagee, receiver, executor or trustee
in control of real property; but, not including the holder of a leasehold estate or a tenancy for an initial term of
fewer than five (5) years.
Person. An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association, two or more persons
having a joint interest, or any other legal or community entity.
Property manager. A person who, for compensation, has managing control of a rental unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/244
Rent. The offering, holding out or actual leasing of a rental unit to an occupant other than the owner; typically
involving the payment of a rental amount, although other forms of consideration may be involved or no
consideration at all may be involved.
Rental unit. A one-family dwelling unit, two-family dwelling unit, multifamily dwelling unit or a commercial
unit, or portion thereof, that is rented or offered for rent.
Tenant. Any person who rents or leases a rental unit with the consent of the landlord.
Two-family dwelling. A dwelling designed exclusively for residential occupancy by two (2) families, including a
community-based residential home as defined by the Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act,
chapter 123.001, Texas Human Resources Code. A two-family dwelling shall not include a one-family dwelling
or a multifamily dwelling, as defined by this section.
(Ordinance 061710, sec. 2, adopted 6/17/10)
Sec. 3.12.002 Generally
(a) Each owner of a rental unit within the city shall register each such rental unit with the building official no
later than November 1, 2010; and an owner shall renew such registration annually on the date prescribed by the
building official pursuant to section 3.12.003. Separate registration shall be required for each rental unit.
(b) Each new owner of a rental unit within the city shall make application for registration with the building
official within ten (10) days after the date of acquiring ownership of a rental unit.
(c) Application for rental registration shall be made upon a form provided by the city for such purpose, and
shall include at least the following information:
(1) Owner’s name, address, and work and home telephone numbers, driver’s license number, or
identification card number, and state of issuance of the license/card;
(2) If owner is a partnership, the name of all partners, the principal business address, and telephone
number of each partner;
(3) If owner is a corporation, the person registering must state whether the corporation is organized
under the laws of this state or is a foreign corporation, and must show the mailing address, business
location, telephone number, name of the main individual in charge of the local office of such
corporation, if any, and the names of all officers and directors or trustees of such corporation, and, if
a foreign corporation, the place of incorporation;
(4) Name, address, and telephone number of the property manager, if applicable;
(5) Street address of the rental unit;
(6) Copy of lease between owner and tenant for the rental unit;
(7) Number of persons occupying the rental unit;
(8) Whether there has been a change of occupancy or an additional tenant of the rental unit since
the date of last registration; and
(9) Signature of the owner or owner’s agent.
(d) A registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany the application for registration. There shall be
no fee for a renewal registration. An inspection fee equal to the actual inspection expenses incurred by the city
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/244
shall be charged for the inspection of a rental unit. The inspection fee shall be paid within fifteen (15) days of the
date of the inspection.
(e) The building official shall within thirty (30) days after receipt of the registration application, either issue a
certificate of registration or notify the owner that the application does not comply with the requirements of this
section.
(f) It is an offense for an owner to fail to register and/or to renew the registration for the owner’s rental unit(s)
within the city; each and every day that the owner continues to fail to register and/or renew the registration of
the owner’s rental unit(s) within the city shall constitute a separate offense.
(g) It is an offense for an owner to fail to schedule and pay for an inspection in accordance with this article.
(h) It shall be unlawful for any person to file a false registration application with the building official.
Sec. 3.12.003 Renewal
(a) Recognizing that the initial implementation of this article may be difficult because of the number of rental
units, the inspections of rental units and limited manpower, the building official may, by administrative order,
divide the city into two (2) or more geographical areas and establish annual registration dates for rental units
located within each geographical area. A copy of the geographical designation shall be on file in the office of the
city secretary.
(b) A registered owner of a rental unit within the city, or the owner’s agent, shall renew the registration for
each rental unit on or before the date prescribed in this article and obtain an inspection by paying the fee set
forth in section 3.12.002(d).
(c) The building official shall send each registered owner of a rental unit within the city a renewal notice for
registration accompanied by a registration application to be completed and returned by the owner.
(d) A registered owner of a rental property, or the owner’s agent, shall, upon receipt of the renewal notice,
complete and return a completed registration application for each rental unit within thirty (30) days after receipt
of the renewal notice. If an owner does not receive a renewal notice, it is the owner’s responsibility to
nonetheless renew the registration for each rental unit within the city. It is an offense for an owner to fail to file a
completed annual registration application for each rental unit on or before the dates specified in the renewal
notice or prior to the expiration date of the current registration.
Sec. 3.12.004 One-family dwelling unit and two-family dwelling registration and inspection
(a) Registration.
(1) The owner or owner’s agent shall annually register a one-family dwelling unit or two-family
dwelling (“dwelling”), except as provided herein.
(2) A certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) calendar months following
issuance thereof, unless the ownership of the dwelling changes; provided, however, the initial
certificate of registration for a dwelling shall not expire until the date of renewal of registration
established by the building official pursuant to section 3.12.003.
(3) The owner of a dwelling must have a dwelling inspected upon the occurrence of a vacancy.
(b) Exemption.
(1) A dwelling shall be exempt from the registration and inspection requirements under this article
for five (5) years from the date the original certificate of occupancy was issued for the dwelling.
However, an inspection of the dwelling shall be triggered during the exemption period if the city
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/244
receives a valid complaint of, or otherwise becomes aware of, a violation of this article or of the
city’s Code of Ordinances at the dwelling.
(2) In the event that a dwelling passes an inspection, the dwelling will be exempt from the annual
registration and inspection required herein, for a period of sixty (60) months from the date of the
successful inspection providing this exemption, unless a violation is reported or observed before the
sixty-month exemption expires.
Sec. 3.12.005 Multifamily dwelling complex registration and inspection
(a) Certificate of occupancy.
(1) Change of ownership. Within thirty (30) days after the change of ownership of a multifamily
dwelling complex, the owner shall obtain a new certificate of occupancy to continue operating. The
multifamily dwelling complex, including all occupied and all vacant dwelling units, shall be subject
to a complete certificate of occupancy inspection by the building official before a new certificate of
occupancy will be issued.
(2) Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of the
provisions of the city’s building code, this article, or of other ordinances of the city. Certificates
presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the building code and other
applicable ordinances shall not be valid. Changes in the character or use of a building shall not be
made except as provided in the city’s Code of Ordinances.
(3) The certificate of occupancy for all multifamily dwelling complexes shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises of the complex, and shall not be removed except by the building
official.
(4) An owner commits an offense if the owner knowingly operates a multifamily dwelling complex
in violation of this article.
(5) If the building official determines that the complex fails the certificate of occupancy inspection,
all vacant units within the complex shall be posted for nonoccupancy, and the landlord shall not allow
the occupancy of such units until the complex passes final inspection and a certificate of occupancy
is issued.
(b) Registration.
(1) The owner or owner’s agent shall annually register and obtain an inspection of the multifamily
dwelling complex, except as provided herein.
(2) A certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) calendar months following
issuance thereof, unless the ownership of the complex changes; provided, however, the initial
certificate of registration for a complex shall not expire until the date of renewal of registration
established by the building official pursuant to section 3.12.003.
(3) The owner of a multifamily dwelling complex must have a multifamily dwelling unit inspected
upon the occurrence of a vacancy.
(c) Exemption.
(1) A multifamily dwelling complex shall be exempt from the registration and inspection
requirements under this article for ten (10) years from the date the original certificate of occupancy
was issued for the complex. If a complex was constructed in phases, each phase shall be treated as a
separate complex for the purposes of this subsection. However, an inspection of the complex shall be
triggered during the exemption period if:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/244
(A) The ownership of the complex changes, in which case an inspection pursuant to
subsection (a) shall be made; or
(B) The city receives a valid complaint of, or otherwise becomes aware of, a violation of this
article or of the city’s Code of Ordinances at the complex.
(2) In the event that a multifamily dwelling complex passes an inspection, the multifamily
dwelling complex will be exempt from the annual registration and inspection required herein, for a
period of sixty (60) months from the date of the successful inspection providing this exemption,
unless a violation is reported or observed before the sixty-month exemption expires.
Sec. 3.12.006 Commercial unit registration and inspection
(a) Registration.
(1) The owner or owner’s agent shall annually register and obtain an inspection of the commercial
unit, except as provided herein.
(2) A certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) calendar months following
issuance thereof; provided, however, the initial certificate of registration for a commercial unit shall
not expire until the date of renewal of registration established by the building official pursuant to
section 3.12.003.
(3) Nothing in this article shall alter or relieve the owner of a commercial unit or the tenant of a
commercial unit from complying with all other applicable provisions of the city’s Code of
Ordinances.
(b) Exemption.
(1) A commercial unit shall be exempt from the registration and inspection requirements under this
article for ten (10) years from the date the original certificate of occupancy was issued for the
commercial unit. However, an inspection of the complex shall be triggered during the exemption
period if:
(A) The ownership of the commercial unit changes, in which case an inspection pursuant to
section 3.12.005(a) shall be made; or
(B) The city receives a valid complaint of, or otherwise becomes aware of, a violation of this
article or of the city’s Code of Ordinances at the commercial unit.
(2) In the event that a commercial unit passes an inspection, the commercial unit will be exempt
from the annual registration and inspection required herein, for a period of sixty (60) months from the
date of the successful inspection providing this exemption, unless a violation is reported or observed
before the sixty (60) month exemption expires.
Sec. 3.12.007 Inspection
(a) The building official may inspect, or cause to be inspected, a rental unit to determine compliance with
applicable state and local laws as provided in this article.
(b) An inspection shall be subject to the city’s most recently adopted version of the Property Maintenance
Code and International Residential Code.
Sec. 3.12.008 Penalty
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/244
(a) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each offense.
(b) A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to
comply occurs or continues to occur.
(c) Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the proof of a violation of this article.
(Ordinance 102110, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/10)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 4.01.001 Automobile salvage yards
No new junk car, wrecking yard, salvage dealer, or any other business dealing with or in junk cars will be
permitted within the city limits unless:
(1) They get written permission from the mayor and city council;
(2) Such business screens such junk cars or parts of cars from view of the public by erecting a sixfoot-
high solid wall or fence around the entire perimeter of their property; and
(3) They meet such other conditions as may be set by the city council.
(1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 4)
State law reference–Automobile wrecking and salvage yards, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 396.
ARTICLE 4.02 COIN-OPERATED MACHINES*
Sec. 4.02.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions will apply:
Coin-operated amusement machine. Any amusement machine or device operated by means of the insertion of a
coin, token, or similar object, for the purpose of amusement or skill and for the playing of which a fee is
charged. The term does not include vending machines in which are not incorporated gaming or amusement
features, nor does the term include any coin-operated mechanical musical devices, nor any coin-operated
amusement device designed exclusively for children under ten (10) years of age.
Commercial establishment. Any amusement establishment, office, store, restaurant, or business establishment
which is designed for the purposes of carrying on of any trade, profession, or business.
Proprietor or owner. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or club who, as the owner, lessee,
or proprietor, has under his or its control any commercial establishment, place, or premises in or at which such
device is placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/244
(1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 2(A))
Sec. 4.02.002 Registration
Each machine upon which the occupation tax has been paid shall be registered with the city by the owner or
proprietor, and such registration shall contain the make, model, and serial number of each machine. (1982 Code,
ch. 4, sec. 2(C))
Sec. 4.02.003 Sealing of machines for nonpayment of tax
Every coin-operated amusement machine subject to the payment of the occupation tax levied herein and upon
which tax has not been paid is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be sealed by the city to prevent its
operation or use. A five dollar ($5.00) fee is to be charged for the release of any machine sealed in addition to
the payment of the occupation tax. Whoever shall break the seal or display or remove from location any machine
on which the seal has been broken shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be in violation of this article.
(1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 2(D))
Sec. 4.02.004 Exemptions
Gas meters, pay telephones, pay toilets, food vending machines, confection vending machines, beverage vending
machines, merchandise vending machines, and cigarette machines which are now subject to an occupation or
gross receipts tax, stamp vending machines, and any musical device or jukebox and any coin-operated
amusement device designed exclusively for children under ten (10) years of age are expressly exempt from the
occupation tax levied herein, and the other provisions of this article. (1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 2(E))
Sec. 4.02.005 Gambling devices
Nothing in this article shall in any way be construed to authorize, license, or permit any gambling devices
whatsoever, or any merchandise that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way
contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the state. (1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 2(F))
ARTICLE 4.03 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 4.03.001–4.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Itinerant Merchants
Sec. 4.03.031 Purpose
The purpose of this division is regulatory so as to generally require registration and identification of persons
conducting commercial solicitation; and to protect the health, life, property and welfare of the citizens of the city
against unwarranted and unreasonable solicitations.
Sec. 4.03.032 Definition
Itinerant merchant. Includes all peddlers, solicitors, hawkers, canvassers, itinerant merchants or vendors and
transient merchants or vendors of goods, wares, merchandise, services or any other articles. Shall also include
any persons, partnerships, firms, or corporations soliciting, exhibiting, selling, taking orders for, or offering to
sell or take orders for such goods, wares, merchandise, meat, fish, publications, or services upon or from a truck
or other vehicle.
Sec. 4.03.033 Permit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/244
It shall be unlawful for any iterant merchant to engage in the business of selling, displaying, offering for sale of
any food, beverages, goods, services, or merchandise within the city without first obtaining a permit from city
hall. Itinerant merchants, vendors and their associates will be issued a permit ID card by the permit clerk after
review by the chief of police, showing the individual’s name, the address wherein the vending business is to be
conducted, the individual’s driver’s license number and the effective period of the permit and shall display the
permit ID card on their person at all times.
Sec. 4.03.034 Hours of operation
Vendors shall be allowed to engage in the business of vending only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
or as approved by the city manager or his/her designee. All stands and other vending operations must be
removed during nonoperating hours.
Sec. 4.03.035 Signage
Itinerant merchants shall be allowed a single temporary detached sign to advertise the business, subject to the
following standards:
(1) A vendor may have a maximum of two signs upon the vehicle or vendor structure. A third sign
is allowed upon the vehicle/structure; however the third sign shall constitute the allowed single
detached sign. If two signs or less are utilized on the vehicle structure, then the vendor shall be
allowed the single temporary detached sign subject to standards below.
(2) The sign must remain temporary and no permanent installation shall be allowed unless
permitted under the city’s sign ordinance. The sign should be anchored or stabilized to prevent wind
damage.
(3) Height of the sign shall not exceed six feet from the surface of the ground.
(4) Overall sign dimensions shall not exceed 24 square feet. Sign may be dual sided.
(5) Sign must be a minimum of 5 feet from the property line or curb, whichever is greater.
(6) Signs may not:
(A) Block a sidewalk or other pedestrian path.
(B) Impede access to/from a mailbox.
(C) Block a driveway or be located in the turning radius of a driveway.
(D) Be set up in an area where the visual triangle of a driveway would be affected.
(E) Be within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
(7) All peddler/vendor signs may not be electronic or have any flashing component(s) upon the
sign surface. Battery operated internally lighted signs are allowed.
(8) All signs must be constructed of weatherproof materials and shall not be constructed of any of
the following: Paper, canvas, cloth, cardboard, Styrofoam, or sheet metal.
Sec. 4.03.036 Stands
Vendor stands and/or motor vehicles shall not:
(1) Exceed 25 feet in total length, 10 feet in width or 13 feet in height.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/244
(2) Impede access to the entrance or driveway of an adjacent building.
(3) Must be on an improved surface such as concrete.
Sec. 4.03.037 Fire hydrants
Must be 20 feet from fire hydrants.
Sec. 4.03.038 Handicapped areas
No vendor shall conduct business within 20 feet of any handicapped parking space or access ramp.
Sec. 4.03.039 Prohibited areas
(a) A vending permit issued pursuant to this division is not valid in public ways or in public places of the city.
Vendor stands and motor vehicles are prohibited within 20 feet of a fire hydrant, fire escape, loading zone or
driveway of a fire station, police station or hospital.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any vendor to engage in business on any state highway within the city.
Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any vendor to park on any state highway within the city.
Exceptions: Vendors may engage in business or park on a state highway in connection with a special
event approved by city council.
(c) Vendor must have permission to be on private property and must show that permission in writing to city
hall.
Sec. 4.03.040 Removal of trash
All trash or debris accumulating within 50 feet of any vending stand shall be collected by the vendor and
deposited in an authorized trash container. All vendors selling food or beverages must provide at least one trash
receptacle adjacent to or as a part of their stand.
Sec. 4.03.041 Noise
No vendor may sound any device, which produces a loud and raucous noise, or use or operate any loudspeaker,
public address system, radio sound amplifier, or similar device to attract public attention.
Sec. 4.03.042 Quarterly sales and use tax reports
All vendors shall provide a copy of their quarterly report of sales and use tax receipts to the city secretary within
30 days of completing such reports.
Sec. 4.03.043 Motor vehicles
No vendor vending from a motor vehicle shall:
(1) Stop, stand or park within 20 feet of any intersection;
(2) Conduct business in such a way as would increase traffic congestion or delay, constitute a
hazard to life or property, interfere with an abutting property owner or obstruct access to emergency
vehicles.
Sec. 4.03.044 Application/permit fee
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/244
There shall be charged a $100.00 nonrefundable application fee to cover the cost of reviewing the application.
The application and permit fee shall be paid to the permit tech.
Sec. 4.03.045 Duration of permit
All permits issued under the provisions of this division shall be, except as provided specifically otherwise, for a
period of (60) days from the date of issuance.
Sec. 4.03.046 Suspension or revocation
Any permit issued under this division may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in the application.
(2) Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting the business of vending.
(3) Conducting the business of vending in any way contrary to the provisions of this division.
(4) Conducting the business of vending in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or
constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare.
(5) Conviction of any felony offense or any misdemeanor offense involving moral turpitude while
holding a vendor/peddler permit from the city.
(6) Suspension or cancellation of any license issued by the Texas Department of Health Services.
(7) Arrears (90 days or more) of sales and use tax due the state comptroller.
(8) Failure to submit quarterly sales tax report to the city secretary.
(9) Violation of any city ordinance or law of the state in connection with any itinerant merchant.
(Ordinance 120114 adopted 1/5/15)
Secs. 4.03.047–4.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Peddlers and Solicitors
Sec. 4.03.061 Definitions
License. Unless the context requires otherwise, shall be synonymous with a permit issued under this division.
Person. Any firm, company, partnership, corporation association, club, society or other organization.
Soliciting and solicitation. All activities ordinarily performed by a solicitor as indicated under this division.
Solicitor/peddler. Any person who goes upon the premises of any private residence in the city, not having been
invited by the occupant thereof for the purpose of taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods,
merchandise, wares, or other personal property of any nature for immediate or future delivery, or for services to
be performed, either immediately or in the future, and shall include the term peddler, itinerant merchant or
vendor, and canvasser. This definition also includes any person who without permit or invitation solicitants for
donations in and on the streets of the city. This definition also includes any persons who, goes upon private
property to request contributions of funds or anything of value, or sell goods or services for political, charitable,
religious, or other noncommercial purpose.
Sec. 4.03.062 Soliciting without permit unlawful
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/244
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit in the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from city hall.
Sec. 4.03.063 Application for permit
Every person subject to the provisions of this division shall file with the permit tech an application in writing on
a form to be furnished by the city, which shall provide the following information:
(1) Proof of age, address and identification of the applicant, to be provided through the applicant’s
driver’s license, articles of creation or incorporation as applicable, or other legally recognized form of
identification, photo identification required;
(2) A brief description of the business or activity to be conducted;
(3) The hours and location for which the right to solicit is desired;
(4) If soliciting pursuant to employment, the name, address and telephone number of the employer;
or, if acting as an agent, the name, address and telephone number of the principal who is being
represented, with credentials in written form establishing the relationship and authority of the
employee or agent to act for the employer or principal, as the case may be;
(5) A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or
ordinance violation (other than traffic violations), the nature of the offense or violation, the penalty or
punishment imposed, the date when and place where such offense occurred, and other pertinent
details thereof;
(6) Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state, or local laws or
regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed business, or which,
under any such law or regulation, would exempt the applicant from permitting requirements of this
division; and
(7) Photograph of the applicant, which shows a clear identification of the applicant, and which
shall have been taken within one year prior to the date of application, unless state issued driver’s
license with expiration date on the identification.
(8) Application fee of $100.00 for each solicitor to cover the cost of processing the application.
(9) The application will be reviewed by the permit tech and police chief. The police chief and/or
permit tech may refuse to issue a permit to the applicant under this division for any of the following
reasons:
(A) The location and time of the solicitation would fall outside of the times or locations
permitted for solicitation by this division.
(B) An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified information on the application.
(C) The applicant has been convicted of a felony, misdemeanor or ordinance violating
involving a sex offense, trafficking in controlled substances, theft, burglary, robbery, or any
violent act against persons or property, or any crime against the elderly.
(D) The applicant has been denied a permit in the past 12 months, unless the applicant can
and does show to the satisfaction of the city secretary/city manager that the reasons for such
earlier denial no longer exist.
(10) The police chief and/or permit tech denial and the reason for denial shall be noted on the
application and sent to the permit tech. The applicant will be notified of the denial and no permit will
be issued.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/244
(11) The permit tech will issue a permit upon approval of an application and payment. A copy will
be issued to the chief of police along with documentation.
(12) The permit will be issued for a time frame of 60 days and must be displayed. The applicant
must report any changes to the permit tech within the 60 days time frame. The applicant must reapply
for renewal.
Sec. 4.03.064 Exemptions
The permitting requirements and the requirements related to identification of this division shall not apply to any
person:
(1) Attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political
party, issue, or candidate.
(2) A solicitor is exempt from this division if involved in local school fundraiser.
(3) Distribution of handbill or flyer providing notification of a noncommercial event or service.
Sec. 4.03.065 Hours of solicitation
During Central Standard Time, permissible solicitation hours are from 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., and during
daylight savings time, permissible solicitation hours are from 10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. only Monday through
Saturday. No solicitation is permissible on Sunday.
Sec. 4.03.066 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this division or failing to observe any provisions
here of shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not more than $500.00 and
each and every day or fraction of a day during which this division or any part thereof, shall be violated, shall be
deemed a separate offense and punishable as such.
(Ordinance 120114A adopted 1/5/15)
ARTICLE 4.04 JUNKYARDS
Sec. 4.04.001 Definitions
Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this article:
Junk. All worn-out, worthless, discarded or secondhand material or equipment, in general, including any scrap
metal, bottles, glass, paper, cordage, junked vehicles, machinery and equipment and/or parts thereof.
Junkyard. A yard, lot or place, covered or uncovered, containing junk, upon which occurs one or more acts of
buying, storing or keeping, dismantling, processing, selling or offering for sale any such junk, in whole or by
parts, for a business or commercial purpose, regardless of whether or not the proceeds from such act or acts are
to be used for charitable purposes or such location is a primary or incidental use of such property.
(1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 5(A))
Sec. 4.04.002 Compliance; permit required
Hereafter, any place being used or maintained by any person, partnership or corporation as a junkyard is hereby
declared to be a public and common nuisance and is hereby prohibited within the city limits unless its operation
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/244
and maintenance is conducted in accordance with these regulations and a permit to operate or maintain such
junkyard has been issued by the city council. (1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 5(B))
Sec. 4.04.003 Application for permit; issuance
(a) Any person desiring to use or maintain any property within the city for the purpose of a junkyard shall
make written application to the city council for a permit. Said application shall set forth the name and address of
the applicant and legal description of the property or premises upon which the junkyard is proposed or
conducted and any other information or evidence required or desired to be submitted by the city council deemed
necessary to properly consider the application. Upon receipt of such application, the city council shall decide in
its discretion whether to approve or reject the application at its next regularly scheduled meeting. In considering
said application, the city council shall take into account the nature and development of surrounding property, the
proximity of churches, schools, hospitals, public buildings and other places of public gatherings, the health,
safety and general welfare of the public and the suitability of the applicant to operate and/or establish and
maintain such a yard or business. If the city council approves the application, the city secretary shall issue a
permit to the applicant upon the payment of the permit fee.
(b) All existing junkyards in operation or being maintained prior to the effective date of this article shall be
required to make application for a permit within sixty (60) days from the effective date of this article and to
comply with all general regulations hereof.
(1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 5(C))
Sec. 4.04.004 Permit fee; duration; revocation
(a) Before any permit is issued to operate or maintain a junkyard, the applicant shall pay an annual fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Any permit issued shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of its issuance but
may be renewed from year to year in a like manner as is provided for in the original permit.
(b) The city council shall have the power to revoke any permit for a junkyard granted by them at any time for
violation of any provisions of this article, but only after notice has been given to the owner(s) and a hearing held
not less than ten (10) days after the service of such notice.
(1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 5(D))
Sec. 4.04.005 Location
All junkyards hereafter permitted, after the adoption of this article, shall be restricted to industrially zoned
properties or areas of the city, except those junkyards presently in operation on the effective date of this article
shall be allowed to continue to operate even if located in another zoning district, provided a permit has been
secured in accordance with section 4.04.002 hereof. (1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 5(E))
Sec. 4.04.006 Operation
The following requirements shall be met by all owner(s) of any junkyard within the city:
(1) Contents to be kept in orderly condition. The junk or rubbish or salvage to be placed within the
premises of a junkyard shall be kept in an orderly condition allowing sufficient space on each side so
an individual may be able to walk among junk or rubbish or salvage and inspect the premises and to
permit easy access to all junk for firefighting purposes.
(2) Yards must be open to inspection. All junkyards must be open to inspection by law
enforcement officials, health department representatives, fire department officials and building
inspectors. Such inspections shall be for the purpose of ascertaining whether any health, safety or
sanitary violations exist and to assist in locating stolen or lost property.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/244
(3) Vehicles and machinery to be drained of flammable liquids and oil. It shall be the duty of the
owner(s) of the junkyard to see that the automobiles, trucks, tractors or machinery of any kind which
is kept within the premises is drained of all flammable liquids and oils.
(4) Screening.
(A) The property and premises of such junkyards shall be enclosed by a fence at least six feet
(6') in height, measured from ground level, and of material which obscures the view. Said fence
shall be kept in good repair at all times and no junk of any character, or parts or machinery of
any kind, shall be allowed to remain outside of such fence. However, any person operating such
junkyard in the city shall be allowed ninety (90) days from the effective date of their permit
within which to construct a fence of the kind and character required.
(B) Such fence enclosing the junkyard shall not be used for billposting or for other
advertising purposes, except a space not larger than fifty (50) square feet which may be used for
the advertisement of the junkyard if not in violation of the city’s zoning ordinance or sign
regulations.
(5) Contents not to collect water. It shall be the duty of the owner(s) of the junkyard to see that the
contents of said junkyard will not be placed in a position whereby they will collect water, thus
becoming a breeding place for mosquitoes.
(6) Standing water. No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner
as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes.
(7) Tall weeds. Weeds and other uncultivated growth on the premises, other than trees, shrubs and
bushes, shall be kept at a height of not more than twelve inches (12").
(8) Garbage and other waste. No garbage or other waste shall be kept on the premises, nor shall
any refuse of any kind be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is junk as defined herein and in use
on the permitted premises.
(9) Open fires. The burning of rubbish, trash, automobiles or any parts thereof, or other junk, shall
not be permitted.
(10) Junk protruding over street, scattered off premises, or stored above height of fence. No junk
shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street, walkway or curb or become scattered
or blown off the premises of such junkyard. Also, the owner(s) shall not allow or permit junk to be
stored at a height exceeding the height of the fence enclosing the premises.
(11) Dismantling of refrigerators and other items. All junk, including but not limited to
refrigerators, stoves, washing machines and dryers, shall be rendered in such a manner to prevent
entrapment. All refrigerators and freezers not stored in a lockable structure shall have the doors
removed. All junk stored or accumulated on said premises shall be dismantled in such a manner so
that it does not constitute a public safety hazard.
(12) Combustible material. No combustible material of any kind, not necessary or beneficial to the
permitted business, shall be kept on the premises, nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire
hazard.
(1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 5(F))
ARTICLE 4.05 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/244
Secs. 4.05.001–4.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Private Clubs
Sec. 4.05.031 Definitions
As used in this article:
Alcoholic beverage. Any liquid or beverage for human consumption containing more than one-half of one
percent (1/2 of 1%) of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purpose, either alone or when
diluted.
Private club. A club which is an association of persons that holds a private club registration permit allowing
alcoholic beverages to be served for on-premises consumption to members of the club and their guests as
authorized by the alcoholic beverage commission under the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Code of the
state. Such alcoholic beverages can either be:
(1) Stored, possessed, and mixed on the club premises; or
(2) Served for on-premises consumption only to members of the club and their families and guests,
by the drink or in sealed, unsealed or broken containers of any legal size.
(1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 6(A))
Sec. 4.05.032 Location near school, church or hospital
No private clubs serving alcoholic beverages of any kind shall be located within three hundred feet (300') of any
church, public school, or public hospital. The measurement of distance between the private club where alcoholic
beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and
front door to front door in a direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place
of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public school shall be from the nearest property line of
the public school to the nearest doorway by which the public may enter the place of business, along street lines
and in a direct line across intersections. For any permit or license covering premises where minors are prohibited
from entering the premises under section 109.53, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, the measurement of the
distance between the premises and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from
front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. (1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 6(B); Ordinance
adopting Code)
State law reference–Sales near church, school or hospital, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 109.33.
Sec. 4.05.033 Regular food service required
All private clubs holding a private club registration permit shall provide and make available to club members
and their guests regular food service which is to be served on the premises. In order to adequately determine
whether such food service is being provided for regularly, at least one-half (50%) of the total food and beverage
gross sales must be in food sales. Each private club shall keep and maintain such records of food and beverage
sales, which shall be subject to inspection by the city upon request. (1982 Code, ch. 4, sec. 6(C))
ARTICLE 4.06 TEMPORARY SALES
Sec. 4.06.001 Definitions
Temporary sale. A sale or offer for sale, an exchange or a barter of miscellaneous items to the general public in a
garage or upon the driveway, patio, or yard or in a residence upon residential property not otherwise being used
for commercial purposes. At least 95% of the merchandise must have been previously owned and used by the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/244
person, firm or corporation holding the sale and shall not include any items bought, exchanged or bartered for
resale at the sale. Sometimes also referred to as “garage sale,” “backyard sale,” “yard sale,” or “porch sale.”
Sec. 4.06.002 Limitations
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or occupying residentially zoned property within
the city to hold or permit to be held on the same property more than four (4) temporary sales in any calendar
year.
Sec. 4.06.003 Signs
Signs not exceeding four (4) square feet may be posted a maximum of two (2) days prior to the temporary sale
being held. No signs shall be permitted on utility poles or public property, including street rights-of-way and
easements. Signs shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours following the last day of the sale.
Sec. 4.06.004 Permit
A permit is required for each temporary sale.
Sec. 4.06.005 Offenses; penalty for violation
(a) A person commits an offense under this article if he fails to comply with any of the requirements of this
article or other ordinances or laws of the city or the state.
(b) A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article.
(c) Any person found to be violating any term or provision of this article shall be subject to a fine as provided
in section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 4.07 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.07.001 Purpose and intent
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
harmful location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article
have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of
this article to restrict or deny access to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny
access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it
the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
Sec. 4.07.002 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Achromatic. Colorless, lacking in saturation or hue. Without limitation, grays, tans and light earth tones shall be
included, but white and black and any bold coloration that attracts attention shall be excluded from the definition
of achromatic.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/244
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for
any form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
Adult audio or video center. Any place at which any of the following activities occurs:
(1) Inbound or outbound telephone or other audio communications in which a topic or purpose of
the communication between an occupant of the premises and a third party is the discussion or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or is otherwise pornographic in
nature for consideration;
(2) Video or audio broadcasting, whether live, delayed, by film, by tape recording or otherwise, of
specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or pornographic material for consideration; or
(3) Filming, taping or otherwise creating video or audio recordings, including but not limited to,
films, movies, video tapes, DVDs, audio tapes or compact discs, that are broadcast, sold,
manufactured or distributed for consideration.
Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store. A commercial establishment which, as one of its
principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified
sexual activities or designed to depict specified anatomical areas.
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude;
(2) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities; or
(3) Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
Adult motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions;
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is
less than ten hours.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/244
Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features
persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude, or live performances that are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
Chief of police. The chief of police for the city or designee.
City manager. The city manager or designee.
Employee. A person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time,
part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is designated an employee, independent contractor, agent
or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said
business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the
premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
Entertainer. A person paid to provide entertainment to customers at a sexually oriented business; entertainment
may consist of dancing, singing, modeling, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations with
customers whereby the entertainer is paid any form of remuneration directly or indirectly for such conversations.
Escort. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another
person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease or specified sexual
activities for another person.
Escort agency. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts
as one of its business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
Establishment. When used as a verb, means and includes any of the following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
sexually oriented business;
(3) The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented
business; or
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
License. Refers to both a sexually oriented business license and a sexually oriented business employee license,
unless otherwise specified.
Licensee. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee license, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business.
Manager. A person designated by the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to be responsible for the
operation of such business at a particular location at a particular time; when the owner, proprietor, or other
principal in the business is present, such person may be considered the manager.
Nude model studio. Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or who displays
specified anatomical areas and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed,
or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not
include a proprietary school licensed by the state or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/244
in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in
which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
or in a structure:
(1) That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates
a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing;
(2) Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of
the class; and
(3) Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time.
Nudity or a state of nudity. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft
or cleavage with less than a fully opaque, meaning non-translucent, covering, the showing of the female breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple or areola, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernibly aroused state.
On-site card. The personal photographic identification card for an employee issued by the chief of police that
must be provided by the employee to the manager or on-site manager in charge of the sexually oriented business
as set forth herein.
Person. An individual, a group of two or more individuals, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, association, or other legal entity.
Personal card. The personal photographic identification card for an employee issued by the chief of police that
must be displayed on the employee as set forth herein.
Principal. Over 35 percent of customers, volume of sales, stock in trade, display areas, or presentation time, or
any combination thereof in any three-month increment period beginning from the date of issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. Stock in trade shall be measured with all titles or objects available on the premises for
sale or rental, including those that are identical being considered a separate title or object.
Residential use. A single-family, townhouse, condominium, duplex, triplex, fourplex, mobile home,
manufactured home, or multiple-family dwelling.
Semi-nude or in a semi-nude condition. The showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top
of the areola at its highest point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the
entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human
female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the
nipple or areola is not exposed in whole or in part.
Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial enterprise that offers, for any form of consideration:
(1) Any form of physical contact, including massage, by a person with the buttock, anus, male
genitals, female genitals, or female breast of another person for the primary purpose of sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification and regardless of whether any of the persons is in a state of nudity
or semi-nude; or
(2) Body painting of the buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast of another
person, whether those of the patron or employee, for the primary purpose of sexual stimulation or
sexual gratification and regardless of whether any of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
Sexual encounter centers do not include any massage establishment lawfully registered under Texas
Occupations Code, chapter 455, as amended, at which services are only provided by persons
registered as a massage therapist under Texas Occupations Code, chapter 455, as amended.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/244
Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult audio or video center, adult bookstore, adult novelty store,
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude
model studio, or sexual encounter center or other commercial enterprise a principal business of which is the
offering of a service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. Sexually oriented businesses do not include: (1) a bookstore,
movie theater, or video store, unless that business is an adult bookstore, or adult movie theater or adult video
store; (2) a business operated by or employing a licensed psychologist, licensed physical therapist, licensed
athletic trainer, licensed cosmetologist, or licensed barber engaged in performing functions authorized under the
license held; or (3) a business operated by or employing a licensed physician or licensed chiropractor engaged in
practicing the healing arts. A commercial establishment may have other business purposes that are not a sexually
oriented business or related to a sexually oriented business. Such other business purposes will not serve to
exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as a sexually oriented business so long as one of
its business purposes is a sexually oriented business.
Specified anatomical areas.
(1) The human male genitals in a discernibly aroused state, even if completely and opaquely
covered; or
(2) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, vulva, anus, anal
cleft, buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
Specified criminal activity. Any of the following offenses:
(1) Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; aggravated promotion of prostitution, compelling
prostitution; obscenity, dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to
a minor; sexual performance by a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public
lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual
assault or aggravated sexual assault; incest; solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child;
molestation of a child; gambling; offenses involving necrophilia or bestiality; or distribution of a
controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above as well as criminal attempt,
conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses, under the criminal or penal
statutes of the states, country, county or city; for which:
(A) Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
the terms of community supervision, probation, parole or deferred disposition or the date of
release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
(B) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of conviction or
the date of release from the terms of community supervision, probation, parole or deferred
disposition or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
(C) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
the terms of community supervision, probation, parole or deferred disposition or the date of
release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses
occurring within any 24-month period.
(2) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the
applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
Specified sexual activities. Any of the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/244
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female
breasts;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including but not limited to, intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
(3) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections
(1) and (2) above.
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business. The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by
more than 25 percent, as the floor areas exist on:
(1) The date the ordinance from which this article is derived takes effect; or
(2) For any premises not used as a sexually oriented business on the date the ordinance from which
this article is derived takes effect, the date an application for a license to use the premises as a
sexually oriented business is received by the city designating the floor area of the structure or
proposed structure in which the sexually oriented business will be conducted, regardless of any
subsequent changes in applicants, licenses, owners, or operators of the premises or the sexually
oriented business.
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business. Includes any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities or ownership interests which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device to which a transfer of any
ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon
the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
Sec. 4.07.003 Classification
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult audio or video center;
(3) Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
(4) Adult cabarets;
(5) Adult motels;
(6) Adult motion picture theaters;
(7) Adult theaters;
(8) Escort agencies;
(9) Nude model studios; and
(10) Sexual encounter centers.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/244
Sec. 4.07.004 Injunction
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or who
violates this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations.
Sec. 4.07.005 Enforcement
(a) Whenever a person does an act that is prohibited, fails to perform an act that is required, or commits an act
that is made an offense by any provision of this article or any other ordinance regulating sexually oriented
businesses, the violation is punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), or other
applicable law. A person violating a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of
a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
(b) Except where otherwise specified, a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense
under this article.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under section 4.07.065 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a
modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school, licensed by the state; or a college, a junior college, or a university
supported entirely or partly by governmental taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(A) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a nude person is available for viewing;
(B) Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in
advance of the class; and
(C) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
Secs. 4.07.006–4.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Licenses
Sec. 4.07.031 Required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a sexually oriented business in the city without a
valid sexually oriented business license issued by the city pursuant to this article for the premises at which the
sexually oriented business is operating, or to operate such business after such license has expired or has been
revoked or suspended by the city.
(b) It is unlawful for any person, entertainer, server, employee, manager, operator or owner to knowingly
perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an unlicensed sexually oriented
business.
(c) It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages or operates a sexually oriented business to have an
employee or to employ a person, regardless of the nature of the employment, who works for the sexually
oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this
article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/244
(d) It is unlawful for any person to obtain employment, regardless of the nature of the employment
relationship, with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee
license pursuant to this article.
(e) It is unlawful for any person to fail to have a manager, who has a sexually oriented business employee
license and who is responsible for ensuring compliance with this article, on-duty and working at any time the
sexually oriented business is open for business.
(f) The failure to post a sexually oriented business license in the manner required herein shall be prima facie
evidence that such business has not obtained such a license. In addition, it shall be prima facie evidence that any
entertainer, employee, manager or owner who performs any business, service or entertainment in a sexually
oriented business in which a sexually oriented business license is not posted in the manner required herein had
knowledge that such business is not licensed.
(g) A separate license is required for each sexually oriented business. A sexually oriented business license
shall be issued only for the one sexually oriented business use listed on the application. Any change in the type
of sexually oriented business use shall invalidate the sexually oriented business license and require the licensee
to obtain a new license for the change in use. The establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually
oriented business in the same building, structure or portion thereof is prohibited.
(h) Each sexually oriented business license and each sexually oriented business employee license shall expire
one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application for renewal. Application for
renewal shall be made at least 30 business days prior to the expiration date, and when made less than 30 business
days before the expiration date, the license will still expire on its expiration date. When the city denies renewal
of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to
denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a license if at least 90 business days have elapsed since the date the denial became final.
(i) Sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses are nontransferable.
Sec. 4.07.032 Application and fees
(a) An application for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license
shall be submitted to the chief of police on a form provided by the city and shall be sworn to as true and correct.
(b) All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. The application may request
and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the city to determine
whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this article.
(c) Only a person who is an officer of or who has an ownership interest in, a sexually oriented business may
apply for a sexually oriented business license. An individual wishing to operate a sexually oriented business
must sign the application. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual having the power to control or direct its operations, each individual who is an officer
and/or each individual having a 20 percent or greater ownership interest in the sexually oriented business must
sign the application for a license as an applicant. Such persons include, but are not limited to, general partners,
officers, directors, and controlling shareholders or owners. Each applicant must be qualified under this article
and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
(d) The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following information
and be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(A) An individual, the individual shall state such person’s legal name and any aliases and
submit proof that such person is 18 years of age;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/244
(B) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, the date of its formation,
evidence that the partnership is in good standing under the laws of the state and if not a Texas
partnership, its state of formation, the names and capacity of all partners and officers, whether
the partnership is general, limited or otherwise, a copy of the partnership agreement or
certificate of partnership, if any, and the official name and address to be used for process of
service on the partnership; and/or
(C) A corporation, limited liability company or other legal entity, the entity shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation or formation, evidence that the entity is in good
standing under the laws of the state of formation and if not a Texas entity, the state of
incorporation or formation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and controlling
stockholders or owners, and the name of the registered agent and the address of the registered
office for service of process.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that
of the applicant; the application must:
(A) State the sexually oriented business’s fictitious name or business owner’s fictitious name;
and
(B) Submit the required registration and assumed name documents.
(3) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of a
specified criminal activity, and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place, and
jurisdiction of each conviction, and the date of release from confinement, if applicable.
(4) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under
this article or other similar sexually oriented business provisions from another city or county denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which
the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and
whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an
officer, director or principal stockholder or owner of a corporation or other legal entity that is
licensed under this article whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including
the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended
or revoked, and the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
(5) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other licenses under
this article or other similar sexually oriented business regulations from another city or county and, if
so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses.
(6) The classification of the sexually oriented business for which the applicant is seeking the
license. A sexually oriented business may only have one classification to be eligible for a license.
(7) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the
property, street address, telephone number, if any, and the dates a notice sign was posted as required
by this article.
(8) The applicant’s mailing address and residence address.
(9) For each applicant, a copy of a valid state driver’s license with photo, or a valid state
identification card with photo. The originals of the required forms of identification shall be presented
to the chief of police for inspection prior to the issuance of a license.
(10) The applicant’s driver’s license number and state of issuance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/244
(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total
floor space occupied by the business, prepared and sealed by an architect or engineer, drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six inches.
(12) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application by
a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing
sexually oriented businesses within 1,250 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines or
boundaries of the uses and locations described in section 4.07.061(b) and (c) within 1,250 feet of the
property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established
if it is in existence or owned by such type of user at the time an application is submitted.
(13) If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel,
which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor
space, films, videocassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the additional
application requirements set forth in section 4.07.063.
(14) A statement whether the applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is delinquent in
payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties.
(e) The completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license shall contain the following
information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) The applicant’s name or any other name (including “stage” names) or aliases used by the
individual;
(2) Age, date, and place of birth;
(3) Height, weight, hair and eye color;
(4) Present residence address and telephone number;
(5) Present business address and telephone number;
(6) A copy of a valid state driver’s license with photo, or a valid state identification card with
photo. The originals of the required forms of identification shall be presented to the chief of police
for inspection prior to the issuance of a license;
(7) Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age;
(8) A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant’s face, and the applicant’s
fingerprints on a form provided by the city. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be
paid by the applicant;
(9) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously
operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country, has ever had a
license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any
professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such
denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and
describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial,
revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application;
(10) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as
defined in this article and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/244
jurisdiction of each conviction, and the date of release from confinement, if applicable; and
(11) A statement whether the applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is delinquent in
payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties.
(f) All employees of a sexually oriented business existing prior to the passage of the ordinance from which
this article is derived must submit an application for a sexually oriented business employee license required by
this article no later than 60 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and
any employee failing to do so shall not continue to work on the premises of a sexually oriented business if he
fails to submit an application within 60 days or if the application for license is denied. Any person who fails to
timely submit an application for a license as required by this subsection, or any person operating sexually
oriented business who allows an employee to continue working who is not in compliance with this subsection or
who fails to receive a license shall be considered to be in violation of this section.
(g) Each application for a sexually oriented business license and each application for a sexually oriented
business employee license, or renewal thereof, shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee
established by resolution of the city council. An application shall not be considered filed until the required fee is
paid and the application is complete in all respects and all information and documentation required by the
application form has been submitted.
(h) Each applicant shall sign a waiver and authorization form authorizing the chief of police to request on
behalf of the applicant criminal history from the state department of public safety and other appropriate state and
federal agencies. The applicant shall pay all fees and costs associated with such request for criminal history.
(i) Each license issued by the chief shall include two photographic identification cards, a personal card and an
on-site card.
(j) If any personal card or on-site card is lost or stolen, the holder thereof shall immediately notify the chief of
police and request a replacement, which shall be issued for a fee established by resolution of the city council
within three days following verification of the identity of the holder.
Sec. 4.07.033 Sign requirements
The following requirements apply for posting a sign concerning intent to locate sexually oriented businesses.
(1) An applicant for a sexually oriented business license for a location for which a sexually
oriented business license has not previously been issued shall post an outdoor sign at the location in
compliance with Texas Local Government Code, section 243.0075, as amended, not later than the
60th day before submitting the application for a sexually oriented business license.
(2) The sign shall comply with the following and Texas Local Government Code, section
243.0075, as amended:
(A) The sign must be at least 24 by 36 inches in size;
(B) All letters must be at least two inches in height and one and one-half inches in width for
each letter on the sign;
(C) The sign shall state that a sexually oriented business is intended to be located on the
premises;
(D) The sign shall provide the name and business address of the owner and operator;
(E) All required information must be presented in both English and Spanish;
(F) All required information must read horizontally from left to right; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/244
(G) The sign shall be prominently posted such that it is clearly legible from the public rightof-
way.
(3) The operator of a proposed sexually oriented business shall notify the chief of police, by
certified mail or hand delivery, when a sign is posted at the intended location of the business in
compliance with Texas Local Government Code, section 243.0075, as amended. The notification
must be in the form of a sworn statement indicating the location of the sign and the date it was posted
and must be received by the chief of police within five days after the posting of the sign. If the chief
of police receives the notification within five days after the sign was posted, the 60-day posting
period required by Texas Local Government Code, section 243.0075 shall be deemed to begin on the
posting date. If the notification is received by the chief of police more than five days after the sign
was posted, the 60-day posting requirement shall be deemed to begin on the date the chief of police
verifies the sign has been posted.
(4) When a sign is posted at an intended location of a sexually oriented business and the intended
location is not in violation of the distance requirements set out in this article on the posting date, the
sexually oriented business will qualify as a conforming use with regard to the distance requirements
and will not be rendered nonconforming by any location, subsequent to the posting of the sign, of the
use or location described in section 4.07.061(b) and (c) within 1,250 feet of the posted location.
(5) Subsection (4) of this section does not apply if:
(A) A completed application for a license for a proposed sexually oriented business is not
filed with the chief of police within 20 days after the expiration of the 60-day posting
requirement under Texas Local Government Code, section 243.0075, as amended;
(B) The application for a license is withdrawn or denied; or
(C) The notification requirements of subsection (2) are not met.
Sec. 4.07.034 Issuance
(a) Upon the filing of a complete application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the chief of
police shall issue a temporary license, valid for 30 business days, to said applicant. If the sexually oriented
business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is immediately deemed null and
void. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate city departments for an investigation to be made
on such information as is contained on the application. The investigation shall be completed within 25 business
days from the date the completed application was filed. Upon completion of the investigation, the chief of police
shall issue a license, not later than 30 business days from the date the completed application was filed, unless it
is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the following are true:
(1) The application contains false, fictitious or fraudulent information or the applicant has failed to
provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;
(2) The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity;
(4) The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business
prohibited or unlicensed by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular
provision of this article;
(5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the city within
two years of the date of the current application;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/244
(6) The license application fee and/or costs required by this article have not been paid; or
(7) The applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is delinquent in payment to the city
of taxes, fees, fines or penalties.
(b) Sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses issued pursuant to
this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the
chief of police that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity or committed any act
during the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license application. The
renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of a license renewal application fee established by
resolution of the city council from time to time.
(c) Upon the filing of a complete application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be
referred to the appropriate city departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is contained
on the application. The investigation shall be completed within 25 business days from the date the completed
application was filed. Upon completion of the investigation, the chief of police shall issue a license not later than
30 business days from the date the completed application was filed, unless it is determined by a preponderance
of the evidence that one or more of the following are true:
(1) An applicant is under 18 years of age;
(2) An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is delinquent in payment to the city of
taxes, fees, fines or penalties, including but not limited to those related to the sexually oriented
business or the property on which the sexually oriented business is located;
(3) The application contains false, fictitious or fraudulent information or the applicant has failed to
provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;
(4) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license by the
city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 calendar months or whose license
to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 calendar months;
(5) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity;
(6) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the
police department, fire department, development services department, the building official, health
department or other city department or applicable governmental agency as being in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances;
(7) The license application fee and/or costs required by this article have not been paid; or
(8) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any
of the provisions of this article, the comprehensive zoning ordinance, or any other applicable city
ordinance, as may be amended.
(d) The sexually oriented business license, if issued, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to
whom it is issued, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business and the classification for
which the license is issued. All sexually oriented business licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or
near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may be easily read at any time the establishment
is occupied or open for business. A sexually oriented business license is only valid for the premises for which it
was issued. The sexually oriented business employee license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the applicant. The holder of a sexually
oriented business employee license shall have the license available for inspection at the premises where such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/244
person is working pursuant to the authority granted under the license. The holder of a sexually oriented business
license shall be responsible for verifying that each employee holds a valid sexually oriented business employee
license and for maintaining copies of such employee licenses on the premises.
(e) A sexually oriented business license shall be issued for only one classification.
Sec. 4.07.035 Inspection
(a) As a condition for the issuance of a license, an applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the
police department, health department, fire department, development services department, building inspections or
other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of
ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business and at other reasonable times
upon request.
(b) A licensee or person who operates a sexually oriented business, or their agent or employee commits an
offense if such person refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by representatives of the city as set
forth in subsection (a) above at any time the sexually oriented business is occupied or open for business and at
other reasonable times upon request.
Sec. 4.07.036 Suspension
(a) The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days if the chief
determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this article; or
(2) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this
article.
(b) A sexually oriented business may not operate while the sexually oriented business license issued for that
business is suspended. The holder of a sexually oriented business employee license may not work on the
premises of a sexually oriented business while that employee’s license is suspended, except as allowed by
section 4.07.038.
Sec. 4.07.037 Revocation
(a) The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 4.07.063 occurs and the
license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
(b) The chief of police shall revoke a license if the chief of police determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the
application process;
(2) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the
premises of the sexually oriented business or failed to report such activities to the police;
(3) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented
business or failed to report such activities to the police;
(4) A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the
licensee’s license was suspended;
(5) Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed
premises;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/244
(6) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties, including but
not limited to those related to the sexually oriented business or the property on which the sexually
oriented business is located; or
(7) A manager, having a sexually oriented business employee license, responsible for ensuring
compliance with this article is not on-duty and working at any time the premises is open for business.
(c) When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee
shall not be issued a license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to
revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant
may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
Sec. 4.07.038 Appeal
(a) Any applicant for a license who is denied a license or the holder of any license that is suspended or
revoked shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city manager. The appeal may be made by filing with
the city manager within ten (10) business days after notice of the denial, suspension or revocation has been
received, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal and the name, mailing address,
facsimile number and/or email address and telephone number to be used by the city to provide notice of a
hearing as required by subsection (b) of this section.
(b) The city manager shall provide for a hearing on such appeal and shall notify the appellant and chief of
police in writing of the date, time and location of such hearing at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the
hearing, unless appellant agrees in writing to a shorter period. The appeal shall be decided on the basis of a
preponderance of the evidence. For purposes of this section, notice by facsimile or hand delivery shall be
considered delivered on the date of fax, or delivery, if faxed or delivered prior to 5:00 p.m., and if after 5:00 p.m.
it shall be considered delivered on the next day. Notice sent by U.S. mail shall be deemed delivered on the
second day following deposit in the United States mail.
(c) The decision of the city manager shall be made no later than 30 business days after receipt of notice of the
appeal unless waived by the appellant. The decision of the city manager is final.
(d) If the appellant being denied a license renewal holds an un-revoked, unsuspended license for the preceding
year, such person shall be permitted to continue to operate under the existing license until a final decision is
made by the city manager under this section, unless the chief of police determines from evidence or information
presented to it that continued operation or work by the appellant would constitute a continuing and imminent
threat to the public welfare; however, if said license expired prior to the denial of the renewal, the license shall
be considered expired and the appellant may not use the expired license.
(e) An appellant appealing the suspension or revocation of a license may continue to use such license until a
final decision is made by the city manager, unless the city determines from evidence or information presented to
it that continued operation or work by the appellant would constitute a continuing and imminent threat to the
public welfare.
(f) The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the state district court of Dallas County, Texas.
Sec. 4.07.039 Transfer
A licensee commits an offense if the licensee transfers a license to another person or entity, or operates a
sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than at the address for which the
license was issued.
Secs. 4.07.040–4.07.060 Reserved
Division 3. Operational Requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/244
Sec. 4.07.061 Location of sexually oriented businesses
(a) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in
any zoning district other than as allowed by the city’s comprehensive zoning ordinance, as amended.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated, within the city limits, a
sexually oriented business within 1,250 feet of any of the following located within the city limits or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction:
(1) A religious institution, church, synagogue, mosque, temple or structure that is used primarily
for religious worship and related religious activities or real property owned by, or for the benefit of, a
religious organization that intends to use the property for such purposes if such ownership has been
registered with the city;
(2) A public or private educational facility, including but not limited to, child day-care facilities,
nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuing
education schools, special education schools, junior colleges, colleges and universities; school
includes the school grounds and related athletic or other facilities regularly visited by students;
(3) A boundary of a zoning district zoned for residential uses under the comprehensive zoning
ordinance, an area designated as residential on the city’s comprehensive planning guide;
(4) A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities,
including but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, golf course, reservoir,
athletic field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar
public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of a governmental
entity;
(5) The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use;
(6) An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family
entertainment; or
(7) A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated, within the city limits, a
sexually oriented business within 500 feet of the right-of-way of any of the following roadways located within
the city limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction:
(1) U.S. Highway 175;
(2) Farm to Market Road 741; and
(3) Farm to Market Road 148.
(d) A person commits an offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial
enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,250 feet of another
sexually oriented business.
(e) A person commits an offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance
of more than one classification of sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof,
or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof
containing another sexually oriented business.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/244
(f) For the purpose of subsections (b) and (c) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the property line or boundary
of the premises where a sexually oriented business is operated or to be operated to the nearest property line or
boundary for the uses listed in subsection (b) or the right-of-way for the roadways listed in (c), as determined by
the chief of police. Presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for
purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
(g) For purposes of subsection (d) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political
boundaries, from the nearest property line of each property sought to be used as a sexually oriented business as
determined by the chief of police. Presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be
irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
(h) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which
this article is derived that is in violation of one or more subsections of this section shall be deemed a
nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year,
unless sooner terminated for any reason, including but not limited to, suspension or revocation of license, or
voluntary discontinuance for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended, or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually
oriented businesses are within 1,250 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually
oriented business which was first lawfully established and continually operating at a particular location is the
conforming use and the later established business is nonconforming.
(i) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use
by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in
subsection (b) of this section within 1,250 feet of the sexually oriented business or a location listed in subsection
(c) of this section within 500 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of
a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or
been revoked.
(j) A person commits an offense if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance
of a sexually oriented business within any tax increment financing zone established by the city.
Sec. 4.07.062 Additional regulations for adult motels
(a) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and
vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this article.
(b) A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar
commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or sub-rents a
sleeping room to a person and, within ten (10) hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or sub-rents the
same sleeping room again.
(c) For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the term “rent” or “sub-rent” means the act of permitting a
room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
Sec. 4.07.063 Additional regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live
entertainment in viewing rooms
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which
exhibits on the premises in a viewing room, booth, stall or partitioned portion of a room having less than 150
square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which depicts
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, (herein referred to as “viewing area”) shall comply with
the following requirements:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/244
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied
by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more
manager’s stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of
the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed 32 square
feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be
conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or
architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or
to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that
the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station may be made without the
prior written approval of the chief of police.
(3) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on
duty and situated in each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall
be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to
which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The
view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
(4) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. No
viewing area shall have a door, half-door, curtain, portal partition or other divider unless at least one
side is completely open to an adjacent public room and a manager’s station so that the area inside is
visible to persons in the adjacent public room and a manager’s station.
(5) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the viewing area specified herein remains
unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials
and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has
been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted as set forth in the application filed
pursuant to subsection (1) of this section.
(6) No viewing area may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
(7) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five
foot candles as measured at the floor level.
(8) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (7)
above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
(9) No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing areas.
(10) No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing areas. A
solid metal barrier in which an opening cannot be easily made shall be used in the wall construction
between viewing areas within 48 inches of the floor.
(11) The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing
areas to determine if any openings or holes exist.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/244
(12) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing areas to be nonporous, easily cleanable
surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
(13) The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing areas to be
constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor. A person
having a duty under subsections (1) through (12) above commits an offense if such person knowingly
fails to fulfill that duty.
Sec. 4.07.064 Additional regulations for escort agencies
(a) An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person
under the age of 18 years.
Sec. 4.07.065 Additional regulations for nude model studios
(a) A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
(b) A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if the person appears semi-nude or in a state of
nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the
person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view, not open to persons of the opposite sex or
visible to any other person, so long as there was not more than one person in a restroom stall.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to
appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public
right-of-way.
(d) A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except
that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
(e) An employee of a nude model studio, while exposing any specified anatomical areas, commits an offense
if the employee touches a patron or clothing of a patron.
(f) A patron at a nude model studio commits an offense if he touches an employee who is exposing any
specified anatomical areas or touches the clothing of the employee.
(g) A licensee or an employee of a nude model studio commits an offense if he permits any customer access to
an area of the premises not visible from the manager’s station or not visible by a walkthrough of the premises
without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom.
Sec. 4.07.066 Sexual encounter centers
(a) Sexual encounter centers are prohibited. No license shall be issued for the operation of a sexual encounter
center.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person owns, operates or causes to be operated a sexual encounter
center. Any person in control of the premises shall be presumed to be operating the sexual encounter center.
Sec. 4.07.067 Additional regulations concerning public nudity and employees
(a) It shall be an offense for a person to knowingly and intentionally appear in a state of nudity or to depict
specified sexual activities in a sexually oriented business.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/244
(b) It shall be an offense for a person to knowingly or intentionally appear in a semi-nude condition in a
sexually oriented business unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least six (6) feet
from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two (2) feet from the floor level used by patrons.
(c) It shall be an offense for an employee to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron while said employee is
semi-nude in a sexually oriented business.
(d) It shall be an offense for any patron to pay or give any gratuity to any employee while said employee is
nude or semi-nude in a sexually oriented business.
(e) It shall be an offense for an employee to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron while said employee is
semi-nude in a sexually oriented business.
(f) It shall be an offense for a patron in a sexually oriented business to touch a nude or semi-nude employee,
or to touch the clothing of a nude or semi-nude employee.
(g) Each manager or entertainer shall conspicuously display his personal card upon his person at all times
while acting as an entertainer or manager of or in a sexually oriented business.
(h) Each manager or entertainer shall provide his on-site card to the manager or on-site manager in charge of
the sexually oriented business to hold while the manager or entertainer is on the premises of the sexually
oriented business.
Sec. 4.07.068 Prohibition against minors in a sexually oriented business
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) below, a person commits an offense if the person knowingly allows a
person under the age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. It shall be unlawful for any
person under the age of 18 years to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business at anytime the
sexually oriented business is open for business.
(b) No person under the age of 21 shall be permitted on the premises of a sexually oriented business where
persons appear in a state of nudity or a state of semi-nudity. A person commits an offense if the person
knowingly allows a person under the age of 21 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business where
persons appear in a state of nudity or state of semi-nudity. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21
years to enter or be on the premises of a sexually oriented business, where persons appear in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity, at any time such sexually oriented business is open for business.
Sec. 4.07.069 Hours of operation
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time except between the hours
of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and 12:00 p.m. (noon) and 10:00 p.m. on Sunday.
Sec. 4.07.070 Alcoholic beverage sales and consumption prohibited
(a) It shall be an offense for any person to maintain, own, or operate a sexually oriented business on any
premises on which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption, or permitted to be
consumed.
(b) It shall be an offense for any person who maintains, owns or operates any commercial establishment where
alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, or are permitted to be
consumed on the premises, to permit any person to appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
Sec. 4.07.071 Signs and exterior portions
(a) A person commits an offense if the person allows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/244
(1) The merchandise or activities of the sexually oriented business to be visible from any point
outside the premises;
(2) Any exterior portion of the premises of a sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or
any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, graphics or pictorial representations of any
manner except for the words or letters allowed by subsection (b);
(3) Any sign to exist that does not comply with the city sign ordinance as it exists or may be
amended; or
(4) Any exterior portion of the premises of a sexually oriented business to be any color other than a
single achromatic color, unless the following conditions are met:
(A) The premises is part of a commercial multi-unit development; and
(B) The exterior portions of each premises or unit in the commercial multi-unit development,
including the exterior of the sexually oriented business, are the same color as one another or are
colored in such a way as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the
commercial multi-unit development.
(b) Notwithstanding any provision of the city sign ordinance, as it exists or may be amended, a sexually
oriented business is limited to one (1) attached sign with an area not exceeding that calculated by multiplying the
lease space frontage by two feet, and in no case greater than 100 square feet in area, and one (1) freestanding
sign not exceeding (6) feet in height and 35 square feet in area. No sign visible from any point outside the
premises shall contain photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner, and may
contain only:
(1) The name of the establishment; and/or
(2) One of the following phrases:
(A) “Adult arcade”;
(B) “Adult audio center” or “adult video center”;
(C) “Adult bookstore”;
(D) “Adult novelty store”;
(E) “Adult video store”;
(F) “Adult cabaret”;
(G) “Adult motel”;
(H) “Adult motion picture theater”;
(I) “Adult theater”;
(J) “Escort agency”; or
(K) “Nude modeling studio.”
(3) A person commits an offense by installing or causing to be installed any sign in violation of
this section or by allowing the continued display of an unlawful sign.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/244
(c) No sexually oriented business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation of any
material depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specifies anatomical areas by display,
sign, show window or other opening from any public view.
(d) A sign shall be conspicuously displayed in the common area of an adult cabaret or adult theater that shall
read as follows:
“THIS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF
CRANDALL
Entertainers and employees are:
a. Not permitted to engage in any type of sexual conduct.
b. Not permitted to be unclothed, clothed in less than opaque attire, or to move or
remove such attire, or allow such attire to be moved or removed so as to expose to view
any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or any portion of the
female breast below the top of the areola except upon a stage at least two (2) feet above
the immediate floor level and removed at least six feet (6') from the nearest patron.
c. Not permitted to demand or collect any payment or gratuity from any patron for
entertainment before its completion.”
(Ordinance 051911A adopted 5/19/11)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 5.01.001 Arson reward
The city will pay out of the general fund of the city the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) as a reward to
any person or persons giving information or otherwise causing the arrest and conviction of any person or persons
found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the corporate limits of the city. This reward is a standing
offer. The city council shall be the sole and exclusive judge in determining whether or not a person or persons
are entitled to such reward and in determining the proration between persons where more than one (1) person is
entitled to such reward, and the conclusions of the city council in such cases shall be final. (1982 Code, ch. 5,
sec. 3; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 28.02.
Sec. 5.01.002 Tank vehicles for flammable and combustible liquids
(a) Definition. Tank vehicle means any vehicle other than railroad tank cars and boats, with a cargo tank
mounted thereon or built as an integral part thereof used for the transportation of flammable or combustible
liquids, LP gas, or hazardous chemicals. Tank vehicles include self-propelled vehicles, full trailers, and
semitrailers with or without motive power and carrying part or all of the load.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/244
(b) Parking and garaging.
(1) Except in an emergency, no tank vehicle shall be left unattended on any street, highway,
avenue, or alley, provided that this shall not prevent a driver from the necessary absence from the
truck in connection with the delivery of his load, except that during actual discharge of the liquid
some responsible person shall be present at the vehicle, nor shall it prevent stops for meals during the
day or night if the street is well lighted at the point of parking.
(2) Tank vehicles containing flammable or combustible liquids shall not be parked out of doors at
any point for longer than one (1) hour, except off the street, and at least twenty-five feet (25') from
any buildings used for assembly, institutional, or residential occupancy.
(3) Tank vehicles shall not be parked or garaged in any building within the city limits other than
those specifically approved for such use by the fire marshal.
(c) Smoking near tank vehicle. Smoking by tank vehicle drivers, helpers, repairmen, or other personnel is
prohibited while they are driving, making deliveries, filling, or making repairs to tank vehicles.
(1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 7)
Sec. 5.01.003 Smoke detectors in rental dwellings
(a) Required. In accordance with state law, every dwelling unit provided to a tenant shall be provided with at
least one (1) approved listed smoke detector installed outside, but in the vicinity of, each separate bedroom in
the dwelling unit on a ceiling or wall. Such smoke detector(s) shall be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s recommended procedures, except smoke detector(s) being installed on a ceiling must be no
closer than six inches (6") to a wall, and if on a wall it must be no closer than six inches (6") and no farther than
twelve inches (12") from the ceiling.
(b) Duties of landlord. It shall be the duty of each landlord to install, inspect and repair smoke detector(s) in
any dwelling unit occupied by a tenant and owned by him. The landlord shall determine that the smoke
detector(s) are in good working order by following the recommended test procedures of the manufacturer at the
beginning of a tenant’s possession or at the time of installation. During any term of a lease or during a renewal
or extension thereof, it is the landlord’s duty to inspect and repair the smoke detector only if the tenant gives the
landlord notice of a malfunction or requests to the landlord that it be inspected or repaired. The landlord must
comply with the tenant’s request for inspection or repair within seven (7) days after the request has been made.
The landlord will be exempt from his duty to repair any smoke detector damaged by the tenant unless the tenant
pays in advance a reasonable repair or replacement cost, including labor, materials, taxes and overhead. Also, the
landlord is not obligated to provide batteries for any battery-operated smoke detector(s) after a tenant takes
possession if the smoke detector was in good working order at the time the tenant takes possession.
(c) Defenses. The landlord shall not be held liable nor shall have violated this section for failure to inspect,
repair or replace any smoke detector(s) upon notice by the tenant if the tenant has not paid all rent due or for
reasonable damages caused by the tenant to the smoke detector(s) causing it to malfunction.
(1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 8)
State law reference–Smoke detectors in rental homes, apartments, dwellings, etc., V.T.C.A., Property Code, sec. 92.251 et seq.
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE MARSHAL
Sec. 5.02.001 Office created; appointment and removal
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be independent of other city departments. The fire
marshal shall report directly to the mayor and city council. Such office shall be filled by appointment by the
mayor, by and with the consent of the city council. The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/244
his office and shall be subject to removal at all times and for any reason. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 1(A); Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 5.02.002 Duty to investigate fires
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by
which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire
was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24) hours, not
including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires,
together with all facts, statistics, and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss,
which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 1(B))
Sec. 5.02.003 Taking of testimony; duty when evidence indicates crime
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in
relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of
the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to
commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall
cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to
the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the
information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. (1982
Code, ch. 5, sec. 1(C))
Sec. 5.02.004 Power to summon witnesses
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which
is by the provisions of this article a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any
book, paper, or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec.
1(D))
Sec. 5.02.005 Misconduct of witnesses
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of
said fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper, or document touching any matter under
examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in
the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter
under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire
marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such misdemeanor shall
be fined in a sum not exceeding twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Provided, however, that any person so convicted
shall have the right of appeal. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 1(E))
Sec. 5.02.006 Investigations may be private
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and
persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held,
and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other
until they have been examined. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 1(F))
Sec. 5.02.007 Authority to enter and examine buildings where fire has occurred
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the
duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/244
where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall
be exercised only with reason and good discretion. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 1(G))
Sec. 5.02.008 Preventive investigations; order to correct conditions; reports to state fire marshal
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and
without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into
and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, monthly or more often, to enter upon
and make, or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing, and public
buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure
which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to
fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger
persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges,
furnaces, or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which
the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or
unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable
products, ashes, or combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous
in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he
shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner
or occupant of said building or premises. Provided, however, that if said owner or occupant deems himself
aggrieved by such order, he may, within five (5) days, appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the
complaint, and unless by his authority the order is revoked, such orders shall remain in force and be forthwith
complied with by said owner or occupant. At the end of each month the fire marshal shall report to the state fire
marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate report on each fire in the city during the
month. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 1(H))
Sec. 5.02.009 Maintaining fire hazard
(a) Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises who shall keep or maintain the same
when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to
fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and
which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished by a fine [not] to exceed
the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense, and each and every day any such offense shall be
continued shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(b) Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure or premises who shall keep or maintain the same
with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatsoever,
including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter
of fire, health, or safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building or other
structure or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of
explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable
materials, or refuse, or with any other condition which shall create a fire danger or which shall be dangerous in
the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires, or which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen, or
occupants of such building, structure, or premises other than the maintainer thereof, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to a penalty of fine as provided in subsection (a) above.
(c) The provisions of this article shall apply to storage of flammable and combustible liquids as regulated in
article 5.03 of this chapter. An owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises who shall keep or
maintain the same for storage of flammable or combustible liquids or materials as defined in article 5.03 shall be
required to keep the same in such manner that leakage or exposure of such liquids or materials is not permitted
at any time. Such owner or occupant shall be required to keep the premises, building, or structure secure by
gates, locks, fences, or any other means necessary to prevent entry by unauthorized persons. Any violation of
this subsection shall be subject to the same penalty as provided in subsection (a) above.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/244
(d) No prosecution shall be brought under the provisions of subsection (a), (b), or (c) above until the order
provided for in section 5.02.008 is given and the party to whom notice has been given has failed or refused to
comply with such order.
(1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 1(I))
Sec. 5.02.010 Enforcement
The penalties provided for herein shall be recovered by the city in the same manner as provided by law for the
enforcement of fines, forfeitures, and punishments for offenses against the city. Every day’s maintenance of any
of the conditions prohibited in any of the foregoing sections shall be a distinct and separate offense. All
misdemeanors herein provided for shall be prosecuted and all fines and forfeitures herein provided [shall be
recovered and enforced in the same manner as provided] by law for the endorsement [enforcement] of fines,
forfeitures, penalties and punishments for offenses generally against the city. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 1(J))
ARTICLE 5.03 FIRE PREVENTION CODE*
Sec. 5.03.001 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to
life and property from fire and explosion, that certain fire code known as the International Fire Code, 2009
edition, published by the International Code Council. One copy of the code is on file in the office of the city
secretary. (Ordinance 060412, sec. 6, adopted 6/4/12)
Sec. 5.03.002 Amendments
The provisions attached to Ordinance 060412 as exhibit H, are local amendments to the International Fire Code,
2009 edition. Each provision is a substitute for the identically numbered provision or is an addition to the
International Fire Code, 2009 edition. (Ordinance 060412, sec. 7, adopted 6/4/12)
Sec. 5.03.003 Enforcement officers
The Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention of the city, which is hereby
established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the fire marshal. Wherever the words “chief of
the bureau of fire prevention” are used in the Uniform Fire Code, they shall be held to mean “fire marshal.” The
fire marshal may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall be necessary from time to
time. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 6(B))
Sec. 5.03.004 Jurisdiction defined
When the word “jurisdiction” is used in the Uniform Fire Code, it shall mean the city. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec.
6(C))
Sec. 5.03.005 Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of flammable or combustible liquids
in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited
The storage of class I and II liquids and flammable cryogenic fluids, excluding liquefied petroleum gas (LP gas),
in above-ground storage tanks or containers outside of buildings is prohibited within the city limits when such
storage exceeds more than ten (10) gallons not in nationally approved safety cans or containers and twenty-five
(25) gallons in nationally approved safety cans or containers. The storage of any other flammable or combustible
liquids in outside aboveground storage tanks is prohibited within the city limits unless a special use permit has
been granted by the city council in accordance with the city’s zoning regulations. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 6(D))
Sec. 5.03.006 Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of liquefied petroleum gases is
restricted
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/244
The limits referred to in section 82.105(a) of the Uniform Fire Code, in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas
is restricted, are hereby established as to be within the city limits unless a special use permit has been granted by
the city council in accordance with the city’s zoning regulations. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 6(E))
Sec. 5.03.007 Establishment of limits of districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is
prohibited
The limits referred to in section 77.106(b) of the Uniform Fire Code, in which storage of explosives and blasting
agents is prohibited, are hereby established as to be within the city limits unless a special use permit has been
granted by the city council in accordance with the city’s zoning regulations. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 6(F))
ARTICLE 5.04 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 5.04.001 Definition
Fireworks means and includes any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of
substances or device designed to produce a visible or audible pyrotechnic display, including, but not limited to,
firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, sparklers or other articles or substances
within the commonly accepted meaning of fireworks, except that the term “fireworks” shall not include any auto
flares, paper caps containing not in excess of an average of twenty-five hundredths (0.25) of a grain of explosive
content per cap, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of such caps, for which the sale and
use shall be permitted at all times. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 2(A))
Sec. 5.04.002 Possession and discharge prohibited
No person shall possess, cast, throw or fire any fireworks of any kind within the city limits. (1982 Code, ch. 5,
sec. 2(B))
Sec. 5.04.003 Sale prohibited
No person shall manufacture, assemble, store, exhibit or have in his possession with intent to give away or sell
or offer for sale or sell within the city limits any fireworks of any kind. The fire marshal of the city shall seize,
take, remove or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owners, all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for
sale, stored or held in violation of this section. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 2(C))
Sec. 5.04.004 Exceptions; permit for public displays
Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to the sale, storage or use of railroad track torpedoes or other
signaling devices used by railroads, nor to the sale, storage or use of flashlight composition by photographers or
dealers in photographic supplies, or prevent any public or private demonstration or display of fireworks of any
kind if conducted under the supervision of the chief of police after application is made and written permit issued
by the chief of police and fire chief for such demonstration. Such permit shall not be granted until written
application therefor has been filed with the chief of police and the fire chief, nor unless such demonstration or
display shall be of such a character, and so located, discharged or fired, as in the opinion of the chief of police
and fire chief, after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person. (1982 Code,
ch. 5, sec. 2(D))
ARTICLE 5.05 OUTDOOR BURNING*
Sec. 5.05.001 General prohibition
No person may cause, suffer, allow, or permit any outdoor burning within the city limits except as provided for
in section 5.05.002. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 5(A))
Sec. 5.05.002 Allowable burning
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/244
(a) Outdoor burning is authorized in each of the following instances:
(1) Pursuant to a written grant of authority from the state commission on environmental quality or
executive director, who, before granting such authority, must determine that there is no practical
alternative to outdoor burning, and the burning will [not] cause or contribute to a violation of any
federal primary or secondary ambient air standard.
(2) Outdoor burning for the purpose of training firefighting personnel when requested by certified
mail and when authorized in writing by the local air pollution control agency or local health unit. If
notice of denial from the local air pollution control agency or local health unit is not received within
ten (10) days of the request, the burning is authorized.
(3) Outdoor burning consisting of campfires and fires used solely for recreational or ceremonial
purposes, or in the noncommercial preparation of food, or used exclusively for the purpose of
supplying warmth during cold weather.
(4) Outdoor burning of diseased animals when burning is the most effective means of controlling
the spread of disease.
(5) Outdoor burning of hydrocarbons from pipeline breaks and oil spills may be allowed upon
proper notification to the city and the executive director of the state commission on environmental
quality if it is determined that the burning is necessary to protect the public welfare.
(b) Burning shall not be commenced when surface wind is predicted to be less than six (6) mph (5 knots) or
greater than twenty-three (23) mph (20 knots) during the burning period and shall only commence after 9:00
a.m. and be completely consumed by 5:00 p.m.
(1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 5(B))
Sec. 5.05.003 Deposit of material capable of igniting spontaneously
No disposal or deposit outdoors of any material capable of igniting spontaneously is allowed except where the
disposal or deposit is made pursuant to a specific grant of authority by the state commission on environmental
quality or the executive director. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 5(C))
Sec. 5.05.004 Liability; compliance with applicable laws
The authority to conduct outdoor burning under this article does not exempt or excuse the person responsible
from the consequences, damages, or injuries resulting from the burning and does not exempt or excuse anyone
from complying with all other applicable laws or ordinances, regulations and orders of governmental entities
having jurisdiction even though the burning is otherwise conducted in compliance with the regulations. (1982
Code, ch. 5, sec. 5(D))
ARTICLE 5.06 FIRE LANES
Sec. 5.06.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the following meanings ascribed to them:
Fire lane. A passageway for fire and emergency vehicles and equipment, and in addition to the location and
width provided herein is further defined as an area of pavement suitable for vehicular traffic and shall be of a
quality not less than the drive area for the structure or remaining portion of the dedicated street and shall extend
to a dedicated street.
Front. That portion of the building containing the primary entrance way or ways. In the event a structure has
units fronting on all sides, then all sides of such structure shall be deemed a front side. Entrance ways into a mall
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/244
or area closed to vehicle traffic shall not be considered in determining a front if more than one hundred feet
(100') from an area designed for vehicle travel.
Place of assembly. A building, structure, or any portion thereof used for the congregation or gathering of fifty
(50) or more persons in one (1) room or space for purposes of deliberation, education, instruction, worship,
entertainment, amusement, drinking or dining or awaiting transportation.
(1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 9(A))
Sec. 5.06.002 Establishment and approval
The fire chief, fire marshal or any other designated person is hereby authorized to establish the location of and to
approve fire lanes within the city for the use of fire and emergency vehicles and equipment used in fighting and
control of fires. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 9(B))
Sec. 5.06.003 Required
(a) All multifamily residential structures other than duplexes, all shopping centers, all places of assembly, all
structures of more than two (2) stories, sometimes called “high rise” structures, and any other building or
structure where the fire chief, fire marshal or any other designated person deems necessary, whether existing or
hereinafter constructed, shall contain an area to be designated as a “fire lane,” such area to be along the curbline
in front of such structure or, if there is no curbline, then along the front of such structure as the term “front” is
herein defined not more than thirty-five feet (35') from such structure and lying along the entire width or length,
as the case may be, of the front of such structure, such fire lane being not less than twelve feet (12') wide on a
straight-of-way and a forty-foot radius at any corner of such lane.
(b) In addition thereto, all multifamily dwellings, including townhouses but excluding duplexes, shall have a
fire lane of the same description located to provide access to the rear not less than seventy-five feet (75') from
the furthermost point of any unit.
(1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 9(C))
Sec. 5.06.004 Paving and marking
(a) The fire lane shall be a paved surface and be clearly marked on the pavement with exterior red paint
forming a perimeter line at least four inches (4") wide, with the legend “FIRE LANE” in three-inch black letters
at intervals of not more than fifty feet (50') along said perimeter line; provided, however, that where the fire lane
is adjacent to a curb said curb shall also be painted red and clearly marked with the words “Fire Lane” in black
letters, a minimum of three inches (3") in height, clearly legible. In addition, metal signs on posts shall be posted
each one hundred twenty-five feet (125'), when practical, bearing the legend “FIRE LANE - NO PARKING”
painted in white letters on a red background, and near such fire lane; provided, however, that lack of metal signs
where such fire lane is otherwise clearly marked shall not be a defense to a charge of illegal parking.
(b) The owner or person in charge of such structure shall keep the fire lane clearly marked and signed at all
times; provided, however, that where the fire lane is to be upon a public street the owner or person in charge
shall not mark or designate such area but shall make application to the city for such designation and marking.
(1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 9(D))
State law reference–Marking of fire lane, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 2308.251(c).
Sec. 5.06.005 Connection to dedicated street or turnaround area required
All fire lanes shall connect at both ends to a dedicated street or be constructed with turnaround areas at the deadend
with a minimum radius of forty feet (40'). (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 9(E))
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/244
Sec. 5.06.006 Fire lanes to be separate from loading zones
Such fire lane shall not be coextensive with a loading zone, but loading zones, where needed, shall be
established in addition to the area designated as a fire lane. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 9(F))
Sec. 5.06.007 Closing or obstructing; defacing markings
No person shall close, abandon, obstruct, or deface the markings or indications of a fire lane required by this
article without written permission of the fire chief, the fire marshal, or an authorized representative. (1982 Code,
ch. 5, sec. 9(G))
Sec. 5.06.008 Access to fire hydrants
All fire hydrants located on either public or private property shall be accessible for fire department use at all
times and shall have clearance of at least twenty feet (20') on either side of the hydrant or along the curbline or
edge of paving nearest the fire hydrant. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 9(H))
Sec. 5.06.009 Stopping or parking in fire lane
No person may stop, park, or leave standing any non-emergency vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in a
fire lane. Any such unauthorized vehicle in a fire lane is subject to removal by the operator of the premises, with
the expense of removal and storage to be borne by the registered owner of the vehicle and subject to citation, as
well as removal by the fire marshal or his designate, or any police officer of the city. Whenever an unauthorized
vehicle is found to be stopped, parked, or left standing in a fire lane it shall be refutably presumed that the
registered owner of the vehicle has committed the act in violation of this section. (1982 Code, ch. 5, sec. 9(I))
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 6.02 HEALTH AUTHORITY†
Sec. 6.02.001 Office created; appointment
There is hereby created the office of health authority for the city. The city council shall appoint a competent
physician who is legally qualified to practice medicine under the laws of this state and who is of reputable
professional standing, and furthermore a resident of the state. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 1(A))
Sec. 6.02.002 Term
The health authority shall be appointed at the first regular meeting of the city council or as soon thereafter as
practicable after the annual election of the officers of the city in each year in April, and shall hold office for one
(1) year or until his successor has duly been appointed and qualified. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 1(B))
Sec. 6.02.003 Oath
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/244
An appointee must take and subscribe to the official oath and file a copy of the oath and appointment with the
state board of health. He shall not be deemed legally qualified until such documents are filed. (1982 Code, ch. 6,
sec. 1(C))
Sec. 6.02.004 Duties
The health authority shall perform all duties which are necessary to implement and enforce any law to protect
the public health and all duties as may be prescribed by the state board of health. Such duties shall include, but
are not limited to, the following:
(1) Establishing, maintaining and enforcing quarantine within the health authority’s jurisdiction;
(2) Assisting and aiding the state board of health in all matters of local quarantine, inspection,
disease prevention and suppression, birth and death statistics, and general sanitation within the health
authority’s jurisdiction;
(3) Reporting to the state board of health, in such manner and form and at such times as it shall
prescribe, the presence of contagious, infectious and dangerous epidemic diseases within the health
authority’s jurisdiction;
(4) Reporting to the board on all other matters as may be proper for the board to direct; and
(5) Aiding the state board of health at all times in the enforcement of proper rules, regulations,
requirements and ordinances and in the enforcement of all sanitation laws, quarantine regulations and
vital statistics collection in the health authority’s jurisdiction.
(1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 1(D))
Sec. 6.02.005 Compensation
The health authority shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the city council. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec.
1(E))
Sec. 6.02.006 Enforcement of regulations and orders
Whenever it may be necessary to use any force to secure the observation and execution of any rules, regulations
or orders issued by the health authority under authority of this article, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to
detail the necessary officers and execute the same upon the requisition made by the health authority and
approved by the mayor. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 1(F))
ARTICLE 6.03 MOSQUITO CONTROL*
Sec. 6.03.001 Treatment of breeding places required
It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause, or permit within the city any collection of standing or
flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is so treated as
effectually to prevent such breeding. Collections of water shall be held to be those contained in ditches, pools,
ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults, fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells,
barrels, troughs, urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, automobile tires, or other
similar water containers. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 2(A))
Sec. 6.03.002 Methods of treatment of breeding places
The methods of treatment of collections of water directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes shall
be approved by the city council, and shall be one (1) or more of the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/244
(1) Screening with wire netting of at least sixteen (16) meshes to the inch each way, or with any
other material which will prevent the ingress and egress of mosquitoes.
(2) Complete emptying every seven (7) days of unscreened containers, together with their
thorough drying or cleaning.
(3) Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum, or paraffin oil once
every seven (7) days.
(1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 2(B))
Sec. 6.03.003 Evidence of breeding; notice
The natural presence of mosquito larvae or pupae in standing or running water shall be sufficient evidence that
mosquitoes are breeding there, and failure to prevent such breeding within three (3) days after notice by the city
council, or representative of the city council, shall be deemed a violation of this article. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec.
2(C))
Sec. 6.03.004 Action by city upon failure to comply with notice
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take
measures necessary to prevent the same within three (3) days after due notice has been given him by the city
council, or an authorized representative, the city is hereby authorized to do so, and all necessary cost incurred by
the city for this purpose shall be charged against the property owner. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 2(D))
Sec. 6.03.005 Enforcement
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the mayor, or his duly authorized agent acting under
his authority, may, at all reasonable times, enter in and upon any premises within his jurisdiction, and any person
charged with any of his duties imposed by this article failing within the time designated by this article or within
the time stated in the notice of the mayor, or his representative, as the case may be, to perform such duties or to
carry out the necessary measures as outlined in section 6.03.002 shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this
article. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 2(E))
ARTICLE 6.04 LITTER CONTROL*
Sec. 6.04.001 Depositing litter on public or private property
It shall be unlawful to throw, drop, or deposit in any manner any paper, glass, metal, or other article upon the
sidewalks, streets, alleys, or other public places within the city or upon private property without the owner’s
permission. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 3(A))
Sec. 6.04.002 Duties of businesses
It shall be unlawful to conduct any business or enterprise upon any premises or within any building which,
through negligence, allows paper, paper cups, or other refuse or debris to escape from such premises or building
and litter any sidewalk, alley, street, public property, or other private property. Businesses which cater to
customers who are likely to dispose of refuse on the premises, such as restaurants and grocery stores, shall
provide conveniently located waste receptacles for the customers’ use. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 3(B))
ARTICLE 6.05 TALL WEEDS AND GRASS*
Sec. 6.05.001 Prohibited conditions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/244
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association of persons, owner, agent,
occupant, or anyone having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or
unoccupied, within the city limits to suffer or permit weeds, grass, or uncultivated plants to grow to a height
exceeding twelve inches (12") on an average or to grow in rank profusion upon said premises. The premises
extend lot line to lot line, including alleys and easements.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association of persons, owner, agent,
occupant, or anyone having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or
unoccupied, within the city limits to suffer or permit weeds, grass, or any uncultivated plants to grow along the
sidewalk or street adjacent to the same between the property line and the curb, or, if there is no curb, within ten
feet (10') outside that property line, to a height exceeding twelve inches (12") on an average or to grow in rank
profusion upon said premises. The premises extend lot line to lot line, including alleys and easements.
Sec. 6.05.002 Duty to cut and remove
It shall be the duty of any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association of persons, owner, agent, occupant,
or anyone having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or
unoccupied, within the city limits to remove, or cause to be cut and removed, all such weeds, grass, or
uncultivated plants as often as may be necessary to comply with section 6.05.001 of this article.
(Ordinance 082197, sec. 1, adopted 8/21/97)
Sec. 6.05.003 Failure to remove; removal by city
(a) Should the owner of any lot or lots within the city, who shall allow weeds, grass, or uncultivated plants to
grow in rank profusion to an average height of twelve inches (12") or excess, making it unsightly, harboring
snakes, rodents, and mosquitoes, making it a threat to public health and safety, and allowing the accumulation of
rubbish, trash, and objectionable or unsanitary or unsightly matter, as the case may be, fail or refuse to mow or
cut down or remove said weeds or plants, or refuse or fail to remove rubbish, trash, or unsanitary matter, within
ten (10) days after notice to said owner to do so, then such work may be done by the city.
(b) Written notice shall be given:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner’s address as recorded in the appraisal district’s
records; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained, notice may be given by:
(A) Publication at least once;
(B) Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the
violation relates; or
(C) Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property
to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(4) If a municipality mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with this subsection and the
United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice
is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered.
(c) In the notice of violation, the city may inform the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, that if
the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and
safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may correct the
violation at the owner’s expense and assess the expense against the property. In addition, the city may give
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/244
notice that, should any condition described in this article exist again on the property within one year from the
date of such notice, no additional notice to remove or remedy the condition will be given, and a citation or
citations will be issued to such person or persons as provided in this code.
(d) The city may do such cutting, mowing, or removing such weeds, grass, or uncultivated plants, rubbish,
trash, objectionable or unsanitary matter or cause the same to be done and may pay therefor, and charge the
expenses incurred in doing such work or having such work done, which shall include salary and wages of
employees, and the expense of notifying the owner by mail or publication of said notice in a newspaper, to the
owners of such lot or lots.
(Ordinance 082197, sec. 1, adopted 8/21/97; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.05.004 Authority to immediately abate dangerous weeds
(a) Notwithstanding any of the foregoing sections, the city may abate, without notification, weeds that:
(1) Have grown higher than forty-eight (48) inches; and
(2) Are an immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person.
(b) The city must give notice, in the manner provided in section 6.05.003, to the property owner no later than
the tenth (10th) day after the date the city abates weeds under this section. The notification shall contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(2) A description of the violation of this article that occurred on the property;
(3) A statement that the city abated the weeds; and
(4) An explanation of the property owner’s rights to request an administrative hearing regarding
the city’s abatement of the weeds.
(c) The city shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of weeds under this section if, not later
than the thirtieth (30th) day after the date of the abatement of the weeds, the owner files a written request for a
hearing with the city.
(d) The city shall conduct the administrative hearing not later than the twentieth (20th) day after the date a
request for hearing is filed. At the administrative hearing, the owner may testify or present any witnesses or
written information relating to the city’s abatement of the weeds.
(e) The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section in the same manner and subject to the
same conditions as set forth in section 6.05.005 below.
(f) The authority granted the city by this section is in addition to the authority granted by section 6.05.003.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without notice, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.008.
Sec. 6.05.005 Statement of city’s expenses; lien
The city shall file a statement of such expenses incurred under section 6.05.003 of this article, giving the amount
of such expense and the date on which said work was done, and the name of the owner, if known, and the legal
description of the property with the county clerk, and the city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or lots or
real estate upon which said work was done to secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with the
provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, chapter 342, which said lien shall be second only to tax liens
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/244
and liens for street improvements, and said amount shall bear ten percent (10%) interest from the date said
statement is filed. It is further provided that, for any such expenditures and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be
instituted and recovery and foreclosure of said lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of
expenses so made as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for
such work. (Ordinance 082197, sec. 1, adopted 8/21/97; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 6.06 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 6.06.001 State rules on retail food store sanitation adopted
There is hereby adopted by the city the Rules on Retail Food Store Sanitation adopted by the state board of
health on August 17, 1985, for establishing standards for establishments that offer food and food products to
consumers which are intended for off-premises consumption. Such rules are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference to the same [extent] as if fully set out at length herein, and the same shall be controlling
within the city. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 7)
Secs. 6.06.002–6.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Food Service Establishments
Sec. 6.06.031 State rules on food service sanitation adopted
The definitions; the inspection of food service establishments; the issuance, suspension, and revocation of
permits to operate food service establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or
drink; and the enforcement of this division shall be regulated in accordance with the department of state health
services, division of food and drugs Rules on Food Service Sanitation 229.161–229.171, of which one (1) copy
shall be on file in the office of the city secretary; provided that the word “municipality” shall be understood to
refer to the city and the words “regulatory authority” shall be understood to refer to the department of state
health services. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 6(A))
Sec. 6.06.032 Permits, licenses and certificates
(a) Permit, license or certificate required. No person shall operate a food service establishment who does not
have a valid permit, license, or certificate issued to him by the regulatory authority. Only a person who complies
with the requirements of the Rules on Food Service Sanitation adopted in section 6.06.031 of this division shall
be entitled to receive or retain such a permit, license, or certificate. Permits, licenses, or certificates are not
transferable. A valid permit, license, or certificate shall be posted in every food service establishment.
(b) Issuance. Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment shall make written application for a
permit, license, or certificate, on forms provided by the regulatory authority. Such application shall include the
name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food service establishment, and the
signature of each applicant. Prior to approval of an application for a permit, license, or certificate the regulatory
authority shall inspect the proposed food service establishment to determine compliance with the requirements
of the Rules on Food Service Sanitation. The regulatory authority shall issue a permit, license, or certificate to
the applicant if its inspection reveals that the proposed food service establishment complies with the
requirements of the Rules on Food Service Sanitation.
(c) Suspension.
(1) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing, suspend any permit, license,
or certificate to operate a food service establishment if the holder of the permit, license, or certificate
does not comply with the requirements of the Rules on Food Service Sanitation, or if the operation of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/244
the establishment does not comply with the requirements of such rules, or if the operation of the food
service establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. Suspension is
effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (c)(2) below. When a permit, license, or
certificate is suspended, food service operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit, license,
or certificate is suspended, the holder of the permit, license, or certificate shall be afforded an
opportunity for a hearing within twenty (20) days of receipt of request for a hearing.
(2) Whenever a permit, license, or certificate is suspended, the holder of the permit, license, or
certificate, or the person in charge, shall be notified in writing that the permit, license, or certificate
is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be
provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the
permit, license, or certificate within ten (10) days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten
(10) days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if
reasons for suspension no longer exist.
(d) Revocation. The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit,
license, or certificate for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for
interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory
authority shall notify the holder of the permit, license, or certificate, or the person in charge, in writing, of the
reason for which the permit, license, or certificate is subject to revocation and that the permit, license, or
certificate shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written
request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit, license, or certificate
within such ten-day period. If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the
permit, license, or certificate becomes final.
(e) Service of notices. A notice provided for in this division is properly served when it is delivered to the
holder of the permit, license, or certificate, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit, license, or certificate. A
copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority.
(f) Hearings. The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time
and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall
make a final finding, and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A
written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit, license, or certificate by the
regulatory authority.
(g) Application after revocation. Whenever a revocation of a permit, license, or certificate has become final,
the holder of the revoked permit, license, or certificate may make written application for a new permit, license,
or certificate.
(1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 6(B))
State law reference–Authority to require permit for food service establishment, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 437.004.
Sec. 6.06.033 Inspections; correction of violations
(a) Frequency of inspections. An inspection of a food service establishment shall be performed at least once
every six (6) months. Additional inspections of the food service establishment shall be performed as often as are
necessary for the enforcement of the Rules on Food Service Sanitation adopted by reference in section 6.06.031
of this division.
(b) Access to premises. Agents of the regulatory authority or the city, after proper identification, shall be
permitted to enter any food service establishment at any reasonable time, for the purpose of making inspections
to determine compliance with such rules. The agents shall be permitted to examine the records of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/244
establishments to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received, or used, or to persons
employed.
(c) Inspection report. Whenever an inspection of a food service establishment or commissary is made, the
findings shall be recorded on the inspection report form on file in the office of the city secretary. The inspection
report form shall summarize the requirements of such rules and shall set forth a weighted point value for each
requirement. Inspectional remarks shall be written to reference, by section number, the section violated and shall
state the correction to be made. The rating score of the establishment shall be the total of the weighted point
values for all violations, subtracted from 100. A copy of the inspection report form shall be furnished to the
person in charge of the establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection report form
is a public document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who requests it according
to law.
(d) Correction of violations.
(1) The inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of time for the correction of the
violations found, and correction of the violations shall be accomplished within the period specified,
in accordance with the following provisions:
(A) If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of refrigeration or sewage
backup into the establishment, the establishment shall immediately cease food service
operations. Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the regulatory authority and/or
the city.
(B) All violations of 4- or 5-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but
in any event within ten (10) days following inspection. The holder of the permit, license, or
certificate shall submit a written report to the regulatory authority and the city stating that the 4-
or 5-point violations have been corrected. A follow-up inspection shall be conducted to confirm
correction.
(C) All 1- or 2-point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as possible, but in any event
by the time of the next routine inspection.
(D) When the rating score of the establishment is less than 60, the establishment shall initiate
corrective action on all identified violations within forty-eight (48) hours. One (1) or more
reinspections will be conducted at reasonable time intervals to assure corrections.
(E) In the case of temporary food service establishments, all violations shall be corrected
within twenty-four (24) hours. If violations are not corrected within twenty-four (24) hours, the
establishment shall immediately cease food service operations until authorized to resume by the
regulatory authority and/or the city.
(2) The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time limits for corrections may
result in cessation of food service operations. An opportunity for appeal from the inspection findings
and time limitations will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory
authority and the city within ten (10) days following cessation of operations. If a request for a hearing
is received, a hearing shall be held within twenty (20) days of receipt of that request.
(3) Whenever a food service establishment is required under the provisions of this division to cease
operations, it shall not resume operations until such time as a reinspection determines that conditions
responsible for the requirement to cease operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall
be offered within a reasonable time.
(e) Inspection report form. The inspection report form based on the requirements of the Rules on Food Service
Sanitation is on file in the office of the city secretary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/244
(1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 6(C))
Sec. 6.06.034 Examination and condemnation of food
Food may be examined or sampled by the regulatory authority and/or the city as often as necessary for
enforcement of the Rules on Food Service Sanitation adopted by reference in section 6.06.031 of this division.
The regulatory authority or the city may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge specifying with
particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food which it believes is in violation of subsection
(a) of rule .003 or any other provision of such rules. The regulatory authority or the city shall tag, label, or
otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or
moved from the establishment. The regulatory authority or the city shall permit storage of the food under
conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which
case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for
hearing may be filed within ten (10) days, and if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. A hearing
shall be held if so requested, and on the basis of evidence produced at that hearing the hold order may be
vacated, or the owner or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy
such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of such rules. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 6(D))
Sec. 6.06.035 Review of plans
(a) Submission of plans. Whenever a food service establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and
whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food service [establishment], properly prepared plans and
specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority and
the city for review and approval before construction, remodeling, or conversion is begun. The plans and
specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, and construction materials of
work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The regulatory authority and the
city shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of the Rules on Food Service
Sanitation adopted by reference in section 6.06.031 of this division and all other building and health regulations
of the city. No food service establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the regulatory authority and the city.
(b) Pre-operational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are required by subsection (a) above to be
submitted to the regulatory authority and the city, the regulatory authority and/or the city shall inspect the food
service establishment prior to its beginning operation to determine compliance with the approved plans and
specifications and with the requirements of such rules.
(1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 6(E))
Sec. 6.06.036 Procedure when disease is suspected
When the regulatory authority or the city health authority has reasonable cause to suspect the possibility of
disease transmission from any food service establishment employee, it may secure morbidity history of the
suspected employee or make any other investigation as may be indicated and shall take appropriate action. The
regulatory authority or the city health authority may require any or all of the following measures:
(1) The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food service establishments;
(2) The immediate closing of the food service establishment concerned until, in the opinion of the
regulatory authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists;
(3) Restriction of the employee’s services to some area of the establishment where there would be
no danger of transmitting disease;
(4) Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee, of other employees and of his
and their body discharges.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/244
(1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 6(F))
Sec. 6.06.037 Violations
Any person who violates a provision of these rules, and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise
operates a food service establishment that does not comply with the requirements of these rules, and any
responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons, may be fined, and the regulatory authority or the city
may seek to enjoin violations of these rules. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 6(G))
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 7.01.001 Creation and name
(a) The city council hereby finds and determines that the creation of a municipal court of record is necessary
to provide a more efficient disposition of cases arising within the city.
(b) The city council hereby creates a municipal court of record to be known as the “Municipal Court of
Record No. 1 in the City of Crandall, Texas.”
(c) The city council hereby adopts state law regarding municipal courts of records, as amended, and to the
extent that this article conflicts with state law, state law shall govern.
Sec. 7.01.002 Seal of the court
The city council shall provide the court of record with a seal. The seal’s appearance and use shall substantially
conform to the requirements set forth in Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 45.012. The seal shall include
the following phrase: “Municipal Court of Record No. 1 in the City of Crandall, Texas.”
Sec. 7.01.003 Jurisdiction
The municipal court of record, as created herein, shall exercise the entire jurisdiction conferred upon the judge
and municipal court by the ordinances of the city and the constitution and laws of the state. The municipal court
shall have jurisdiction as follows:
(1) General jurisdiction as provided by section 30.00005 of the Texas Government Code, as
amended;
(2) Concurrent jurisdiction with a district court or a county court at law under subchapter B,
chapter 54, Texas Local Government Code, within the city’s territorial limits and property owned by
the city located in the city’s extraterritorial jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing health and safety
and nuisance abatement ordinances;
(3) Civil jurisdiction for the purpose of enforcing municipal ordinances enacted under subchapter
A, chapter 214, Texas Local Government Code, or subchapter E, chapter 683, Texas Transportation
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/244
Code;
(4) Authority to issue:
(A) Search warrants for the purpose of investigating a health and safety or nuisance
abatement ordinance violation; and
(B) Seizure warrants for the purpose of securing, removing, or demolishing the offending
property and removing the debris from the premises;
(5) Jurisdiction over the forfeiture and collection of bonds given in proceedings therein, and to
order the forfeiture of cash acceptance bonds upon failure of the defendant to appear, and to accept
same in lieu of a fine;
(6) Jurisdiction over cases involving a license or permit granted by the city for any calling,
occupation, business or vocation. In addition to the punishment to be imposed therefor, the court may
suspend or revoke the license or permit so granted;
(7) Jurisdiction to enforce all process of the court in accordance with state law and city ordinance,
punish witnesses for failing to obey subpoenas, and compel their attendance by process of
attachment;
(8) Jurisdiction to punish for contempt, provide bail, and forfeit bonds under such circumstances as
are lawfully warranted and as provided by county courts, or county courts exercising criminal
jurisdiction only; and
(9) Jurisdiction over all other matters and cases provided for by state law and city ordinance.
Sec. 7.01.004 Collection fee; adoption of article 103.0031, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure
(a) A collection fee is hereby authorized and imposed, as provided by article 103.0031, Texas Code of
Criminal Procedure, in the amount of thirty percent (30%) of debts and accounts receivable, such as unpaid
fines, fees, court costs, forfeited bonds, or restitution ordered paid by a municipal court of record serving the
city, when such debt or account receivable is more then sixty (60) days past due and has been referred to an
attorney or private vendor for collection; and
(b) A collection fee is hereby authorized and imposed, as provided by article 103.0031, Texas Code of
Criminal Procedure, in the amount of thirty percent (30%) of amounts in cases in which the accused has failed to
appear:
(1) As promised under subchapter A, chapter 543, Texas Transportation Code, or other law;
(2) In compliance with a lawful written notice to appear issued under article 14.06(b), Texas Code
of Criminal Procedure, or other law;
(3) In compliance with a lawful summons issued under article 15.03(b), Texas Code of Criminal
Procedure;
(4) In compliance with a lawful order of a court serving the city; or
(5) As specified in a citation, summons, or other notice authorized by section 682.002, Texas
Transportation Code, that charges the accused with a parking or stopping offense, when such amounts
are more than sixty (60) days past due and have been referred to an attorney or private vendor for
collection.
Secs. 7.01.005–7.01.030 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/244
Division 2. Judges
Sec. 7.01.031 Appointment
(a) Generally.
(1) The municipal court of record of the city shall be presided over by one or more municipal
judges, one of whom shall be designated as the presiding judge.
(2) One or more associate judges may be appointed to assist the presiding judge.
(3) In June of each odd-numbered year, the city council shall appoint one or more municipal
judges.
(4) A judge shall hold office for two years from the date of appointment, or until his successor is
appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed by the city council, in compliance with state law.
(5) In the event of a vacancy in the office of a municipal judge by death, resignation or otherwise,
the city council shall appoint a qualified attorney to fill the unexpired term as municipal judge.
(6) A person may not serve as a municipal judge if the person is employed by the city. A municipal
judge who accepts employment with the city vacates his position as municipal judge.
(7) Each municipal court judge shall devote as much time to the office as necessary.
(b) The presiding judge shall:
(1) Be the administrative head of the judiciary of the city;
(2) Maintain a central docket for cases filed within the territorial limits of the city over which the
municipal court of record has jurisdiction;
(3) Provide for the distribution of cases from the central docket to the individual municipal judges
to equalize the distribution of business in the courts;
(4) Request the jurors needed for cases that are set for trial by jury;
(5) Temporarily assign associate judges or substitute judges to exchange benches and to act for
each other in a proceeding pending in a court if necessary for the expeditious disposition of business
in the courts;
(6) Supervise and control the operation and functions of the proceedings of the court, specifically
those operations relating to courtroom processes; however, the judge shall not supervise any court
personnel;
(7) Promulgate work rules concerning administration of court dockets, the times and places for
holding court, equalization of judicial assignments, vacation schedules and other administrative
details that address the judicial performance of the municipal court (“rules”), which rules shall be
submitted to the city manager and city attorney for comment before consideration and adoption by
the city council;
(8) Be responsible to assure that the rules are adhered to by the court; and
(9) Make such reports as may be required by the city council.
(c) An associate judge shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/244
(1) Assist the presiding judge;
(2) Attend and preside over any and all dockets assigned;
(3) Be available to assist court staff during and after assigned dockets and sign all documents as
requested by court staff or relating to court assignments;
(4) Perform magisterial duties, as assigned;
(5) Comply with the rules promulgated by the presiding judge; and
(6) Be available to serve for and on behalf of the presiding judge, if he is temporarily absent due to
an emergency, illness, family death, continuing legal or judicial education programs, or any other
reason.
Sec. 7.01.032 Qualifications
An individual appointed to serve as a municipal court judge shall:
(1) Be a resident of the state;
(2) Be a citizen of the United States;
(3) Be an attorney currently licensed to practice law in the State of Texas who is in good standing
with the State Bar of Texas; and
(4) Within the last five (5) years, have two (2) or more years of experience as a practicing attorney
in this state.
Sec. 7.01.033 Salary
A municipal judge is entitled to a salary, the amount of which shall be determined by the city council. The
amount of a judge’s salary may not be diminished during the judge’s term of office. Further, the amount of a
municipal judge’s salary shall not be based, directly or indirectly, on fines, fees or costs collected by the court of
record.
Sec. 7.01.034 Powers and duties
Each municipal judge shall take judicial notice of state law and the ordinances and corporate limits of the city.
The municipal judge shall have all powers assigned by state law, including the power to grant writs of
mandamus, attachment and other writs necessary to the enforcement of the jurisdiction of the court of record,
and may issue writs of habeas corpus in cases in which the offense charged is within the jurisdiction of the court
of record. The municipal judge is a magistrate and may issue administrative search warrants.
Sec. 7.01.035 Removal of judge
The city council may remove a municipal judge from office at any time for the reasons stated and consistent
with section 30.000085 of the Texas Government Code, as amended.
Secs. 7.01.036–7.01.060 Reserved
Division 3. Court Clerk and Court Personnel
Sec. 7.01.061 Clerk of court
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/244
(a) There shall be a clerk of the municipal court of record, who shall have the power and authority to perform
all acts usual and necessary by clerks of court in issuing process of said court and conducting the business
thereof, and such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance of the city council.
(b) The clerk of the municipal court shall keep the records of the municipal courts of record, issue process,
and generally perform the duties consistent with a clerk of a county court at law that exercises criminal
jurisdiction. In addition, the clerk shall maintain an index of all court judgments in the same manner as county
clerks are required by law to prepare for criminal cases arising in county courts.
(c) The clerk of the municipal court shall be subject to the personnel rules and regulations applicable to all
city employees and may be removed at will.
Sec. 7.01.062 Other court personnel
City council may provide for deputy clerks, warrant officers, and other personnel as needed for the proper
operation of the municipal court of record. Such individuals shall perform their duties under the direction and
control of the presiding judge during times when court is in session.
Secs. 7.01.063–7.01.090 Reserved
Division 4. Rules of Procedure
Part I. In General
Sec. 7.01.091 Recording of court proceedings
All proceedings before the municipal court of record, to the extent requested, shall be recorded by use of a goodquality
electronic recording device. This shall be the primary method for the recording of proceedings utilized
by the municipal court of record. No recording shall be made unless the municipal judge, or one of the parties to
the proceedings, requests a record. As an alternative to the electronic recording device, proceedings may be
recorded by an official court reporter appointed by the city council. The record of the proceedings shall be kept
by the clerk of court if an electronic recording device is used, or the court reporter in cases where the court
reporter records the proceedings, for the twenty (20) day period beginning the day after the last day of the court
proceeding, trial or denial of motion for new trial, whichever occurs last. If a case is appealed, the proceedings
shall be transcribed from the recording by a court reporter appointed by the city.
Sec. 7.01.092 Court reporter; duties; compensation
The city council shall appoint one or more court reporters to preserve a record in cases tried before the municipal
court of record in which the proceedings are not recorded by a good-quality recording device. The court reporter
must meet the qualifications provided by law for official court reporters. The court reporter may use written
notes, transcribing equipment, video or audio recording equipment, or a combination of those methods to record
the proceedings of the court. The court reporter shall keep the record for the twenty (20) day period beginning
the day after the last day of the proceeding, trial or denial of motion for new trial, or until any appeal is final,
whichever occurs last. The court reporter shall not be required to record testimony or any proceeding in a case
unless the municipal judge or one of the parties requests a record. The party requesting the services of the
official court reporter shall bear the cost of those services. When an electronic recording device is being used to
record the proceedings, it is not necessary to have a court reporter present to record the proceedings or to certify
the statement of facts. The city council shall set the compensation of the court reporter.
Sec. 7.01.093 Transcript preparation fee
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/244
The city council hereby establishes a transcript preparation fee in the amount of $25.00. This fee does not
include the fee for payment of an actual transcript of the proceedings. The party requesting an actual transcript
must pay the transcript preparation fee and the fee for an actual transcript of the proceedings. The fee for a
transcript shall include the actual cost, as invoiced by the court reporter, for transcribing the recorded
proceedings and the cost for copies.
Sec. 7.01.094 Prosecutions
All prosecutions in the municipal court of record shall be conducted as provided by article 45.003, Texas Code
of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
Secs. 7.01.095–7.01.120 Reserved
Part II. Appeals
Sec. 7.01.121 Generally
A defendant has the right to appeal from a judgment or conviction in the municipal court of record, as provided
by Texas Government Code, section 30.00014, as amended. The state has the right to appeal from a judgment in
the court of record in the manner provided for by Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, article 44.01, as amended.
The appropriate county court shall have jurisdiction of appeals from the municipal court of record. All appeals
shall be conducted in the manner provided for by Texas Government Code, chapter 30, as amended. Upon the
enactment of this article, all cases for offenses alleged to have been committed on or after July 1, 2010, shall be
appealed in accordance with Texas Government Code, chapter 30, as amended. An offense committed before
July 1, 2010, shall be appealed in accordance with the law in effect before such date.
Sec. 7.01.122 Perfecting right to appeal
(a) The city council specifically adopts state law, as amended, relative to appeals.
(b) In order to perfect an appeal, the appellant must file a written motion for new trial with the clerk of court
and must also give notice of the appeal to the appellee and to the court.
(c) The written motion for new trial must be filed with the clerk of court not later than the tenth day after the
date on which judgment is rendered. The motion must clearly set forth the points of error of which the appellant
complains. The motion or amended motion may be amended with leave of court at any time before action on the
motion is taken, but may not be amended later than the twentieth (20th) day after the date on which the original
or amended motion is filed. The court may for good cause extend the time for filing or amending, but the
extension may not exceed ninety (90) days from the original filing deadline. If the court does not act on the
motion before the expiration of the thirty (30) days allowed for determination of the motion, the original or
amended motion is overruled by operation of law.
(d) If the appellant requests a hearing on the motion for new trial, the appellant may give notice of appeal
orally in open court after the motion is overruled. If there is no hearing, the appellant must file the notice with
the court not later than the tenth day after the date on which the motion is overruled. The court may for good
cause extend the time period for providing notice; however, the extension shall not exceed ninety (90) days from
the original filing deadline. If the defendant is in custody, the appeal is perfected when the notice of appeal is
given, as provided by Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, article 44.13, as amended.
Sec. 7.01.123 Appeal bond
If the defendant is not in custody, the defendant may not take an appeal until the defendant files an appeal bond
with the municipal court of record. The bond must be approved by the court and must be filed not later than the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/244
tenth (10th) day after the date on which the motion for new trial is overruled. The appeal bond must be in the
amount of one hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00) or double the amount of the fines and costs adjudged
against the defendant, whichever is greater. The bond must state that the defendant was convicted in the case and
has appealed and must be conditioned on the defendant’s immediate and daily personal appearance in the court
to which the appeal is taken. If the defendant is in custody, the defendant shall be committed to jail unless the
defendant posts the appeal bond.
Sec. 7.01.124 Record
(a) The record on appeal must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a record
on appeal set forth in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as
amended.
(b) Not later than the sixtieth (60th) day after the date on which notice of appeal is given or filed, the parties
must file with the clerk of court the statement of facts; a written description of material to be included in the
transcript in addition to the required material; and any material to be included in the transcript that is not in the
custody of the clerk of court. Upon completion of the record, the municipal judge shall approve the record in the
manner provided for record completion, approval and notification in the court of appeals. After the municipal
judge approves the record, the clerk of court shall promptly send the record to the appellate court clerk for filing.
Pursuant to Texas Government Code, section 30.00020, as amended, the appellate court clerk is charged with the
responsibility of notifying the defendant and the prosecuting attorney that the record has been filed.
Sec. 7.01.125 Statement of facts
The statement of facts must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a statement of
facts in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended. The
appellant shall pay for the statement of facts.
Sec. 7.01.126 Transcript
The transcript must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of a transcript set forth in
the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
Sec. 7.01.127 Bills of exception
Bills of exception must substantially conform to the provisions relating to the preparation of bills of exception
set forth in the Texas Rules of Appellate Procedure and the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
Sec. 7.01.128 Brief
(a) Both the appellant and the appellee are required to file briefs with the appellate court clerk. Each party, on
the filing of the party’s brief with the appellate court clerk, shall deliver a copy of the brief to the opposing party
and to the municipal judge. The record and the brief, on appeal, shall be limited as far as possible to the
questions relied on for reversal. The municipal judge shall decide from the briefs of the parties whether the
appellant should be permitted to withdraw the notice of appeal and be granted a new trial by the court of record.
The court of record may grant a new trial at any time before the record is filed with the appellate court.
(b) The appellant must file a brief with the appellate court clerk not later than the fifteenth (15th) day after the
date on which the transcript and statement of facts are filed with that clerk. The appellant or the appellant’s
attorney must certify that the brief has been properly mailed to the appellee.
(c) The appellee must file its brief with the appellate clerk not later than the fifteenth (15th) day on which the
appellant’s brief is filed.
(Ordinance 061710A, sec. 2, adopted 6/17/10)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/244
ARTICLE 7.02 COSTS AND SPECIAL EXPENSES*
Sec. 7.02.001 Technology fund
(a) There is hereby created a municipal court technology fund for the city.
(b) A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court in the city shall pay a technology
fee not to exceed four dollars for each conviction as a cost of court.
(c) For purposes of this section, a person is considered convicted if a sentence is imposed on the person, the
person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision, or the court
defers final disposition of the person’s case.
(d) The municipal court clerk shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the finance director for deposit in a
fund to be known as the municipal court technology fund.
(e) The municipal court technology fund may be used only to finance the purchase of technological
enhancements for the city municipal court, including those items as specified in V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal
Procedure, article 102.0172.
(f) This section shall take effect immediately from and after its passage; provided, however, that the court
costs imposed hereby shall apply only on conviction for an offense committed on or after September 1, 1999.
Court costs for convictions for an offense committed before September 1, 1999, are covered by the law in effect
at the time the offense was committed and the former law is continued in effect for that purpose.
(Ordinance 990914A, secs. 1–6, adopted 9/14/99; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
Sec. 7.02.002 Building security fund
(a) There is hereby created a municipal court building security fund as permitted by article 102.017 of the
Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
(b) A defendant convicted in a trial for a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall pay a $3.00 security
fee as a cost of court.
(c) A person is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives deferred adjudication; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person’s case.
(d) The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the costs and pay them to the city treasurer for deposit in a
fund to be known as the municipal court building security fund.
(e) The municipal court building security fund may be used only to finance the following items when used for
the purpose of providing security services for the building housing the municipal court, including those items as
specified in V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, article 102.017.
(f) The municipal court building security fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city
council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/244
(g) This section shall take effect immediately from and after its passage as the law in such cases provides;
provided, however, that the fee required by this section shall not be imposed on any offense which occurred
prior to the effective date hereof.
(Ordinance 032097, secs. 1–7, adopted 3/20/97; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 8.01.001 Misdemeanors under state law adopted
All misdemeanors named in the Penal Code of the state for which the municipal court has jurisdiction are hereby
declared to be offenses against the city, and the fines and penalties and other punishments shall be the same as
prescribed in said Penal Code. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 1)
Sec. 8.01.002 Offensive odors
It shall be unlawful to permit water, sewage, or other wastes, noxious gases, or refuse to accumulate or discharge
on any premises in such an unsanitary manner so as to create offensive odors which disturb occupants of
surrounding premises and buildings. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 3)
Sec. 8.01.003 Damaging or defacing property; posting signs or notices
(a) Damaging public property. Any person who shall damage or deface any property belonging to the city
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(b) Damaging private property. Any person who shall damage or deface any property belonging to any
person, business, or corporation within the city shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(c) Posting signs or notices. Any person who shall paint, stamp, nail, tack, or otherwise place [any bill, sign,
or notice] upon any private or public property within the city, without first having obtained permission of the
owner, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 6)
Sec. 8.01.004 Theft of city services
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally avoid payment for any service or use of any property or
facility of the city, whether real or personal, that he knows is provided or used only with compensation and he
intentionally or knowingly secures performance of the service or uses the property or facility which he is not
entitled to either by deception, threat, false token, impersonation, or fraud. Such services, property, or facilities
shall include, but not be necessarily limited to, utilities, ballfields, swimming pools, parks and other recreational
facilities, trash collection services, or any other service or property owned, operated or provided by the city. It
shall also be unlawful to have or exercise control over the disposition of city services, property, or facilities of
another to which he is not entitled unless authorized by the city and that person. For these purposes, intent to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/244
avoid paying is presumed if the actor absconded without paying for the services or knowingly uses or is in
possession of such property or facility not authorized to use or receive. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 12)
ARTICLE 8.02 MINORS
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 8.02.001–8.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Curfew*
Sec. 8.02.031 Definitions
In connection with this division, the following terms, phrases and words shall have the meanings given herein:
Adult. A responsible person eighteen (18) years of age or older, other than a parent, guardian or custodian, in
whose care and under whose individualized supervision the child has been placed by the parent, guardian or
custodian, and under circumstances that demonstrate actions indicating oversight and concern for the child.
City. The City of Crandall, Texas, as defined by its corporate boundaries.
Minor. Any person under the age of seventeen (17) or, in equivalent phrasing often herein employed, any person
sixteen (16) or less years of age.
Parent. Any person having legal custody of a minor:
(1) As a natural or adoptive parent;
(2) As a legal guardian;
(3) As a person who stands in loco parentis; or
(4) As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of court.
Parking lot. Any area, whether paved or unpaved, whether public or private, used or intended to be used for the
storage or parking of vehicles.
Remain. To stay behind, to tarry or to stay unnecessarily upon the streets or parking lots within the city.
Street. A way or place of whatsoever nature open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of
vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term “street” includes the legal
right-of-way, including but not limited to traffic lanes, curbs, sidewalks, whether paved or unpaved, and any
grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term “street” applies irrespective
of what it is called or formally named, whether alley, avenue, court, drive, road or otherwise.
Time of night. As referred to herein, the time of night is based upon the prevailing standard of time, whether
Central Standard or Central Daylight Savings Time. The time observed in the city administrative offices and
police station shall be prima facie evidence of the time of night.
Year of age. Year of age continues from one birthday, such as the sixteenth (16th), to (but not including the day
of) the next birthday, such as the seventeenth (17th) birthday, making it clear that sixteen (16) or less years of
age is herein treated as equivalent to the phrase “under seventeen (17) years of age.”
(Ordinance 110702, sec. 2, adopted 12/7/02; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/244
Sec. 8.02.032 Established; hours
It shall be unlawful for any person sixteen (16) or less years of age (under seventeen (17)) to be or remain in or
upon the streets or parking lots within the city at night during the following periods of time:
(1) Monday through Friday, beginning at 11:00 p.m. and ending at 6:00 a.m.
(2) Saturday and Sunday, beginning at 12:00 a.m. midnight and ending at 6:00 a.m.
(Ordinance 110702, sec. 3, adopted 12/7/02; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.02.033 Defenses
It shall be a defense to prosecution under section 8.02.032 of this division that one of the following situations
exists:
(1) The minor was accompanied by a parent.
(2) The minor was accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to take said
parent’s place in accompanying said minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a
specified area.
(3) The minor was en route, using the most direct route, to or from the following:
(A) A place of the minor’s employment;
(B) A restaurant, library, movie theater, store or other place of public accommodation;
(C) A play, dance, sporting event or other event of public entertainment;
(D) A church, meeting hall, school, courthouse or other place of public assembly or worship;
or
(E) An emergency errand.
(4) The minor was exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States constitution,
such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech or the right of assembly.
(5) The minor was married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code.
(Ordinance 110702, sec. 4, adopted 12/7/02; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.02.034 Enforcement procedure
Any police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 8.02.032 of this division, may transfer the case to
proper authorities for handling under the provisions of title 3 of the Family Code. In addition, a complaint may
be filed against the parents in municipal court for violation hereof. The police department shall file all necessary
legal papers, supply all documentation, and provide necessary testimony as required for pursuing violation of
this division by either the minor or by any parent or guardian. (Ordinance 110702, sec. 5, adopted 12/7/02;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.02.035 Parental responsibility
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly to permit or by inefficient control to
allow such minor to be or remain upon any city street or parking lot under circumstances not constituting a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/244
defense to, or otherwise beyond the scope of, this division. The term “knowingly” includes knowledge that a
parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent’s legal
custody. It is intended that a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility be applied through an
objective test. It shall be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or
whereabouts of such minor. (Ordinance 110702, sec. 6, adopted 12/7/02; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.02.036 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in a sum not to exceed five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00), and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ordinance 110702, sec. 7, adopted 12/7/02; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 8.03 NOISE*
Sec. 8.03.001 Definition
The word “person,” as used in this article, shall include corporations, companies, societies, associations and
churches.
Sec. 8.03.002 Policy
It is the expressed intent of the city to minimize the exposure of persons to excessive noise and to protect,
promote and preserve the public health, comfort, convenience, safety and welfare. It is also the express intent of
the city to control the level of noise in a manner which promotes commerce; protects the sleep and repose of
citizens; promotes the use, value and enjoyment of property; and preserves the quality of the environment.
Sec. 8.03.003 Nuisance declared
Any unreasonably loud, disturbing, irritating, or raucous noise which either exceeds the maximum permitted
sound levels specified in section 8.03.006(1) or otherwise causes material distress, discomfort or injury to
persons of reasonable nervous sensibilities and of ordinary tastes, habits, and modes of living, originating from a
nearby property, is hereby declared to be a noise nuisance and is prohibited.
Sec. 8.03.004 Unlawful conduct
No person, while on public or private grounds adjacent to any hospital or to any building in which a school or
any class thereof is in session, shall willfully make or assist in the making of any noise or diversion which
disturbs or tends to disturb the peace or good order of such school session, class, or hospital.
Sec. 8.03.005 Enumeration of specific noises
The following acts, among others, are declared to be noise nuisances in violation of this article, but said
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
(1) The playing of any radio, phonograph, compact disc player, amplifier, sound system, musical
instrument, or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound, on any private or
public property in the city, and in such manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons of reasonable nervous sensibilities and of ordinary tastes, habits, and
modes of living in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence.
(2) The use of any stationary loudspeaker or sound amplifier of such intensity that annoys and
disturbs the quiet, comfort or repose of persons of reasonable nervous sensibilities and of ordinary
tastes, habits, and modes of living in the immediate vicinity thereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/244
(3) The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall
disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person of reasonable nervous sensibilities and of ordinary
tastes, habits and modes of living in the immediate vicinity.
(4) The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle except as a danger or warning signal; the creation by
means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh device for any unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time.
(5) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, motor vehicle or boat engine except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(6) The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise to be created is
effectively muffled and reduced.
(7) The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair work on any building other
than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in
the interest of the public safety and convenience, and then only by permission from the city council.
(8) The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting
attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show or sale of merchandise, in such a way as
to disrupt the quiet, comfort or repose of persons of reasonable nervous sensibilities.
Sec. 8.03.006 Determinations
In determining whether a noise is loud, unnecessary, unusual, or disrupts the quiet, comfort or repose of persons
of reasonable nervous sensibilities, the following factors shall be considered:
(1) Noises in excess of 80 decibels between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and 75 decibels between 7:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. as measured by a calibrated decibel meter, discernable at any location beyond the
property line of the property on which the noise is being generated, shall be deemed reasonably
calculated to disrupt the comfort of persons of reasonable nervous sensibilities;
(2) Proximity to residential properties;
(3) Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant;
(4) Whether the noise has been enhanced in volume or range by any type of electronic or
mechanical means; and
(5) Whether the noise is subject to being controlled without unreasonable effort or expense to the
creator thereof.
Sec. 8.03.007 Vibration
It shall be unlawful for any person to create, maintain or cause any ground or airborne vibration which is
perceptible without instruments at any point on any affected property adjoining the property or in the near
vicinity of the property in which the vibration source is located.
Sec. 8.03.008 Penalty for violation
A violation of this article shall be considered a class C misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine as
provided in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each hour that the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/244
Sec. 8.03.009 Exemptions
This article shall not apply to:
(1) Speech or other communication, of gathering with others to hear or observe such speech or
communication, or of gathering with others to picket or otherwise express in a nonviolent manner a
position on social, economic, political, or religious questions;
(2) Noise generated at a scheduled stadium event by parade spectators and participants on the
parade route during a city-permitted parade;
(3) Noise generated by outdoor celebration participants sponsored or cosponsored by the city for
the general welfare of the public;
(4) Noise produced solely for the purpose of encouraging citizen participation in elections;
(5) Officers and employees of the city, the county, the state, the United States or any official
governmental entity when such noise is being used by such officer or employee while engaged in
his/her official duty.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 8.04 WEAPONS*
Sec. 8.04.001 Discharge of firearms or airguns
(a) Prohibited. It shall hereafter be unlawful to discharge, within the corporate limits of the city, any firearm,
airgun, BB gun, pellet gun, or any other mechanism projecting lead or any missiles.
(b) Exceptions. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the following:
(1) Any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the lawful performance of his duty.
(2) Any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property.
(3) The use by workers in the construction business of any mechanism designed to propel nails,
bolts, screws, rivets, or other fasteners, as long as such mechanism is being used in the manner in
which it was intended.
(4) The discharge of “blanks” during official celebrations, athletic events, etc., when written
permission is received from the chief of police of the city.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 11)
State law references–Authority of municipality to regulate the discharge of firearms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 217.003;
limitation of authority to prohibit discharge of firearms or other weapons in extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, sec. 229.002.
Sec. 8.04.002 Carrying handgun on city premises
(a) No person, including a person licensed to carry a concealed handgun under Texas Government Code,
chapter 411, shall carry a handgun on or about his or her person on any premises owned, leased, operated or
controlled by the city. “Premises” means a building or a portion of a building. The term does not include any
public or private driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/244
(b) The city manager shall cause appropriate signs to be erected at the entrances to city premises and shall
require that all agendas for city council, board and commission meetings contain a notice, in both English and
Spanish, that it is unlawful to carry a handgun on the premises. The signs posted at entrances shall be in
contrasting colors with block letters at least one inch (1") in height and shall be displayed in a conspicuous
manner clearly visible to the public and in English and Spanish. Such signs shall state: “Carrying of a concealed
handgun on these premises is prohibited and violators will be arrested for criminal trespass.”
(c) The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to peace officers as that term is defined by the Texas Code
of Criminal Procedure.
(Ordinance 21596A, secs. 1–3, adopted 2/15/96)
ARTICLE 8.05 ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 8.05.001 Definitions
Abandoned motor vehicle. A motor vehicle that is inoperable and over eight (8) years old and is left unattended
on public property for more than forty-eight (48) hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public
property for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained on private
property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than forty-eight (48)
hours, or a motor vehicle left unattended on the right-of-way of any designated county, state or federal highway
within this state in excess of forty-eight (48) hours, or in excess of twelve (12) hours on any turnpike project
constructed and maintained by the state turnpike authority.
Antique auto. Passenger cars or trucks that were manufactured in 1925 or before, or which become thirty-five
(35) or more years old.
Collector. The owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades
or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for his own use in order to restore, preserve
and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Demolisher. Any person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or
otherwise to dismantle motor vehicles.
Garagekeeper. Any owner or operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle storage facility, or any
establishment for the service, repair or maintenance of motor vehicles.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 9(A))
Junked vehicle.
(1) A vehicle, including a motor vehicle, aircraft or watercraft, that:
(A) Is self-propelled; and
(B) Is:
(i) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(ii) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
a. 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/244
b. 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
(2) “Junked vehicle” only applies to:
(A) A motor vehicle that does not have lawfully attached to it an unexpired license and a
valid motor vehicle inspection certificate;
(B) An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft an unexpired federal
aircraft identification number registered under Federal Aviation Administration aircraft
registration regulations in 14 C.F.R. part 47; or
(C) A watercraft that does not have lawfully on board an unexpired certificate or number and
is not a watercraft described by section 31.055, Texas Parks and Wildlife Code.
(Ordinance 100112 adopted 10/1/12)
Motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the state Certificate of Title Act.
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age which has not been altered or modified from original
manufacturer’s specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
Storage facility. A garage, parking lot or any type of facility or establishment for the servicing, repairing, storing
or parking of motor vehicles.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 9(A))
Sec. 8.05.002 Enforcement
The administration of this article shall be the responsibility of the chief of police. The chief of police is hereby
authorized to enter upon private property for the purposes specified in the procedures adopted in this article to
examine vehicles or parts thereof, to obtain information as to the identity of vehicles and to remove or cause the
removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance. The municipal court shall have authority to issue
any order necessary to enforce the procedures set out in this article. Nothing in this article shall affect parking or
other ordinances of the city which permit the immediate removal of a vehicle left upon public property or on a
public right-of-way and which vehicle constitutes obstruction of traffic. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 9(B))
Sec. 8.05.003 Disposal to demolisher
(a) Junked vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, demolisher or any suitable
site operated by the city for processing as scrap or salvage.
(b) The police department is authorized to apply to the state department of transportation for abandoned
vehicle in its possession to a demolisher in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code,
chapter 683, as amended.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 9(I))
Secs. 8.05.004–8.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Junked Vehicles
Sec. 8.05.031 Declaration of nuisance
Junked vehicles which are located in any place where they are visible from a public place or public right-of-way
are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, reduce the value of private property, invite
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/244
vandalism, create fire hazards, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the state by producing urban
blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city, and such vehicles are
therefore declared to be a public nuisance. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 9(C))
Sec. 8.05.032 Abatement
The police department or code enforcement department of the city, when desiring to remove and dispose of
junked vehicles as public nuisances from private property, public property or public rights-of-way, shall comply
with the following procedures:
(1) A notice of not less than ten (10) days, stating the nature of the public nuisance on private
property and that it must be removed and abated within ten (10) days, and further, that a request for a
hearing must be made before the expiration of said ten-day period, must be sent to the owner or the
occupant of the private premises whereupon such public nuisance exists, the last known registered
owner of the nuisance, and each lienholder of record of the nuisance. Such notice shall be mailed by
certified mail with a five-day return receipt requested. If the notice is returned undelivered by the
United States post office, official action to abate such nuisance shall be continued to a date not less
than ten (10) days from the date of such return;
(Ordinance 100112 adopted 10/1/12)
(2) The requirements of subsection (1) above shall also apply to the case of a public nuisance on
public property or on a public right-of-way and such notice shall be sent to the owner or the occupant
of the public premises, or to the owner or the occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-ofway
whereupon such public nuisance exists;
(3) Once a vehicle has been removed under the provisions of this section, it shall not be
reconstructed or made operable;
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 9(D))
(4) Where a hearing is requested by a person whom notice was issued to in accordance with
subsection (1) above, within ten (10) days after service of notice to abate the nuisance, a public
hearing prior to the removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance must be held before
the municipal judge of the city. It shall be the responsibility of the city prosecuting attorney to
prosecute the case on behalf of the city and, should the municipal judge find that such vehicle is a
public nuisance as defined herein, he shall enter an order requiring the removal of the vehicle or part
thereof from the public or private property or public right-of-way where it is situated, and such order
shall include:
(A) Motor vehicle. The vehicle’s description, vehicle identification number, and license plate
number;
(B) Aircraft. The aircraft’s description, and federal aircraft identification number as described
by Federal Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 C.F.R. part 47; and
(C) Watercraft. The watercraft’s description, and identification number as set forth in the
watercraft’s certificate of number.
(Ordinance 100112 adopted 10/1/12)
(5) The police department shall give notice to the state department of transportation within five (5)
days after the date of removal of the vehicle, identifying the vehicle or part thereof;
(6) The procedures set out in this section shall not apply to a vehicle or part thereof which is
completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/244
other public or private property, to a vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard,
or to unlicensed operable or inoperable antique and special interest vehicles stored by a collector on
his property, provided that the vehicle and outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner that
they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a
fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means;
(7) If the nuisance is not removed and abated and a hearing is not requested within the ten-day
period provided, a complaint may be filed in municipal court for the violation of maintaining a public
nuisance. Any person found guilty of maintaining a public nuisance as defined in this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a fine for each offense and the municipal court shall order
removal and abatement of the nuisance.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 9(D))
Secs. 8.05.033–8.05.060 Reserved
Division 3. Abandoned Vehicles
Sec. 8.05.061 Authority to take possession
The police department is authorized to take into custody any abandoned motor vehicle found on public or private
property. The removal of such vehicle or parts thereof from any property may be accomplished by any duly
authorized wrecker service company and [the vehicle shall be] taken to a designated vehicle storage facility as
directed by the chief of police or police officer handling such case. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 9(E))
Sec. 8.05.062 Notice of impoundment
The police department shall notify within ten (10) days, by certified mail, return receipt requested, the last
known registered owner and all lienholders of record pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act (V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code, chapter 501) that it has taken into custody any abandoned motor vehicle under the
provisions of this article. The notice shall describe the year, make, model and vehicle identification number of
the abandoned motor vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the motor vehicle is being held, and
inform the owner and any lienholders of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle not later than the 20th day after
the date of the notice, on payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges resulting from placing the
vehicle in custody. The notice shall state that the failure of the owner or lienholders to exercise their right to
reclaim the vehicle within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver by the owner and all lienholders of all
right, title, and interest in the vehicle and their consent to the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle at a public
auction to be held by the city. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 9(F))
Sec. 8.05.063 Sale at auction; disposition of proceeds
(a) If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed within twenty (20) days after the date of notice and
payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges resulting from its impoundment, the chief of police shall
sell the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction. Proper notice of the public auction shall be given, and in
the event a vehicle is to be sold in satisfaction of a garagekeeper’s lien, the garagekeeper shall be notified of the
time and place of such auction.
(b) The police department shall furnish a sales receipt for each vehicle to the purchaser thereof at the public
auction. The proceeds shall be applied first to reimburse the police department for the expenses of the auction,
costs of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all notice and publication costs, and any remainder from
the proceeds of the sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and
then shall be deposited in the special fund which shall remain available for the payment of auction, towing,
preserving, storage and all notice and publication costs which result from placing other abandoned vehicles in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/244
custody, whenever the proceeds from a sale of such other abandoned motor vehicles are insufficient to meet
these expenses and costs.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 9(G))
Sec. 8.05.064 Vehicles left with garagekeepers
(a) The police department, upon receipt of a report from a garagekeeper of the possession of a vehicle deemed
abandoned under the provisions of this article, shall follow the notification procedures set forth herein for the
giving of notice to owners and lienholders of abandoned vehicles, except that custody of the vehicle shall remain
with the garagekeeper until after the notification requirements have been complied with. A motor vehicle left
with a garagekeeper in a vehicle storage facility shall be deemed abandoned under the conditions of V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code, chapter 683.001, as amended.
(b) A fee of two dollars ($2.00) shall accompany the report of the garagekeeper, and such fee shall be retained
by the police department receiving the report and used to defray the cost of notification or other costs incurred in
the disposition of such vehicles, and such fee shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. Abandoned
vehicles left in storage facilities which are not reclaimed after notice given in accordance with this article shall
be taken into custody by the police department and sold at auction, as in the cases of other abandoned motor
vehicles. The proceeds of the sale shall first be applied to the garagekeeper’s charges for servicing, storage and
repair; provided, however, that the police department shall retain an amount of two percent (2%) of the gross
proceeds of the sale for each vehicle auctioned, but in no event shall it retain less than ten dollars ($10.00), to be
used to defray expenses of custody and auction.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 9(H))
ARTICLE 8.06 ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY*
Sec. 8.06.001 Declaration of nuisance; removal
Property, other than a junked motor vehicle, placed, left standing, parked, erected, or lying in violation of any
ordinance of the city or left unattended for more than forty-eight (48) continuous hours in or on any public
street, alley, sidewalk, park, or other public place of the city is declared to be a nuisance, and any such property
when so found shall be removed summarily by the city and held by the city until redeemed or sold as herein
provided. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 10(A))
Sec. 8.06.002 Lien on impounded property
The city shall have a lien on such impounded personal property for all cost incurred in impounding, storing, and
advertising such property and such lien shall be prior and superior to all other liens of every kind, save and
except liens for ad valorem taxes, and the city may retain possession thereof until all costs are paid and may sell
the same as herein provided. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 10(B))
Sec. 8.06.003 Redemption of impounded property
The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of such impounded personal property may redeem the
same as follows:
(1) Before sale: By paying to the city the impounding fee and any other actual expenses incurred
by the city in impounding and keeping the property.
(2) After sale: By paying to the buyer at the auction sale double the amount paid by him for such
personal property and any reasonable expenses incurred by him for keeping same; provided the same
property must be redeemed from the auction buyer within thirty (30) days after the date of auction
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/244
sale, excluding the day of sale, otherwise title to said property shall become absolute in the auction
buyer.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 10(C))
Sec. 8.06.004 Procedure for sale
(a) When any personal property, other than motor vehicles, is not redeemed within sixty (60) days after being
impounded, and when any motor vehicle, other than a junked motor vehicle, is not redeemed after compliance
by the mayor with the provisions of article 8.05, the mayor shall sell the same at public auction to satisfy the lien
of the city.
(b) Before selling such personal property, the mayor shall post two (2) notices thereof, one at the city hall and
one in some other public place within the city, and shall cause [such notice] to be published in the official
newspaper, once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, the date of the first publication to be at least fourteen
(14) days prior to the day of the auction sale. The notice of sale shall describe the impounded property, state that
the same is unredeemed, state that the same will be sold at public auction, designate the place of sale, and state a
time and date of sale which shall not be less than fourteen (14) days from the date of posting such notices as
herein required.
(c) When any impounded property is not redeemed by the date and time designated in the notice of sale, the
mayor shall sell such property at public auction, and, as city auctioneer, shall execute a bill of sale of said
property or [but shall not] deliver any but a conditional bill of sale unless and until the title of said buyer has
become absolute by an expiration of thirty (30) days in time, exclusive of the date of sale, without being
redeemed by the owner of the impounded property.
(d) Impounded property which is offered for sale at public auction in accordance with the procedure herein
prescribed, and upon which no person bids, shall thereafter be sold or otherwise disposed of as junk. Money
received for junk property shall be disposed of in the same manner as proceeds from an auction sale under
section 8.06.005 of this article.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 10(D))
Sec. 8.06.005 Disposition of proceeds of sale
After deducting the impounding fee and all other actual expenses incurred by the city in impounding, storing,
and selling of said property, not to exceed a reasonable amount for each impounded article, the mayor shall pay
the balance of the proceeds of such, if any, to the owner of the property. If the owner fails to call for such
proceeds, they shall be paid into the city treasury. Within six (6) months after such auction sale, the owner may
apply in writing to the mayor, and upon satisfactory proof of ownership shall be entitled to receive the amount of
the proceeds delivered to the city treasury. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 10(E))
Sec. 8.06.006 Records
The city secretary shall keep a record book which shall contain a description of all property impounded, the date
and time of such impounding, the date notices of sale were posted and advertised and mailed to owners and
lienholders, the date of sale at auction, the amount realized for each article at such sale, the name and address of
the owner and lienholders, if known, the name and address of the auction buyer, and any such other information
as may be deemed necessary. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 10(F))
Sec. 8.06.007 Fees
The fees charged under this article shall be set by the city council and shall be paid into the city treasury. (1982
Code, ch. 7, sec. 10(G))
Sec. 8.06.008 Animals excluded
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/244
This article shall not apply to the impounding and sale of livestock, fowl, dogs, or other animals. (1982 Code,
ch. 7, sec. 10(H))
Sec. 8.06.009 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction in municipal court shall be subject to a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation as the court may deem proper. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 10(I))
ARTICLE 8.07 NUISANCES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY*
Sec. 8.07.001 Nuisances defined
For the purposes of this article, the term “nuisance” is defined to mean any condition or use of premises or of
building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial
diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. This includes,
but is not limited to, the keeping or the depositing on, or the scattering over the premises, of any of the
following:
(1) Lumber, building materials, junk, trash, or debris;
(2) Storage of furniture, other than furniture designed for outside use, household items, or products
of a commercial trade or business enterprise, whether such items are so used or not outside;
(3) Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as automobiles, furniture, stoves,
refrigerators, freezers, cans, or containers;
(4) Items of salvage such as scrap metals, rags, papers, bottles, cans and similar items;
(5) Any compost pile which is of such a nature as to spread or harbor disease, emit unpleasant
odors or harmful gas, or attract rodents, vermin or other disease-carrying pests, animals or insects;
(6) Keeping unsanitary matter on premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, or permit
another to keep, upon any premises, deleterious or septic material, unless such material is retained in
containers or vessels which deny access to humans, flies, insects, rodents and animals;
(7) Any inoperable, dismantled, wrecked or junked vehicles, motorized or otherwise.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 14(A))
Sec. 8.07.002 Nuisances prohibited; duty to maintain property
No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance
thereon, nor shall any such person keep or maintain such premises in a manner causing substantial diminution in
the value of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec.
14(B))
Sec. 8.07.003 Notice to abate
(a) Upon becoming aware of conditions set forth herein, the mayor or his designated representative shall make
a determination whether or not the conditions and circumstances constitute a nuisance as herein defined, and if it
is determined that the conditions, if not abated, will constitute a nuisance, said official shall give notice to the
owner, tenant or person in control of said premises, or an agent thereof, to remedy such condition within ten (10)
days. Such notice shall be given to the owner, tenant, or person in control of said premises, or an agent thereof,
in writing, in the following manner:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/244
(1) If the owner, tenant, or person in control of said premises, or an agent thereof, and his
residence, is known, such notice shall be:
(A) By personal service to the owner, tenant or person in possession, by the mayor or his
designated representative or any peace officer of the city, or by the sheriff of the county of the
residence of the owner as in the case of citations in the district courts of the state; or
(B) By registered mail with return receipt requested addressed to the last known address of
the owner.
(2) If the ownership of the building is unknown, then the notice shall be considered served by
attaching a copy of it in a place of prominence on such building.
(3) When a complaint under this article has been made as to the condition of a particular property,
the ownership of which has been granted or accrued to the heirs of such of any deceased person, and
if the names of such heirs are unknown, the notice shall be directed against them, their heirs, or legal
representatives, describing them as the heirs of such named ancestor.
(b) The notice shall state the nature of the nuisance on the private property and that it must be removed or
abated within ten (10) days, and further that a request for a hearing must be made before the expiration of said
ten-day period if the owner, tenant, or person in control of said premises, or agent thereof, wishes to appeal such
determination.
(c) If the nuisance is not removed and abated and a hearing is not requested within the ten-day period
provided, a complaint may be filed in municipal court for the violation of maintaining a nuisance on private
property. Any person found guilty of maintaining a nuisance as defined in this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be subject to a fine for each offense and the municipal court shall order removal and
abatement of the nuisance.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 14(C))
Sec. 8.07.004 Appeals
(a) The owner, tenant, or person in control of said premises, or agent thereof, ordered to abate any such
nuisance may request a hearing before the city council in order to show cause why such premises are not a
nuisance. Such date of hearing shall not be less than ten (10) days before written notice has been mailed to the
appellant.
(b) On the day set in the notice for hearing, the hearing shall be had, and on the basis of the hearing the city
council shall make its decision to the effect that the property is in fact a nuisance or not. The judgment shall
further contain an order, as the facts may justify, requiring the owner, tenant, or person in control of said
premises, or agent thereof, to abate such nuisance within a time designated by the city council.
(c) If the nuisance is not removed or abated within the time allowed by the city council then a complaint shall
be filed in municipal court for the violation of maintaining a nuisance on private property. Any person found
guilty of maintaining a nuisance as defined in this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a
fine for each offense and the municipal court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 14(D))
Sec. 8.07.005 Abatement by city
If the owner, tenant, or person in control of said premises, or agent thereof, fails to comply with the order to
remove or abate any nuisance, then, in addition to any fine which may be levied against such person, the court
may allow the city to remove or abate such nuisance. The city may then cause said nuisance to be removed or
abated, and the expenses of such procedure shall be charged against the owner and shall thereupon become a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/244
valid and enforceable personal obligation of the owner of such premises which may be recovered by the city in a
suit brought for the purpose, and the city may assess the expenses on the property on which the nuisance is
located or situated, and make the same a lien thereon. (1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 14(E))
Sec. 8.07.006 Statement of city’s expenses; lien
(a) Whenever the city shall have performed any work or paid any necessary expenses in connection with any
work done in the removal or abatement of any nuisance, it shall be the duty of the mayor to immediately prepare
and deliver or mail to the owner of the property upon which the nuisance was located an itemized statement in
the form of an affidavit, duly sworn to, of all such work performed and all costs and expenses incurred and paid
by the city in connection therewith. Said statement shall be sent to the owner of said property if his true address
is known; if not, then to the owner of record according to the last official tax rolls of the city at the address
carried in connection therewith. Such affidavit, among other things and provisions, shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of the owner, and name and address of the tenant or agent of the property, if
known, and if unknown recite the fact;
(2) Description of the property sufficient to identify same, and, where property has been
subdivided, a description by lot and block number of any particular subdivision shall be sufficient, or
the description as per the revised map of the city;
(3) Statement of the action of the city;
(4) Itemized statement of the work done and performed, together with the cost thereof opposite
each item; and
(5) Statement of payment made by the city to other parties, and to whom made, or reasonable
charges by any concerned city department.
(b) Upon delivery or mailing of the statement and affidavit provided for above, the city shall be entitled to the
payment of the aggregate amount so expended, or reasonable charges for city work, or costs paid, as therein set
forth. Should the owner fail or refuse to pay the amount due within thirty (30) days thereafter, the affidavit
containing the information as set out hereinabove, signed by the mayor, shall be filed with the county clerk.
Such statement, when filed, shall constitute a lien upon the property on which the expense was incurred, second
only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, and the amount remaining unpaid on said statement shall
accrue interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from the date of expenditure by the city, or from the
date that the city itself performed such work and incurred said expense, as provided for in chapter 214 Texas
Local Government Code.
(1982 Code, ch. 7, sec. 14(F))
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 9.01.001 Personnel policies manual adopted
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/244
The city council hereby adopts the personnel policies manual dated February, 1987, with amendments as may be
subsequently approved by the city council, as the official policy of the city with regard to personnel
administration. A copy of the manual is on file in the office of the city secretary. (1982 Code, ch. 8, sec. 2)
ARTICLE 9.02 CITY OFFICERS*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 9.02.001–9.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. City Manager
Sec. 9.02.031 Office created
The office of city manager is hereby created. Pursuant to chapter 25 of the Texas Local Government Code, the
city shall hereafter, until such system is abolished in accordance with law, operate under the city manager form
of government as established by chapter 25 and this division.
State law reference–City manager form of government in general-law municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 25.021
et seq.
Sec. 9.02.032 Appointment; qualifications
The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of the person’s administrative ability. The city manager
is not required to meet any residency qualifications. The city manager is appointed by and serves at the will of
the city council.
State law references–Appointment of city manager, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 25.026; qualifications of city manager,
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 25.027.
Sec. 9.02.033 General powers and duties
The city manager shall administer the city’s business and the city council shall ensure that the administration is
efficient. The city council by ordinance may delegate to the city manager any additional powers or duties it
considers proper for the efficient administration of the city’s affairs.
(Ordinance 921-1995, sec. 1, adopted 9/21/95)
State law reference–Powers and duties of city manager, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 25.029.
Sec. 9.02.034 Additional powers and duties
The city manager is hereby delegated the following additional powers and duties considered by the city council
to be proper for the efficient administration of municipal affairs, as required by section 9.02.033 and by section
25.029(b) of the Local Government Code, to wit:
(1) Plan, direct and review the overall activities and operations of the city; coordinate city
activities with other agencies and organizations; provide highly responsive and competent
administrative support to the mayor and city council.
(2) Receive policy direction, support and input from the mayor and city council.
(Ordinance 100198, sec. 1, adopted 10/1/98)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/244
(3) Exercise direct and indirect supervision over all city employees, using sound management
practices. Exercise authority to hire, fire and discipline employees according to the personnel policies
adopted by the city manager; the city manager, however, shall have authority to appoint a chief of
police only with the consent of city council. Personnel policies will be approved by the city council.
Monitor and direct the training, motivation, workload and performance evaluations of all city
personnel. Manage staffing changes with recommendations from department heads. (Ordinance
080513 adopted 8/5/13)
(4) Develop, plan, implement, and present ideas to the mayor and city council to support the goals
and objectives of the city. Manage the resources to achieve the goals and objectives.
(5) Develop, recommend and administer ordinances, rules, regulations, policies and procedures.
(6) Prepare each year a municipal budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Manage short- and long-range
financial goals of the city. Direct the forecast of funds needed for city staffing, equipment, supplies,
facilities and activities. Assure the financial integrity of the city, and the development and
implementation of financial systems and controls. Make recommendations and advise the mayor and
city council of the financial condition of the city. Monitor and approve expenditures of the city.
(7) Strive to maintain good public relations among citizens, professional groups and the city.
Respond to and resolve citizen inquiries and complaints.
(8) Attend all city council meetings. Prepare the city council agenda.
(Ordinance 100198, sec. 1, adopted 10/1/98)
(9) Purchases, contracts and change orders. The city manager is hereby granted authority to make
purchases, execute contracts, and approve change orders for the city, and to do anything which is
proper, usual and necessary to exercise such authority, within the limits of this resolution.
(A) The city manager or designee shall make all purchases for the city of all personal
property necessary for the functions of the city. All purchases of personal property and
contracts for construction, repair, services, high technology procurements or any other
municipal purpose that require an expenditure of $15,000 or less, regardless of the source of
funds, whether for consumables, recurring expenses, capital outlay, or replacement shall be
made by the city manager upon such basis as may be deemed necessary and advisable. If the
expenditure is more than $3,000, the city manager shall follow the procedures for contacting
disadvantaged businesses prescribed in section 252.0215 of the Texas Local Government Code,
as amended. All such purchases and contracts may be made by the city manager as provided in
this subsection without further city council action.
(B) A contract for personal or professional services requiring an expenditure of $15,000 or
less may be authorized by the city manager without further city council action. A contract for
personal or professional services requiring an expenditure exceeding $15,000 must be
authorized by the city council.
(C) For purchases of personal property and contracts for construction, repair, services, or any
other lawful municipal purpose requiring an expenditure exceeding $15,000, and required by
state law to be competitively bid, the city manager shall follow the procedure set forth in
chapter 252 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(D) The city manager with the written concurrence of the city engineer, is authorized to
approve change orders on city construction and engineering contracts without further approval
from the city council so long as the change will not increase the cost to the city by more than
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/244
$25,000, provided that the original contract price may not be increased by more than 25%, or
decreased by more than 25% without the consent of the contractor.
(E) In no instance will the authority granted by this subsection be construed so as to be in
conflict with the Texas Local Government Code, chapter 9 of this code, this article, as amended,
or the ordinance delegating additional powers and duties to the city manager by the city council.
(F) In no event can the city manager expend or authorize the expenditure of any sum of
money unless such sum is specifically set out in the annual municipal budget and when funds
have been appropriated for such budgeted item.
(Resolution 100198R adopted 10/1/98)
Sec. 9.02.035 Actions regarding utility account overcharges and undercharges
If the city manager determines that the city has undercharged or overcharged a water, sewer or solid waste utility
account (“claim”), the city manager shall have authority to take action regarding any such claim, up to and
including fifteen hundred and no/100 dollars ($1,500.00), in the following manner:
(1) Charge the customer at the applicable service address the unpaid amount;
(2) Adjust the current monthly utility bill to a fair and equitable amount; or
(3) Refund the excess payment or overcharge made by the most recent customer at the service
address, limited as provided by section 16.004 of the Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code (fouryear
statute of limitations period) or other applicable state law.
(Ordinance 090408A, sec. 2, adopted 9/18/08)
Sec. 9.02.036 Bond
The city manager shall execute a bond, payable to the city, conditioned that he or she will faithfully perform the
duties of city manager. The amount of the bond will be prescribed by ordinance of the city council. Such bond
shall be a corporate surety bond and the city shall pay all costs, premium, and expense connected therewith.
(Ordinance 921-1995, sec. 1, adopted 9/21/95)
State law reference–Execution of bond by city manager, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 25.029.
Secs. 9.02.037–9.02.070 Reserved
Division 3. City Secretary
Sec. 9.02.071 Office created; appointment and removal; residency requirement
The office of city secretary is hereby created, and shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the city
council. The city secretary shall be appointed to office by a majority vote of the city council. The city council
may remove the city secretary by resolution, provided that two-thirds (2/3) of the councilmembers vote in favor
of said resolution, for incompetency, corruption, misconduct, or malfeasance in office, after due notice and an
opportunity to be heard in his or her defense. (1982 Code, ch. 8, sec. 1(A); Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Appointment of secretary, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 22.071.
Sec. 9.02.072 Bond
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/244
The city secretary shall execute a bond, payable to the city, as required by law, and the city council shall
determine the amount of bond at least annually. In the event the city council fails to determine the amount of
bond for the succeeding year, then the amount last prescribed shall continue to be the amount of bond required to
be executed. Such bond shall be a corporate surety bond and the city shall pay all cost, premium, and expense
connected therewith. (1982 Code, ch. 8, sec. 1(B))
Sec. 9.02.073 Duties
The city secretary, and any person duly appointed and acting as city secretary, shall perform the duties
prescribed in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, section 22.073, as well as the duties prescribed in V.T.C.A.,
Local Government Code, section 22.075 as city treasurer, as well as the duties prescribed in V.T.C.A. Tax Code
as city tax assessor-collector, as well as the duties of clerk of the municipal court of the city. (1982 Code, ch. 8,
sec. 1(C))
State law reference–Powers and duties of city secretary, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 22.073.
ARTICLE 9.03 POLICE
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 9.03.001–9.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Police Department*
Sec. 9.03.031 Composition
The police department shall consist of the chief of police and such other officers as may be provided for from
time to time by the city council. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(A))
Sec. 9.03.032 General duties
It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to see to the enforcement of all ordinances of the
city, and all statutes effective in the city, and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and to arrest
violators of the peace. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(B))
Sec. 9.03.033 Conduct of members
(a) Generally.
(1) It shall be the duty of every member of the police department to conduct himself in a proper
and law-abiding manner, and to avoid the use of unnecessary force.
(2) No member of the police department shall conduct himself in a disorderly or any other manner
as to bring discredit upon the department.
(b) Attention to duty. All regular members of the department, regardless of rank, shall at all times be attentive
to their duties.
(c) Performance of duties. No member of the police department shall perform his duties in an ineffective
manner.
(d) Courtesy. Courtesy and civility towards the public are demanded from all members of the department, and
any conduct to the contrary will not be tolerated. Members in their conduct and deportment shall be quiet, civil,
and orderly and shall at all times be attentive and serious in the discharge of their duties, controlling their temper
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/244
and exercising the utmost patience and discretion. They must at all times refrain from using violent, profane, and
insolent language, but when required must act with sufficient force to perform their duties. They shall be civil
and respectful towards each other.
(e) False reports. No member of the department shall knowingly make a misstatement or make a false report.
(f) Leaving city while on patrol. No member of the department doing patrol duty shall go beyond the limits of
the city unless in the performance of actual police duty, or upon direct orders from the superior officer.
(g) Criticizing other members of department. Members of the department shall not discuss or criticize publicly
or privately the personal habits, character, or conduct or the official action of other members of the department
unless it be a violation of the rules and regulations, in which case the same should be reported to their superior
officers.
(h) Giving name and badge number. A police officer shall furnish such information or render such aid to all
persons when requested as is consistent with his duties. He shall at all times, when in uniform, keep his badge in
sight, and give his name and badge number in a respectful manner when requested.
(i) Games of chance. Police officers shall not engage in any games of chance.
(j) Drinking. Members of the police department shall not drink any intoxicating liquor while either on duty or
in uniform or in the city limits.
(k) Altercations; mistreatment of persons or prisoners. Members of the department shall refrain from physical
altercations except in the line of duty and shall not maltreat any person or prisoner.
(l) Aiding prisoners in obtaining attorney or bondsman. No member of the department shall aid any prisoner
in obtaining an attorney or a bondsman.
(m) Accepting rewards. No member of the department shall receive or accept any reward from any person,
firm, or corporation for any service rendered in the line of duty. However, as to all rewards received by members
of the department, where the individual has contributed outstanding work in the recovery of property, etc., a
written report thereof will be made to the city council outlining the case in question and submitting the reward to
the council to be acted upon by them.
(n) Acceptance of fees or gifts. No member of the department shall accept any fee, reward, or gift of any kind
from persons arrested or from any friend in his behalf while he is in custody, or after his release or discharge.
Members of the department shall not accept presents or gifts from other members of the department, groups,
clubs, associatory societies, citizens, lodges, or political parties. Members of the department shall not solicit
contributions for a fund for the purposes of presenting other members of the department with a gift, unless
authorized by the chief of police.
(o) Accepting bribes. No member of the department shall accept bribes of money, gifts or other articles of
apparent or actual value.
(1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(C))
Sec. 9.03.034 Chief of police
(a) Chief to serve as director of department. The chief of police shall be the director of the police department
and shall report directly to the city manager.
(b) Appointment. The chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to the approval of the
city council. The chief of police shall be responsible to the city manager and city council.
(Ordinance 080513 adopted 8/5/13)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/244
(c) Duties.
(1) The chief of police shall be responsible for the performance by the police department of all its
functions, and all persons who are members of the department shall serve subject to the order of the
chief of police.
(2) The chief of police shall be specifically charged with the supervision of all members of the
department and shall be held strictly responsible for the conduct and efficiency of all such members
for the general conduct and efficiency of all such members [sic] for the general good order of the
department.
(3) The chief of police shall have a thorough knowledge of all sections of the city, and when going
on duty shall immediately familiarize himself with all police business transacted since his last tour of
duty. It shall be his duty to inform the officers coming on duty of all important matters which have
occurred and which may require attention.
(4) The chief of police shall diligently inquire into all complaints and charges of laxity and
misconduct in the performance of duty by the members under his command and shall take such steps
as set forth in these rules and regulations or as he may deem necessary when not in conflict with
these rules and regulations.
(5) The chief of police in the exercise of his duties shall have the power to establish and enforce
rules and regulations for the government of the members of the department, which rules shall,
however, be consistent with the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state. Such rules, when
approved by the city council, shall be binding on such members.
(6) It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause the public peace to be preserved and to
enforce all ordinances of the city of which the police department must take cognizance. The chief of
police shall receive and give proper attention to complaints of all persons referred to him and perform
such other duties as may be required from time to time prescribed by the rules and regulations.
(7) The chief of police shall have full power and authority to reprimand any member of the police
department, and to file charges against any member or members of the police department with the
mayor and city council for a hearing, for nonconformance with these rules and regulations.
(8) The chief of police shall have custody and control of all books, records, machines, tools,
apparatus, or equipment of every kind necessary for the use of the department. He shall keep such
records and make such reports concerning the activities of his department as may be required by
statute or ordinance.
(9) The chief of police shall be keeper of the city jail and shall have custody of all persons
incarcerated therein.
(1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(D))
Sec. 9.03.035 Sergeants
A sergeant of police is charged with executing the proper performance of patrol and other police duties from the
members of the department assigned to patrol duty under him during his hours of duty. He shall have such hours
as may be prescribed by the chief of police. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(E))
Sec. 9.03.036 Patrolmen
(a) Appointment. All original appointments shall be for a period of six (6) months. Continuance in service
shall be dependent upon the conduct of the appointee and his fitness for the performance of the duties to which
he is assigned as indicated by the quality of his work and the reports and recommendations of his superior
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/244
officers. If, during the year, the appointee proves unfit, he will be dismissed from the service by the chief of
police with the approval of the mayor and city council and shall not be entitled to appeal from such dismissal.
(b) Duties. Every patrolman, in carrying out the functions of the police department, namely the preservation of
the public peace, the protection of life and property, the prevention of crime, the arrest of violators of the law,
and the proper enforcement of all the laws and ordinances of which the department takes cognizance, shall be
consistently direct in his efforts to accomplish that end intelligently and efficiently, and shall hold himself in
readiness at all times to answer the calls and obey the orders of his superior officers for the general conditions of
the city during the hours assigned to him.
(c) Attire. Patrolmen, unless otherwise ordered, shall wear the uniform adopted by the service and approved
by the council.
(1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(F))
Sec. 9.03.037 Use of department property for private purposes
No department property whatsoever shall be used for private purposes. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(H))
Sec. 9.03.038 Serving of writs, summons and other processes
The chief of police shall be authorized to serve writs, summons, and other processes, but no patrolman shall
serve any such summons or process except on the order of the chief of police. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(J))
Sec. 9.03.039 Members appearing as witness
Every member of the police department shall appear as a witness whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for
a violation of a city ordinance or of a state or federal law, but no such member shall receive any witness fee for
such services in any action or suit to which the city is a party; all fees due for such services shall, if paid, be
turned over to the city treasurer. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(K))
Sec. 9.03.040 Confidential information
No member of the department shall give out or release any information covering the affairs, business, or
operation of the police department without the consent of the chief of police. Members of the department shall
not deliver addresses in meetings concerning the work of the police department, nor shall they make statements
for publication concerning plans, policies or affairs of the police department, unless authorized to do so by the
chief of police. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(L))
Sec. 9.03.041 Members served with subpoena or requested to appear for defense
Members of the department, when served with a subpoena or requested to appear for the defense in the
prosecution of a criminal case, shall immediately report to their commanding officer, whose duty it shall be to
notify the state’s attorney. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(M))
Sec. 9.03.042 Firearms
All regular members of the police department shall buy a revolver approved by the chief of police. The same
shall be submitted for inspection, and the members shall be qualified for the use of firearms by a training course
adopted by the department. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(N))
Sec. 9.03.043 Rules and regulations
Rules and regulations should be posted. Further, all the rules and regulations which are applicable to members of
the police department are also applicable to the chief of police. In addition to the written rules and regulations as
established by the city council, the laws of the state, ordinances of the city, and federal laws pertaining to and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/244
affecting police officers shall be the governing factors in the conduct of all members of the police department,
who shall at all times be subject to the same. It shall be the duty of the chief of police and city council to enforce
the rules and regulations. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(O))
Sec. 9.03.044 Disposition of fines
All fines assessed and collected pursuant to the foregoing rules shall be forthwith turned over to the treasurer of
the city to become and be used as a part and portion of a fund to be designated. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(P))
Sec. 9.03.045 Resignations
All members of the police department shall give fourteen (14) days’ written notice to the chief of police of their
intention of resigning from the police department. Any member leaving the department without due notice as
aforesaid shall be disqualified from ever again becoming a member of the police department. However, before
any resignation is accepted, all equipment and property belonging to the city must be returned to the
commanding officer. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(Q))
Sec. 9.03.046 Police reserve force
(a) An auxiliary police force to be known as the city police reserve is hereby established. The members of the
police reserve force shall serve on a voluntary basis.
(b) The chief of police shall be the head of the police reserve force and the members thereof shall be under his
authority, control and command, subject to this division and other ordinances of the city and laws of the state
and of the United States.
(c) The chief of police may, by order, establish rules and regulations to govern the police reserve force, to fix
specific duties of its members, and to provide for the maintenance of discipline. He may change such orders
from time to time, and he may command members of the police reserve force to obey instructions of regular
police officers in carrying out their orders.
(d) An applicant for membership in the police reserve force shall meet the minimum standards for
appointment as promulgated by the state commission on law enforcement officer standards and education.
(e) In addition to the penalties provided by law, any violation of law under color of the performance of his
duties as a member of the police reserve force, and any breach of rules and regulations established by the chief
of police, shall subject any member to discipline procedures by the chief of police.
(f) The chief of police shall prescribe the uniform and badges for the members of the police reserve force and
direct the manner in which the same shall be worn.
(1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 24(R); Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Authority to provide for police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 341.012; compensation of
police reserve in type A general-law municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 141.007.
ARTICLE 9.04 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 9.04.001 Ordinance on file
The specific ordinances providing for participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as adopted by the
city, are not included in this article, but they are hereby specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained
on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/244
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS†
Sec. 10.02.001 Adopted
The development standards as adopted by the city are not included in this code, but are hereby specifically saved
from repeal. A copy of the development standards and amendments thereto shall be maintained and available on
file in the offices of the city. (Ordinance adopting Code)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 11.02 PROPERTY TAX†
Sec. 11.02.001 Authority to levy
There is hereby established the authority to levy and collect an annual ad valorem (property) tax of not
exceeding one and one-half percent (1-1/2%) on the one hundred dollars ($100.00) valuation of taxable property
within the city. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 15(A))
Sec. 11.02.002 Participation in appraisal district
The city hereby authorizes participation in the Kaufman County Appraisal District. The appraisal district shall
be authorized to perform all appraisal and assessment functions required under the state Property Tax Code. The
city shall retain collection functions. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 15(B))
State law reference–Appraisal districts, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 6.01 et seq.
Sec. 11.02.003 Due date; delinquency
The property taxes levied by the city each year shall become due on the first day of October of each year for
which the levy is made and shall become delinquent on the following first day of February. Penalties and interest
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/244
for delinquent taxes shall incur in accordance with section 33.01 of the state Tax Code. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec.
15(C))
State law reference–Delinquency date for payment of taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 31.02.
Sec. 11.02.004 Additional penalty for costs of collection of delinquent taxes
Whereas the city has contracted with an attorney to enforce the collection of delinquent taxes pursuant to section
6.30 of the state Tax Code, it is hereby provided, as authorized by sections 33.07 and 33.08 of the state Tax
Code, that taxes that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become delinquent shall incur an
additional penalty to defray costs of collection. The amount of the penalty may not exceed the amount of the
compensation specified in the contract with the attorney to be paid in connection with the collection of the
delinquent taxes. (Ordinance 121803A, sec. 1, adopted 12/18/03)
State law references–Contract with attorney for collection of taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 6.30; imposition of penalty for collection
of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 33.01, 33.07, 33.08.
Sec. 11.02.005 Restriction on tax increase on homestead of elderly or disabled persons
(a) Pursuant to Texas Constitution article VIII, section 1-b(h), if a person who is disabled or is sixty-five (65)
years of age or older receives a lawfully authorized or prescribed residence homestead exemption, the total
amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on that homestead by the city shall not be increased while it remains the
residence homestead of that person or that person’s spouse who is disabled or sixty-five (65) years of age or
older and receives a residence homestead exemption on the homestead. Further, if a disabled person or person
sixty-five (65) years of age or older dies in a year in which the person received a residence homestead
exemption, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the homestead by the city shall not be increased
while it remains the residence homestead of that person’s surviving spouse if the spouse is fifty-five (55) years
of age or older at the time of the person’s death, subject to any exceptions provided by general law. For purposes
of this section, the definitions of the terms “disabled” and “residence homestead” are identical to the definitions
of those same terms as they appear in Texas Tax Code section 11.13.
(b) All individuals sixty-five (65) years of age or older on or before January 1st of the tax year in which said
exemption is to be applied shall file an application for said exemption with the Kaufman County Appraisal
District at 3950 South Houston Street, Kaufman, Texas 75142.
(Ordinance 121803B, secs. 1, 2, adopted 12/18/03)
Sec. 11.02.006 Exemption for charitable organizations
(a) The city council hereby grants an exemption to those charitable organizations that qualify under the
applicable provisions of section 11.184 of the Texas Tax Code, and that file an exemption application with and
are granted such an exemption request by the Kaufman County Appraisal District.
(b) Successful applicants who receive the exemption shall file with the city secretary a copy of the
comptroller’s determination letter and the chief appraiser’s letter granting the exemption request within 30 days
of the granting of the exemption.
(Ordinance 011504, secs. 2, 3, adopted 1/15/04)
State law reference–Tax exemption for organizations engaged primarily in performing charitable functions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec.
11.184.
Sec. 11.02.007 Goods in transit
Beginning tax year 2012, and continuing thereafter until further action is taken by the city council, “goods in
transit,” as defined by Tax Code, section 11.253, as amended, shall be subject to ad valorem property taxation by
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/244
the city. (Ordinance 120111 adopted 12/1/11)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods in transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
ARTICLE 11.03 SALES AND USE TAXES*
Sec. 11.03.001 One-percent tax adopted
A local sales tax of one percent (1%) as provided for in the Local Sales and Use Tax Act of 1967 (V.T.C.A., Tax
Code, chapter 321) as authorized by the 60th Legislature, Regular Session, has been adopted by the voters of the
city as a result of an election held for that purpose on November 2, 1976. (1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 16(A))
Sec. 11.03.002 Tax on sale of gas and electricity for residential use
(a) The tax heretofore imposed by the city pursuant to the provisions of the Local Sales and Use Tax is hereby
continued on the sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of and the use, storage or other consumption of gas
and electricity for residential use.
(b) The sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of and the use, storage or other consumption of gas and
electricity for residential use shall not be exempt from the tax imposed by the city under the Local Sales and Use
Tax Act.
(c) The city secretary was directed to transmit, on or before April 1, 1979, a certified copy of this ordinance
by registered or certified mail to the comptroller of public accounts of the state.
(1982 Code, ch. 1, sec. 16(B))
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
Sec. 11.03.003 Additional one-half percent tax for business promotion and development
A local sales and use tax for the promotion and development of new and expanded business enterprises, at the
rate of 1/2 of 1 percent, for any project authorized by section 4B of the Development Corporation Act of 1979,
including maintenance and operating costs for any such project, has been adopted by the voters of the city at an
election held on May 4, 1996. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Development Corporation Act of 1979, Vernon’s Ann. Civ. St. art. 5190.6.
Sec. 11.03.004 Allocation of percentage of sales tax to volunteer fire department
(a) An amount not to exceed seventeen and one-half percent (17 1/2%) of the total one percent sales tax
received is hereby allocated to the Crandall Volunteer Fire Department. This allocation may be utilized for any
lawful, department-related purpose.
(b) The allocated sales tax funds for the CVFD shall be set aside into a special account entitled “Crandall
Volunteer Fire Department Fund.”
(c) This allocation of sales tax shall expire on September 30, 2013, unless action is taken by the city council to
renew such sales tax allocation.
(d) The signatories on the Crandall Volunteer Fire Department fund account shall be the mayor, city manager
and fire chief. Two signatories shall be required to draw on this account.
(Ordinance 100109A, secs. 2, 3, adopted 10/1/09)
ARTICLE 11.04 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/244
Sec. 11.04.001 Levy; amount
There be, and is hereby, levied, pursuant to the provisions of chapter 351 of the Texas Tax Code, a hotel
occupancy tax at the rate of seven percent (7%) of the price paid for a room in a hotel for each day of occupancy
under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement by a person who pays for the
use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in such hotel, costs two dollars
($2.00) or more each day, and is ordinarily used for sleeping. The price of a room does not include the cost of
food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person, except for those
services related to cleaning and readying the room for use or possession. (Ordinance 2-5-1996A, sec. 1, adopted
2/5/96)
Sec. 11.04.002 Exceptions
The following exemptions shall apply to the hotel occupancy tax, to wit:
(1) The tax shall not be imposed on the person who has the right to use or possess a room in a hotel
for at least thirty (30) consecutive days, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period;
(2) The tax does not apply to the United States, the state, or an agency, institution, board, or
commission of the state, other than an institution of higher education;
(3) The tax does not apply to an officer or employee of a state governmental entity as described in
subsection (2) above when such person is traveling on or otherwise engaged in the course of official
duties for the governmental entity; and
(4) An officer or employee of a governmental entity of the United States when traveling on or
otherwise engaged in the course of official duties for the governmental entity if the governmental
entity directly pays to the hotel the price for the room.
(Ordinance 2-5-1996A, sec. 2, adopted 2/5/96)
Sec. 11.04.003 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel within the city shall collect the tax levied by
this article. A person who is required to collect and pay over to the city the tax authorized by this article may
retain not more than one percent (1%) of the amount collected and required to be reported as reimbursement for
the costs in collecting the tax. This reimbursement shall be forfeited by such person to the city because of a
failure to pay the tax or to file a report as required by this article. (Ordinance 2-5-1996A, sec. 3, adopted 2/5/96)
Sec. 11.04.004 Quarterly report to tax collector
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period ending after the effective date of this article, every
person required to collect the tax imposed hereby shall file a report with the city secretary showing the price paid
for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies, and any
other information the city secretary may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such
occupancies at the time of filing such report. The report shall be in a form prescribed by the city secretary. The
city secretary is hereby authorized and directed to do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the terms of
this article. The city secretary shall have authority to request and receive, within a reasonable time,
documentation for the information contained in the report. The city secretary shall establish procedures to
affectively collect the taxes levied hereby and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to the books and
records of the hotel so as to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the
amount of taxes due as a result of such report. (Ordinance 2-5-1996A, sec. 4, adopted 2/5/96)
Sec. 11.04.005 Additional authorizations to bring suit for violations
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/244
The city attorney may bring suit against a person who is required to collect the tax imposed by this article and
pay the collections over to the city and who has failed to file a tax report or pay the tax when due to collect the
tax not paid or to enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report filed, as
applicable. In addition to the amount of any tax owed under this article, the person is liable to the city for the
city’s reasonable attorney’s fees in enforcing the provisions of this article and collecting the tax, plus a penalty
equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the total amount of the tax owed. The remedies provided by this article are
cumulative of other available remedies. (Ordinance 2-5-1996A, sec. 5, adopted 2/5/96)
Sec. 11.04.006 Use of revenue
(a) Revenue from the hotel occupancy tax may be used only to promote tourism and the convention and hotel
industry in the city, and that use is limited to the following, to wit:
(1) The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing,
operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities or visitor information centers, or both;
(2) The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention
delegates or registrants;
(3) Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and
convention delegates or registrants to the city or its vicinity;
(4) The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including
instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied
fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape
and sound recording, and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution, and
exhibition of these major art forms; and
(5) Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting
solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit
preserved historic sites or museums at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities or
visitor information centers or located elsewhere in the city or its vicinity that would be frequented by
tourists and convention delegates.
(b) Revenue derived from the tax shall be expended in a manner directly enhancing and promoting tourism
and the convention and hotel industry and not for the general revenue purposes or general governmental
operations of the city. Other requirements for the use of tax revenue shall be enforced as provided by section
351.101 of the Texas Tax Code.
(Ordinance 2-5-1996A, sec. 6, adopted 2/5/96)
Sec. 11.04.007 Allocation of revenue
The limitations on the allocation of revenue for the specific uses set out in this article shall be as contained in
section 351.103 of the Texas Tax Code. (Ordinance 2-5-1996A, sec. 7, adopted 2/5/96)
Sec. 11.04.008 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, including the collection of the hotel occupancy tax, the
filing of the required reports, and the payment of the taxes imposed, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed the sum of five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day any such person shall be delinquent in any such respect
shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 2-5-1996A, sec. 8, adopted 2/5/96)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/244
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 State motor vehicle laws adopted
For the purpose of regulating traffic on the streets, alleys, and thoroughfares of the city, there is hereby adopted
the state Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, codified as article 6701d, Vernon’s Annotated Civil
Statutes, and all other state motor vehicle laws, which act and laws, together with the provisions contained in
this chapter, shall be controlling in the regulation of traffic in the city. A violation of said act or any state motor
vehicle law for which the municipal court has jurisdiction shall constitute and be punishable as a violation of this
Code of Ordinances. (1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 1)
Editor’s note–Since adoption of this provision, the regulations contained in the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways
(V.T.C.S., article 6701d) have been recodified and are now located in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code.
Sec. 12.01.002 Following emergency vehicle; parking near fire department vehicles
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drive and operate any vehicle following or pursuing such
emergency vehicles or any vehicle or apparatus operated by the fire department at a distance of less than six
hundred feet (600'), or to park such vehicle within the block where vehicles or other apparatus operated by the
fire department are parked for the purpose of answering any fire alarm. (1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 5)
State law reference–Following fire apparatus or ambulance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.407.
Sec. 12.01.003 Driving over fire hose
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive such vehicle over and across any unprotected hose
being used by the fire department along any street, alley, or private driveway without the consent or direction of
the fire chief, the chief of police, or an official of the fire department, or police acting in charge. (1982 Code, ch.
10, sec. 6)
State law reference–Crossing fire hose, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.408.
ARTICLE 12.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES†
Sec. 12.02.001 Conformance with state manual
All traffic-control devices including signs, signals and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the
purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the manual and specifications
adopted by the state transportation commission as provided in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001.
All signs, signals and markings erected or used by the city must conform to the manual and specifications
adopted under V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, section 544.001. All existing traffic-control devices and those
erected in the future by the city being consistent with the manual and specifications, state law and this section
shall be official traffic-control devices. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
Sec. 12.02.002 Unauthorized devices
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/244
(a) No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway, street, or alley any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official
traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which
hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal.
(b) No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway, street, or alley
any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
(c) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways,
streets, or alleys of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official
signs.
(d) Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of
police is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
(1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 2(B))
Sec. 12.02.003 Damaging or tampering with traffic-control device, railroad sign or signal, or street sign
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any
official traffic-control device, sign, or signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia
thereon, or any street name sign or any part thereof. (1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 2(C))
State law reference–Interference with traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.005.
Sec. 12.02.004 Ratification of existing devices
All traffic-control signs, signals, devices, and markings placed or erected prior to the adoption of this Code of
Ordinances and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding vehicles or pedestrian traffic are hereby
affirmed, ratified, and declared to be official traffic-control devices, provided such traffic-control devices are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law. (1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 2(D))
Sec. 12.02.005 Installation
(a) After the adoption of this Code of Ordinances, the city council shall, by ordinance, direct the location of all
future traffic-control signs, signals, and markings. The chief of police shall have the duty of erecting or installing
upon, over, along, or beside any highway, street, or alley, signs, signals, and markings as are necessary to
enforce such ordinances, or causing the same to be erected, installed, or placed, in accordance with this chapter
and consistent with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Said traffic-control devices shall be
installed immediately upon authorization by the city council, or as soon as such specific device, sign, or signal
can be procured.
(b) Whenever the chief of police has erected and installed any official traffic-control device, sign, or signal at
any location in the city, or has caused the same to be done under his direction, in obedience to this chapter and
the manual on traffic-control devices, he shall thereafter file a report with the city secretary in writing, stating the
type of traffic-control device, sign, or signal, and when and where the same was erected and installed. The city
secretary shall file and maintain such report of the chief of police among the official papers of the office of the
city secretary.
(1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 2(E))
Sec. 12.02.006 Evidence of authorized installation
It being unlawful for any person, other than the chief of police acting pursuant to an ordinance of the city, to
install or cause to be installed any signal, sign, or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/244
activities on those streets of pedestrians, vehicles, motor vehicles, or animals. Proof, in any prosecution for a
violation of this chapter or any traffic ordinance of the city, that any traffic-control device, sign, signal, or
marking was actually in place on any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by
the chief of police pursuant to the authority of this chapter and of the ordinances directing the installation of such
device, signal, or marking. (1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 2(F))
Sec. 12.02.007 Obedience
The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle, or animal shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control
device, sign, signal, or marking applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle as
provided for in the state motor vehicle laws. (1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 2(G))
State law reference–Compliance with traffic-control device, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.004.
ARTICLE 12.03 OPERATION OF VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 12.03.001–12.03.050 Reserved
Division 2. Stop Signs*
Sec. 12.03.051 Locations
The ordinances establishing the location of stop signs at specific street intersections are not included in this
code. Such ordinances are on file in the city secretary’s office and are specifically saved from repeal upon
adoption of the Code of Ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 12.03.052–12.03.080 Reserved
Division 3. Speed Limits†
Sec. 12.03.081 Reasonable and prudent speed required; general speed limit
No person shall drive a vehicle on any street in the city limits at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent
under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed
shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or
entering a highway or street in compliance with legal requirements, and it shall be the duty of all persons to use
due care. No person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle or other vehicle within the corporate limits of the
city on any street at a greater speed than thirty (30) miles per hour, unless signs are erected designating another
speed limit, or in any alley at a greater speed than fifteen (15) miles per hour. (1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 3(A))
Sec. 12.03.082 Authority to establish speed limits
Whenever the city shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and/or traffic investigation that the thirty
(30) miles per hour speed limit hereinbefore set forth is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the
conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place, or upon any part of the street or highway, the city
shall, upon authorization by the city council by appropriate ordinance, establish such speed limit as shall be
effective at all times when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at such intersection or other place
or part of the highway or street. (1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 3(B))
Sec. 12.03.083 Driving at slow speed
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/244
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of
traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law, or at the direction
of a police officer. Police officers are hereby authorized to enforce this provision by directions to drivers and, in
the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and refusal to comply with the direction of an officer
in accordance herewith, the continued slow operation of a motor vehicle by a driver shall be a misdemeanor.
(1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 3(C))
Sec. 12.03.084 Speed limits on specific streets
The ordinances establishing speed limits on specific streets are not included in this code. Such ordinances are on
file in the city secretary’s office and are specifically saved from repeal upon adoption of the Code of Ordinances.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 12.03.085–12.03.120 Reserved
Division 4. School Zones
Sec. 12.03.121 Specific school zones
The ordinances establishing speed limits for specific school zones are not included in this code. Such ordinances
are on file in the city secretary’s office and are specifically saved from repeal upon adoption of the Code of
Ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 12.03.122–12.03.150 Reserved
Division 5. Wireless Communication Devices
Sec. 12.03.151 Definitions
As used in this division the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this section unless the context requires otherwise:
Hands-free device. Any speakerphone capability or a telephone attachment or other piece of equipment,
regardless of whether permanently installed in the motor vehicle, that allows use of the wireless communication
device without use of either of the operator’s hands.
(Ordinance 100109B, sec. 2, adopted 10/1/09)
School crossing zone. Any reduced-speed zone designated on a street by the city to facilitate safe crossing of the
street by children going to or leaving a public or private elementary or secondary school during the time the
reduced speed limit is applicable. (Ordinance 100109B, sec. 2, adopted 10/1/09; Ordinance adopting Code)
Wireless communication device. A device that uses a commercial mobile service, as defined by 47 U.S.C.
section 332.
Sec. 12.03.152 Use in school zones
(a) Except as otherwise provided below, it shall be unlawful for a person to use a wireless communication
device while operating a motor vehicle in a school crossing zone on official school days and when a school
crossing zone sign and a sign providing notice of the prohibition of use of a wireless communication device in a
school crossing zone are posted in place.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply if:
(1) The motor vehicle is stopped; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/244
(2) The wireless communication device is used with a hands-free device.
(c) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of an offense under subsection (a) that:
(1) The wireless communication device was used to make an emergency call to:
(A) An emergency response service, including a rescue, emergency medical or hazardous
material response service;
(B) A hospital;
(C) A fire department;
(D) A health clinic;
(E) A medical doctor’s office;
(F) An individual to administer first aid treatment; or
(G) A police department; or
(2) A sign required by section 12.03.153 of this division was not posted at the entrance to the
school crossing zone at the time of an offense committed in the school crossing zone.
(d) This section shall not apply to:
(1) An operator of an authorized emergency vehicle using a wireless communication device while
acting in an official capacity; or
(2) An operator who is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission while operating a
radio frequency device other than a wireless communication device while acting in an official
capacity.
Sec. 12.03.153 Signs
A sign shall be attached to the existing signage which provides notice of a school crossing zone that:
(1) The use of a wireless communication device is prohibited in the school crossing zone during
the hours when the school crossing zone is in effect; and
(2) The operator is subject to a fine if the operator uses a wireless communication device in a
school crossing zone.
Sec. 12.03.154 Offense
(a) A person who violates a provision of this division, or who fails to perform an act required of him by this
division, commits a class C misdemeanor offense.
(b) An offense under this division is punishable by a fine not to exceed $200.00.
(c) Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under
this division.
(Ordinance 100109B, sec. 2, adopted 10/1/09)
ARTICLE 12.04 PARKING*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/244
Sec. 12.04.001 Placement of signs; violations; removal of unlawfully parked vehicles
The chief of police is hereby authorized to erect appropriate signs prohibiting the stopping, standing, or parking
of motor vehicles at the locations described in section 12.04.002 or any other location where parking is
prohibited or limited by this Code of Ordinances or an ordinance of the city or other applicable law. Such signs
shall be official signs of the city and no person shall stop, stand or park any motor vehicle in violation of the
restrictions stated on such signs. Any person stopping, standing or parking a motor vehicle in the areas described
herein after such signs are erected shall be in violation of this section and subject to the penalties set out in
section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances, and whenever any police officer or commissioned member of the
department of public safety finds a vehicle standing upon any portion of the roads described herein or in any
other provision of this Code of Ordinances or any applicable ordinance or law in violation of such law, such
officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to
move the same, to a position off the paved or main traveled part of such highway to a place where parking is
legal or to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. (Ordinance
090497, sec. 1, adopted 9/4/97)
State law reference–Removal of unlawfully stopped vehicle, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.305.
Sec. 12.04.002 Parking prohibited on certain streets
The ordinances establishing no parking zones for specific streets are not included in this code. Such ordinances
are on file in the city secretary’s office and are specifically saved from repeal upon adoption of the Code of
Ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.04.003 Parking in fire lane
(a) Any street, part of street, or alley within the incorporated limits of the city which has heretofore been
designated, or may in the future be designated, by the chief of police or fire marshal of the city as a fire lane
shall be so recognized and subject to regulations as hereinafter provided.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, or persons, to park any vehicles upon the streets, alleys, or portions
thereof which have heretofore been designated or may hereafter be designated as a fire lane as herein provided,
provided that such portions of said streets or alleys shall be designated by the erection of signs or by the painting
of curbs along such streets or alleys so designating and describing such portions of such streets or alleys.
Provided further that this restriction shall not apply to emergency vehicles as herein defined used in connection
with the conduct and operation of the fire department.
(1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 4)
State law reference–Marking of fire lane, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 2308.251(c).
Sec. 12.04.004 Parking of motor vehicles, boats or trailers on certain residential streets
(a) Prohibited parking. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop or stand any motor vehicle, boat or
trailer on any public street, parkway, boulevard, or thoroughfare in any residentially zoned district for a period
longer than seventy-six (76) hours. (Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Enforcement. The city manager is hereby authorized to take those steps reasonable and necessary,
including the placement of appropriate signs indicating such parking regulations, to enforce compliance with the
intent of this section.
(c) Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not to exceed two hundred dollars
($200.00).
(Ordinance 110200 adopted 11/2/00)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/244
Sec. 12.04.005 Parking on private property in residential district
(a) Definitions. As used in this section:
Front yard. The area of a residential lot which is forward of the front building line.
Rear yard. The area of a residential lot between the rear building line and the rear of the lot.
Residential district. Any area or lot occupied, designed for or zoned for residential uses.
Side yard. The area of a residential lot on either side of the dwelling which is between the front building line and
the rear building line.
(b) Location and surfacing of area used for parking. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to
leave, stand, park, or store any motor vehicle or trailer in the front yard, rear yard, or side yard of a residential
area or residential lot except on an impermeable surface such as concrete or asphalt, or at a minimum other allweather
surfaces consisting of gravel or crushed rock, which is contiguous to the existing driveway and which
meets all other requirements of the codes and ordinances of the city.
(Ordinance 042000, sec. 1, adopted 4/20/00; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 12.05 TRUCK ROUTES
Sec. 12.05.001 Use required
Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate or park a commercial motor
vehicle upon any public street within the city except on such streets as are designated as truck routes herein.
(1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 7(A))
Sec. 12.05.002 Commercial motor vehicle defined
For purposes of this article, “commercial motor vehicle” shall mean any motor vehicle designed or used for the
transportation of property, not including a passenger bus, passenger automobile, motorcycle, panel delivery truck
or pickup truck, but including any other type truck, tractor, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or any combination
thereof which has a gross registered carrying capacity of more than 28,000 pounds. (1982 Code, ch. 10, sec.
7(B))
Sec. 12.05.003 Designation
The chief of police or his designated representative shall erect signs and markings to designate the truck routes
set out herein, and whenever any street designated as a truck route herein is being repaired or is otherwise
temporarily out of use, the chief of police or his designated representative is authorized to designate alternate
truck routes for such period as may be necessary. The following streets and parts of streets are designated truck
routes under this article:
(1) Loop 219.
(2) Main Street from Loop 219 to Lewis Street.
(3) Gleason Street from Main Street to Meadow Creek Drive.
(4) FM 148.
(5) FM 3039.
(1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 7(C))
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/244
Sec. 12.05.004 Exemptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any such vehicle which is traveling upon a street other than a
truck route for the purpose of making a delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, building material or other
commodities to, or performing necessary utility or other services for, a person or business establishment on such
street, or a place of performing service, or a place of loading or unloading; provided, however, that the operator
of such vehicle shall travel to and from such places over the shortest practicable route to or from a point on a
designated truck route. The provisions of this article shall not apply to emergency vehicles operating in response
to any emergency call nor to vehicles operated by a public utility or cruising in an assigned area for the purpose
of inspecting the facilities of such public utility or providing maintenance service to said facilities. The
provisions of this article shall not apply to vehicles operated for public service, such as garbage trucks, street
repair and water service vehicles and maintenance vehicles. (1982 Code, ch. 10, sec. 7(D))
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 13.02 SOLID WASTE†
Sec. 13.02.001 Definitions
The words as used in this article shall have the following meanings:
Ashes. Residue from fires used for cooking and for heating buildings.
Garbage. Wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food; waste from the
handling, storage, and sale of produce.
Refuse. Combustible trash, including but not limited to paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree
branches, yard trimmings, wood furniture, and bedding; noncombustible trash, including but not limited to
metals, tin cans, metal furniture, dirt, small quantities of rock and pieces of concrete, glass crockery, and other
mineral waste; and street rubbish, including but not limited to street sweepings, dirt, leaves, catchbasin dirt, and
contents of litter receptacles. Provided, refuse shall not include earth and waste from building operations, nor
shall it include solid wastes resulting from industrial processes and manufacturing operations such as food
processing wastes, boiler house cinders, lumber, scraps, and shavings.
(1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 5(B))
Sec. 13.02.002 Penalty; responsibility for violation
(a) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than five
dollars ($5.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/244
(b) The fact that garbage, refuse, or ashes remains on any occupant’s premises in the city in violation of this
article shall be prima facie evidence that the occupant of such premises is responsible for the violations of this
article occurring.
(1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 5(L))
Sec. 13.02.003 Authority of city
The city is hereby designated the coordinating agency with respect to the collection, handling, storage, and
disposal of municipal waste. The city shall seek the accomplishment of the purposes of this article through the
control of all aspects of municipal waste collection, handling, storage, and disposal by all practical and
economically feasible methods consistent with the powers and duties specifically prescribed in this article and
all other powers necessary or convenient to carry out its responsibilities. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 5(A))
Sec. 13.02.004 Uncovered garbage prohibited
It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city any garbage, or other material subject to
decay other than leaves or grass, except in a tightly covered metal container. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 5(C))
Sec. 13.02.005 Storage of trash that can be blown away by wind
It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, ashes, or trash of such material that it can be
blown away by the wind anywhere in the city, except in a tightly closed metal container. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec.
5(D))
Sec. 13.02.006 Depositing waste on street or alley
It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any garbage, refuse, or ashes on any public
street or alley in the city; provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage, refuse, or
ashes in a container complying with the provisions of this article preparatory to having such material collected
and disposed of in the manner provided herein. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 5(E))
Sec. 13.02.007 Dumping waste without permission
It shall be unlawful to dump or place any garbage, refuse, or ashes on any premises in the city without the
written consent of the owner of such premises. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 5(F))
Sec. 13.02.008 Combustible refuse creating fire hazard
It shall be unlawful to permit or store any combustible refuse in such a way as to create a fire hazard or to store
or throw away any refuse of any kind in an alley, street, or public way in the city. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 5(G))
Sec. 13.02.009 Collection and disposal generally; use of collection service required
It shall be unlawful to collect or dispose of any garbage, refuse, or ashes anywhere in the city or by any person
in the city except by a lawfully established garbage pickup service. The water and sewer superintendent or other
designated official shall have charge of the collection of garbage, refuse, and ashes in the city. The collection of
garbage and refuse shall be made from all premises at least once each week, provided that the material is
properly stored for collection in a container complying with the provisions of this article. Due to the health and
sanitation problems involved, the use of the city garbage pickup service is compulsory for all residences,
businesses, or other establishments within the city. (1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 5(H))
Sec. 13.02.010 Collection fees
(a) The fees for collection of garbage shall be paid monthly and shall be as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/244
(1) Residential service: $6.50.
(2) Residential service for senior citizens: $5.50.
(3) Apartment [or] duplex unit - per unit: $6.50.
(4) Trailer park - per unit: $6.50.
(5) Commercial service: Rate charged specified by garbage contractor’s price sheet plus 10%
charge added for collection and billing.
(6) Residential service outside city limits: $8.50.
(7) Commercial service outside city limits: Rate charged shall be as specified by garbage
contractor’s price sheet plus 15% charge added for collection and billing.
(8) Exceptions to subsections (a)(3) and (4) of this section: If commercial containers are supplied
at apartments or trailer parks the fee per unit will not be charged.
(b) Whenever the collection of garbage from any establishment or place shall exceed the normal amounts for
such a place so that the fee prescribed for such collection is not fair and reasonable as applied to that particular
place, the water and sewer superintendent, or other designated officer, shall recommend to the city council the
establishment of a special rate for such place.
(c) The fees for collection of garbage shall be included with water and sewer services. Failure to pay any one
or all fees shall be cause for discontinuance of all city-supplied services until such fees and penalties, if any, are
paid in full.
(1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 5(I))
Sec. 13.02.011 Containers required
(a) All garbage, refuse, and ashes for collection by the city shall be placed in metal containers equipped with a
cover and equipped with handles so they may be lifted and carried by one man. No such container shall have a
capacity of less than ten (10) gallons or more than thirty (30) gallons.
(b) Plastic bags may be used as an alternative to metal containers. Such plastic bags shall be all-weather, of
sufficient quality and strength, and not exceed thirty (30) gallons in capacity. All bags shall be securely tied and
fastened.
(1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 5(J))
Sec. 13.02.012 Placement of containers for pickup
On the designated pickup day or days, all containers of garbage at residential customers will be placed within
fifteen feet (15') of the street or curbside (front or side street) where pickup is to be made. No attempts to pick up
will be made where garbage is placed an excessive distance from the street where the garbage truck will be.
(1982 Code, ch. 6, sec. 5(K))
Sec. 13.02.013 Transporting waste into city
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to transport or carry any garbage, refuse, or ashes into the city for
collection for the purpose of deposit of such on property within the corporate limits of the city. (1982 Code, ch.
6, sec. 5(M))
ARTICLE 13.03 WATER AND SEWER SERVICE*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/244
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 13.03.001 Penalty; injunctive relief
(a) A person who violates this article may be fined up to $2000.00.
(b) Notwithstanding any penal provisions of this section, the city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of
the city for injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent any violation of this article.
(Ordinance 031606-A, sec. 4, adopted 3/16/06)
Sec. 13.03.002 Free service prohibited
No free services of the waterworks system shall be permitted, and if the city, or any of its agencies or
instrumentalities, makes use of the services and facilities of said system, payment of the regular rates shall be
made by the city out of funds from sources other than the revenues of the system. (1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 1)
Sec. 13.03.003 Rates and charges
The monthly water and sewer rates to be charged and collected by the city from all customers obtaining service
from the utilities system of the city shall be and are hereby fixed as set forth below: (1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 2)
(1) Water rates.
(A) Definitions.
(i) Residential. Residential rates shall apply to single-family and multifamily dwellings,
and mobile home parks; rates for multifamily dwellings and mobile home parks shall be
for each unit.
(ii) Commercial. Commercial rates shall apply to retail, school, light-industrial, office,
church, and similar nonresidential users.
(B) Base rate.
(i) 3/4" meter (residential): $32.10.
(ii) 3/4" meter (commercial): $47.30.
(iii) 1" meter: $52.70.
(iv) 2" meter: $60.80.
(v) 4" meter: $87.80.
(vi) 6" meter: $114.80.
(C) Usage charge per 1,000 gallons or portion thereof: $4.46.
(Ordinance 052109, sec. 2, adopted 5/21/09)
(2) Sewer rates.
(A) Definitions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/244
(i) Residential. Residential rates shall apply to single-family and multifamily dwellings,
and mobile home parks; rates for multifamily dwellings and mobile home parks shall be
for each unit.
(ii) Commercial. Commercial rates shall apply to retail, school, light-industrial, office,
church, and similar nonresidential users.
(B) Base commodity rate (0–2,000 gallons).
(i) 3/4" meter (residential): $44.70.
(ii) 3/4" meter (residential-senior): $30.00.
(iii) 3/4" meter (commercial): $57.00.
(iv) 1" meter: $63.10.
(v) 2" meter: $67.80.
(vi) 4" meter: $75.50.
(vii) 6" meter: $86.20.
(C) Commodity rate (over 2,000 gallons) (cost per gallon), unless otherwise specified in
subsection (E) of this subsection: $3.63.
(D) Residential commodity rate for June, July, August and September billing cycles shall be
based upon the average water consumption billed during the billing cycles of December,
January, and February: $3.63.
(E) Commercial commodity rate during the billing cycles of June, July, August and
September:
(i) Usage charge for 2,001 gallons up to 75,000 gallons (cost per gallon): $3.63.
(ii) Usage charge for over 75,001 gallons (cost per gallon): $2.72.
(Ordinance 081709, sec. 2, adopted 8/17/09)
(3) Meter change and meter test fees. No charge will be made for the first meter change or meter
test requested by a customer at a single service connection within any twenty-four-month period. For
each additional meter change or meter test requested by a customer within a twenty-four-month
period that does not result in a finding that the meter over-registered in excess of 1%, a fee shall be
charged to the customer according to the following schedule:
Meter Size Fee
5/8 to 1 inch $15.00
1-1/2 to 2 inch $30.00
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/244
Larger than 2 inch Actual cost of change and
test
(4) Inspection fee for meter verification. If a customer contends that a discrepancy appears in a bill
or meter reading, the superintendent will inspect the meter and verify the reading. An inspection is
free if the superintendent verifies a gross discrepancy or a customer requests not more than one (1)
inspection during any twelve-month period; otherwise the charge is four dollars and fifty cents
($4.50) for inspection.
(5) Builders, developers and contractors; standby service. All builders, developers and contractors
shall submit a request for service connections to the city. Connections are to be made by the city. See
section 13.03.006 of this article for fee. When connection is complete each property owner shall pay
a minimum monthly rate for standby service for water usage only. The rate shall be the same as
specified in subsection (1) of this section.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 2)
Sec. 13.03.004 Billing and meter reading
(a) The utility billing due date for the payment of all bills for service rendered by the city’s waterworks system
shall be monthly, on or before the twentieth (20th) day of each month. Billing for water service begins when the
meter is set. If not paid by the due date, a $15.00 late charge for all payments will be added to the amount due. If
the twentieth (20th) day of the month occurs on a day when the office is closed, the due date will be the
following business day after occurrence. If the payment has not been received fifteen (15) days after the due
date, service will be discontinued for nonpayment, and a reconnect fee will be charged as provided in section
13.03.005 of this article.
(b) All water meters furnished to customers are the property of the city. A customer may not tamper with,
install or remove a water meter.
(c) A customer shall receive water service only when measured through a meter. The director of public works
shall determine the size, type, number and location of connections for meters to be installed. Each meter shall be
read, when possible, once a month, and a bill rendered accordingly. No more than one (1) residential or
commercial establishment shall be connected to one (1) meter, unless a contract for service is approved in
advance by the city council.
(d) A $50.00 fee will be charged for service calls on weekends, on holidays and after regular business hours of
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. This fee will be assessed only for problems originating on a
customer’s service line.
(e) A $30.00 fee will be charged for all returned checks, and any bank fee charged to the city will be charged
directly to the customer who caused the bank fee to be assessed.
(f) A $15.00 fee will be charged for each customer-requested meter re-reading that occurs after the first two
(2) customer-requested meter re-readings in a calendar year (“courtesy re-reads”). If the reading by the city that
prompted the request was incorrect, no fee will be charged to a requesting customer and the service visit will not
be considered as one of the customer’s two courtesy re-reads.
(g) The fees charged for water and sewer services shall be included with the fees charged for collection of
garbage. Failure to pay any one or all fees shall be cause for discontinuance for all city-supplied services until
such fees and penalties are paid in full.
(Ordinance 081706A, sec. 3, adopted 8/17/06)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/244
Sec. 13.03.005 Deposit; connection, disconnection and reconnection fees
(a) All applicants for any combination of utility services, including water service, sewer service and/or refuse
collection service, prior to initiation of said services, shall deposit with the city, as a guarantee of payment of
utility bills, the following amounts for said services:
(1) Owner-occupied residential premises: $80.00.
(2) Leased residential premises: $150.00.
(3) Commercial premises: $125.00.
(b) Applicants also shall pay a nonrefundable connection fee of $30.00 prior to initiation of service for either
water or sewer service, or a nonrefundable connection fee of $30.00 for both water and sewer service.
(c) Meter deposits shall be refunded only when a customer discontinues service and after deducting any
unpaid service balances due the city. No interest shall be paid on meter deposits. A service fee of $30.00 will be
charged if a work order issues to disconnect service due to nonpayment and a city crew member is dispatched to
a customer’s premises for the disconnection of such service. If utility service is discontinued for nonpayment, an
additional nonrefundable reconnection fee of $30.00 shall be paid before service is restored. If a city crew
member is dispatched to a customer’s premises to restore service on a weekend, on a holiday or after regular
business hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, a nonrefundable after-hours service fee of
$50.00 will be charged in addition to the reconnection fee.
(d) If utility service is discontinued for nonpayment three (3) times in a six-month period, payment of an
additional deposit of $100.00, and, if applicable, all reconnection fees and after-hours fees, will be required
before service is restored.
(Ordinance 120706, sec. 2, adopted 12/7/06)
Sec. 13.03.006 Tap fees
(a) Water tap connections.
(1) The water tap connection fee shall be based upon meter size, as follows:
Meter Size Fee Connection
3/4" $750.00
1" $1,333.33
2" $5,333.33
4" $21,333.33
6" $48,000.00
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/244
(2) The water tap connection fee includes all administrative costs for establishing the customer’s
account, the cost of the water meter (and tail piece) equipment, the cost of the labor, material and
equipment for installing the meter and tying into the city’s distribution system, and related, necessary
expenses as determined by the director of public works. It is the customer’s responsibility to have the
building line tied into the meter.
(3) Any extraordinary costs associated with the installation of a meter larger than 3/4", e.g.,
pavement cuts, pavement replacement, road bores, etc., shall be paid for by the customer prior to the
customer’s connection to the water distribution system, in accordance with a schedule of pricing and
rates approved by the city council. Service will not be let until all fees and related construction costs
charged to the customer have been paid in full.
(b) Sewer tap connections.
(1) The sewer tap connection fee shall be based upon meter size, as follows:
Meter Size Fee Connection
3/4" $750.00
1" $1,333.33
2" $5,333.33
4" $21,333.33
6" $48,000.00
(2) The sewer tap connection fee includes all administrative costs for establishing the customer’s
account, the cost of the sewer tap equipment, the cost of the labor, material and equipment for
installing the tap and tying into the city’s collection system, and related, necessary expenses as
determined by the director of public works. It is the customer’s responsibility to have the house line
tied into the tap.
(3) Any extraordinary costs associated with the installation of a tap larger than 3/4", e.g., pavement
cuts, pavement replacement, road bores, etc., shall be paid for by the customer prior to the customer’s
connection to the collection system, in accordance with a schedule of pricing and rates approved by
the city council. Service will not be let until all fees and related construction costs charged to the
customer have been paid in full.
(Ordinance 080510, sec. 2, adopted 8/5/10)
Sec. 13.03.007 Contracts for wholesale purchase
No water or sewer service shall be provided at rates other than as prescribed in this article except by written
contract approved by the city council. (1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 6)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/244
Sec. 13.03.008 Maintenance of private lines
All private water and sewer service lines shall be maintained by and at the expense of the owner. (1982 Code,
ch. 11, sec. 7)
Sec. 13.03.009 Disconnection or discontinuance of service
(a) Applicability. All customers and qualified service applicants of the city’s water or sewer system, including
those customers and qualified service applicants located inside and outside the corporate limits of the city, are
subject to this section.
(b) Reasons for disconnection. The city may disconnect water or sewer service for the following reasons:
(1) Failure to comply with the city’s utility payment provisions, deposits, and fee requirements;
(2) Violation of the city’s ordinances related to the provision of water or sewer service, including
but not limited to this article of the city code, the city’s plumbing code, and cross-contamination and
backflow prevention requirements;
(3) Operation of nonstandard equipment;
(4) If a known and dangerous condition related to the type of service provided exists;
(5) If the customer’s use is not or is no longer a reasonable consumer use, or if the use threatens or
endangers the city’s ability to provide continuous and adequate service;
(6) Non-use by the customer;
(7) Use of the city’s water or sewer service by a person other than the city’s customer or the
customer’s tenant or lessee;
(8) If the customer fails to comply with the terms of any written agreements between the city and
the customer concerning the provision of service;
(9) If the customer fails to comply with the requirements of section 13.03.012 of this article;
(10) If the disconnection or discontinuance is in the best interest of the city;
(11) Unauthorized re-metering, redistribution, sale, storing or resale of service, extension, service
connection or reconnection, other disposition of service, meter tampering, other alteration, theft or
diversion of service, except as otherwise provided by this code; and
(12) Other similar reasons in the usual course of business.
(c) Conditions for resuming service. If water or sewer service has been disconnected for reasons identified in
this section or other city ordinances, neither water nor sewer service shall be resumed for the same customer
until the violation has been corrected, the dangerous condition eliminated, and payment of the customer’s utility
bill has been made in full, including any late charge, reconnection or other related fees, and any and all criminal
or civil fines assessed against the water or sewer customer by the city for violation of this article or other
ordinances related to the provision of water or sewer service.
(d) Authority to disconnect water service for nonpayment of sewer charges. The city may disconnect a
customer’s water service for nonpayment of the customer’s sewer service.
(e) Temporary discontinuance of service. The city hereby reserves the right to discontinue service at any time
without notice to any and all customers when such discontinuance becomes necessary to repair the system, or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/244
any part of the system, to protect the integrity of the system, or to ensure safe drinking water is provided.
(Ordinance 031606-A, sec. 2, adopted 3/16/06)
Sec. 13.03.010 Tampering with water meter; turning water on or off
It shall be unlawful for any person other than those authorized by the city to connect, disconnect, move or
tamper with any meter; or to turn on or off the water at the curb cock, valve or meter; or to open or tamper with
any meter box. (1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 9)
Sec. 13.03.011 Use of fire hydrants
Fire hydrants shall be provided for the sole purpose of use in extinguishing fires and shall be used or opened
only by the water and fire departments or such persons as may be given authority by the mayor. (1982 Code, ch.
11, sec. 10)
Sec. 13.03.012 Extension policy; service outside city; application requirements
(a) Definitions. Words and phrases used in this section shall have the meanings set forth in this subsection.
Words and phrases that are not defined in this section but are defined in this code or other ordinances of the city
shall be given the meaning set forth in those code provisions or ordinances. Other words and phrases shall be
given their common ordinary meanings unless the context requires otherwise. Headings and captions are for
reference purposes only, and shall not be used in the interpretation of this section.
City council. The city council of the City of Crandall.
City manager. The city manager of the City of Crandall.
City’s water or sewer system. The water or sewer facilities and mains used in the provision of retail water or
sewer service by the city.
Customer. Any person provided water or sewer services by the city.
Director. The public works director of the city.
Person. An individual, corporation, organization, government or political subdivision or agency, business trust,
partnership, association, or any other legal entity.
Qualified service applicant. A person that has met all the applicable requirements as outlined in the city’s Code
of Ordinances in order to obtain water or sewer service within the city’s service area.
Retail water or sewer service. Water or sewer service provided by the city directly to the ultimate retail
consumer.
Service area. The area served by or certificated to the city for provision of retail water or sewer service.
(b) Application requirements.
(1) All persons desiring from the city retail water or sewer service or desiring to transfer service
from a service location to another service location shall file an application with the city at the city
office (city hall building), 110 S. Main St., Crandall, Texas.
(2) The city shall provide water and sewer service to only qualified service applicants, and no
water or sewer service application shall be accepted by the city manager unless the application is
submitted by a qualified service applicant.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/244
(3) A person is a qualified service applicant if the person has met the following conditions:
(A) The person has submitted a completed and signed water or sewer service application to
the city manager.
(B) If applicable, the person has complied with the city’s development standards to obtain
retail water or sewer service from the city for the property.
(C) For persons required to obtain a building permit from the city, the person has paid all the
required building permitting fees.
(D) For persons desiring water or sewer service for property or service connections located
outside the city limits, the person has complied with the requirements of subsection (c) of this
section.
(E) The person has paid all applicable charges and fees prescribed by the city’s fee schedules
and Code of Ordinances, including all tapping and metering charges, all security deposits, and
plumbing code inspection fees.
(F) The person requesting service is the owner of the property, is an authorized agent of the
owner of the property, or is a lessee or tenant of the property.
(G) The person has submitted proof of ownership of the property or proof that he or she is the
authorized agent of the owner of the property, and has submitted a certificate indicating that all
taxes have been paid on the property. For rental properties, the person has submitted the rental
contract or agreement.
(H) The person has complied with the city’s extension of water and sewer facilities
requirements, if necessary, as provided by subsection (d) of this section.
(I) The person has paid all the pro rata charges as required by the city.
(J) Service to the property will comply with the city’s plumbing code and crosscontamination
and backflow prevention requirements.
(K) Any known and dangerous condition related to the type of service to be provided at the
property has been corrected.
(4) The city may refuse service to a person if, at the time of the application, the person is indebted
to another utility for the same kind of service for which the person has applied from the city.
However, if the person is disputing the indebtedness and is otherwise in compliance with the
depository requirements, service shall not be refused.
(5) No application shall be approved unless the city manager determines that the requested service
is for reasonable consumer uses and will not threaten or endanger the city’s water or sewer system so
as to threaten the city’s ability to provide continuous and adequate service.
(6) Any person denied service under this section may request review of the city manager’s
decision. The request shall be made to the city manager, who shall place the request before the city
council. The city manager and the city council may request additional information of the person
denied service. The city council may grant or deny service, after review of the request, in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 031606-A, sec. 3, adopted 3/16/06)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/244
(7) Real estate agents and brokers desiring to establish temporary water and sewer service at a
residential location subject to a listing agreement for sale shall comply with the following process:
(A) The real estate agent or broker shall submit an application for service to the city, which
application shall be processed by the city in the customary manner. The agent or broker shall
update information in the application as necessary to ensure that the city has correct contact
information.
(B) An approved application may be retained for use at additional addresses where the agent
or broker has a current listing agreement.
(C) The agent or broker shall pay the current applicable deposit for each address where
temporary service is desired and approved.
(D) Water and sewer service for each address shall be billed to the agent or broker, as a
separate item on the same bill, in the same manner and frequency as individual customer
accounts.
(E) Failure of the agent or broker to make timely payment for service on one or more
addresses on the account may result in disconnection of service at all addresses on the account
and reconnection of service shall be subject to a reconnection fee at each address.
(Ordinance 050610A, sec. 2, adopted 5/6/10)
(c) Service outside city.
(1) This subsection applies to any retail water or sewer service provided and requested to be
provided by the city to premises which are located, in whole or in part, outside the corporate limits of
the city.
(2) The city shall not provide sewer service to any property located outside the corporate limits of
the city. The city council may grant a variance to this subsection for persons requesting a tap to a city
sewer interceptor line located outside the corporate limits of the city. A variance to this subsection
may not be granted to any person who is required to extend facilities as provided by subsection (d) of
this section, who is required to comply with the city’s development standards and requirements, or
who is located outside the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
(3) No retail water service shall be extended or provided by the city for consumption at premises
located in whole or part outside the corporate limits of the city unless the person desiring such service
has filed an application with the city manager, and the city manager, or the city council in the case of
an appeal under subsection (b) of this section, has determined the application meets the requirements
of subsections (b) and (d) and approved such application, and the person is a qualified service
applicant as defined by subsection (b) of this section. No water service shall be extended to any
property located outside the area included in the city’s water certificate of convenience and necessity
without city council approval.
(4) All customers of the city’s water or sewer system, including those customers located in whole
or in part outside the corporate limits of the city, shall comply with the city’s cross-contamination and
backflow prevention requirements. The city may inspect the premises served by the city’s water or
sewer system to ensure compliance with the city’s cross-contamination and backflow prevention
requirements. The city may disconnect or suspend service to the premises in the event the customer
or any other person at the premises to be served fails to comply with the city’s cross-contamination
and backflow prevention requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/244
(5) Any customer receiving retail water service outside the city limits may not maintain connection
to the city’s water system or connect to the city’s water system unless the customer is in compliance
with the applicable city ordinances. Customers receiving water must at all times be in compliance
with state law, this article of the city’s Code of Ordinances, the city’s plumbing code and other
applicable city ordinances relating to the provision of water service. Any customer failing to be in
compliance or refusing reasonable requests for inspection of facilities connected or to be connected
to the city’s utilities may be disconnected or declined services.
(6) Existing outside-city customers of the city on the effective date of this section are not required
to file an application. However, after the effective date of this section, all customers seeking to
transfer water service from one service connection to another service connection located outside the
city, all persons seeking new water service at an existing service connection located outside the city,
and all persons seeking new water service at a new service connection located outside the city shall
file an application and otherwise comply with this subsection, as well as subsection (d) of this
section.
(7) The application for service to property located outside the corporate limits of the city shall
include the following statement:
THE APPLICANT UNDERSTANDS AND AGREES THAT ALL ORDINANCES OF
THE CITY (AS NOW WRITTEN AND AS HEREAFTER AMENDED) WHICH
RELATE TO WATER SERVICE OR TO PLUMBING MATTERS, INCLUDING BUT
NOT LIMITED TO CROSS-CONNECTION AND BACKFLOW PROTECTION
REQUIREMENTS, AND INCLUDING ORDINANCES THAT IMPOSE CRIMINAL
SANCTIONS, APPLY TO WATER SERVICES PROVIDED BY THE CITY TO
PREMISES OUTSIDE OF THE CITY’S CORPORATE LIMITS. THE APPLICANT
ALSO UNDERSTANDS AND AGREES THAT THE CITY MAY SUSPEND OR
DISCONNECT SUCH SERVICES IN THE EVENT THAT THE APPLICANT OR ANY
OTHER PERSON AT THE PREMISES TO BE SERVED FAILS TO COMPLY WITH
SUCH ORDINANCES.
(8) No water service application shall be accepted by the city manager unless a complete and
signed application is submitted to the city manager that meets the requirements described in
subsection (b) of this section, and the person has complied with the following requirements:
(A) The person has paid the prescribed plumbing code inspection fees and has presented to
the city manager written evidence from the appropriate plumbing official that the plumbing
system at the premises to be served has been inspected by the city and is in compliance with the
city’s plumbing code; and
(B) The person has complied with the city’s extension of utility facilities requirements as
provided by subsection (d) of this section, if necessary.
(d) Extension policy.
(1) This section applies to all requests for water or sewer service in the city’s water service area.
(2) Upon the approval of an application and upon payment of all applicable fees and charges due
under this section and at the expense of the applicant, the city may extend all necessary water and
sewer facilities and mains to the property plus the distance across the entire frontage necessary to
provide the service upon the premises for which the application has been made.
(A) The applicant shall pay the estimated cost to extend the water and sewer facilities prior to
commencement of construction. If the actual cost to extend the water or sewer mains and
facilities is greater than the estimated costs, the applicant shall pay the city the difference
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/244
between the actual and estimated costs upon completion of the extension project. The applicant
is not qualified to receive service until the total cost to the city for the extension project is paid
to the city. If the estimated cost to extend the water or sewer mains or facilities is greater than
the actual cost, the city shall reimburse the applicant the difference between the actual and
estimated costs upon completion of the extension project.
(B) The owners of all intervening property served by such extension shall be required to pay
the pro rata charges at such time as their property is connected to the city’s water and sewer
system.
(3) Upon approval of the city, the property owner or person requesting extension of water or sewer
facilities or mains to his or her property may extend the mains or facilities by a competent and
reputable contractor. In this case, the facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the Technical Construction Standards and Specifications (TCSS), and detailed engineering plans for
the improvements complying with the city’s TCSS for public works construction shall be drawn by a
registered professional engineer and approved by the city manager prior to any construction. The
engineering plans shall be reviewed by the city. Construction on the water or sewer facilities or main
may not commence prior to the approval of the plans by the city. The construction shall be inspected
and approved by the city prior to final acceptance by the city.
(4) The sizes of the mains proposed to be extended shall be determined by the city in conformance
with the then-current comprehensive plan, utility/infrastructure plans, and development standards.
The city may elect to oversize facilities above that which is required by the development standards.
The total costs of extending the mains to and across the applicant’s property shall be borne solely by
the applicant, with the following exceptions:
(A) If the city elects to oversize facilities, the city shall refund the applicant the difference
between the cost of the oversized main and the main the applicant was required to construct by
the city.
(B) The city also will pay to the original applicant pro rata charges as received from
subsequent applicants who desire to connect to the facilities in accordance with the provisions
of the city’s policy(s) regarding the same, and subject to the city’s cost participation policies on
oversized improvements.
(5) In no event will the city be required to make extensions or participate in the cost of
improvements under the provisions of this section if there are no funds available or if, at the
discretion of the city council, the extension or improvement may not be practical, or otherwise
warranted, or is for an unreasonable consumer use.
(6) All water and sewer utilities are owned and operated by the city. Any extensions of the city’s
water and sewer facilities made by a qualified service applicant, after inspection and acceptance by
the city, shall be owned by the city.
(7) Where recorded public utility easements do not exist on the property of a person who is
requesting water or sewer service from the city, the person shall grant permanent recorded utility and
drainage easements. A minimum width for city utility and drainage easements shall be fifteen feet
(15') unless otherwise established by the city manager. The easements required by this subsection
shall comply with the city’s development standards, and, at a minimum, shall extend along all
roadway frontages of the property and shall parallel as closely as possible the street line frontage.
Failure to grant the required easements shall result in the denial of service.
(Ordinance 031606-A, sec. 3, adopted 3/16/06)
Sec. 13.03.013 Connection required
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/244
Where water and sewer service is deemed by the city to be available, it shall be required that all citizens owning
buildings and residences connect to said systems. Said connections shall be made after payment of applicable tap
fees and connection shall be made in accordance with city plumbing standards and the provisions of this article.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 12)
Sec. 13.03.014 Private sewage facilities
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 13.03.013, the building sewer
shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of the department of
state health services construction standards for private sewage facilities. (1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 13)
Secs. 13.03.015–13.03.060 Reserved
Division 2. Water Main Extensions in Certificated Area
Sec. 13.03.061 Definitions
All words used in this division shall carry their customary meanings except where specifically defined as
follows:
Capacity. Capacity shall refer to the quantity of water that can be distributed through certain size water mains.
Certificated area. The geographic area defined by the Certificate of Convenience and Necessity Number 11295,
issued by the state commission on environmental quality and owned by the city, excluding the area within the
city's extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Consumer. The actual user of water from a city water main connection.
Frontage. Frontage shall be determined by the side of the lot on which the legal address is located.
Off-site improvements. Water mains totally outside of a tract of land to be served by the water main or
subdivided and developed for resale.
On-site improvements. Water mains totally within or adjacent to a tract of land to be served by the water main or
subdivided and developed for resale.
Property owner. The record title holder of premises served with or to be served with water service from a
connection by the city.
Pro rata. A charge made against the consumer or property owner to pay for the cost of installation, extension or
any related construction of water service as provided for in this division.
Sec. 13.03.062 Pro rata construction charges
(a) On and after the passage of this division, there shall be a service charge due on all property in the
certificated area to which water lines are extended and construction completed and accepted by the city. This
charge shall be called the “pro rata” charge for water construction. The pro rata charge shall represent a complete
cost or portion of the costs of providing water to serve the property on which the pro rata charge is paid.
(b) The city may extend water mains in the streets and alleys, or easements, within the city limits, its
extraterritorial jurisdiction and certificated area to permit connections by those desiring water and services. A
charge, known as a “pro rata charge” or “pro rata fee,” shall be made against each lot or tract of land, and the
owner thereof, whose property shall be hereafter connected with any water mains in the city, shall pay a pro rata
charge based on a schedule of rates prepared by the city manager and approved by resolution or other action of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/244
the city council. Such a schedule of rates shall be a part of this division for all purposes when approved by
resolution or other action of the city council.
(c) In addition to the pro rata charge on water mains, the property owner must pay the connection charges as
established by the city. Pro rata construction charges are not impact fees as defined in chapter 395 of the Texas
Local Government Code.
Sec. 13.03.063 Extension of water lines to individual property owners (as distinguished from
subdivision)
(a) This section applies to a request for water service in the certificated area from a property owner of a given
lot or tract of land that exists on the date of the adoption of this division. A request for water service in the
certificated area to any subdivision of land that occurs after the date of this division is controlled by section
13.03.064.
(b) Upon request of a property owner of a given lot or tract of land within the certificated area, accompanied
by the payment of the charges due under this division, the city may extend all necessary water mains, including
valves, hydrants, and appurtenances, a distance of 100 feet, plus the distance across the frontage necessary to
provide the service for one single-family residence upon the premises for which application has been made. The
owners of all intervening property served by such extension shall be required to pay the pro rata charges at such
time as their property is connected to the mains. The applicant shall pay the pro rata charges on all property
owned by the applicant and which is served by the requested extension.
(c) Upon approval of the city, the property owner requesting extension of water mains to his or her property
may extend the mains by a competent and reputable contractor. In this case, detailed construction plans for the
improvements complying with the city's technical construction standards and specifications for public works
construction shall be drawn by a registered professional engineer and approved by the city prior to any
construction. The construction shall be inspected and approved prior to final acceptance by the city. The sizes of
the mains shall be determined by the city in conformance with the water utility infrastructure plan. The total
costs of extending the mains to and across the owner's property shall be borne solely by the owner, with the
following exceptions:
(1) Upon approval and acceptance of the system by the city, on any mains larger than twelve-inch
(12"), the city may elect to participate in the cost by refunding to the owner the difference between
the cost of the oversized main and the twelve-inch (12") main.
(2) The city also will pay to the original developer pro rata charges as received from applicants
who desire to connect to the mains, with the total payment not to exceed the amount of the original
developer's cost of off-site improvements.
(3) The maximum period of time for the pro rata reimbursement to the original developer for the
off-site mains shall not exceed ten (10) years. The developer shall have no claim against the city for
any expenses not reimbursed and any pro rata charges not received within ten (10) years, nor any fees
received after ten (10) years.
Sec. 13.03.064 Extension of water lines to subdivisions and within subdivisions
(a) Applicability. This section applies to a request for water service in the certificated area from a property
owner of a given lot created or to any subdivision of land that occurs after the date of this division. Such lot and
subdivision shall comply with the county subdivision regulations except for the regulations provided herein for
construction, connection and payment for water services.
(b) Extension to subdivisions. Upon approval of the city, the property owner requesting extension of water
mains to his or her property may extend the mains by a competent and reputable contractor. In this case, detailed
construction plans for the improvements complying with the city's technical construction standards and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/244
specifications for public works construction shall be drawn by a registered professional engineer and approved
by the city prior to any construction. The construction shall be inspected and approved prior to final acceptance
by the city. The sizes of the mains shall be determined by the city in conformance with the water utility
infrastructure plan. The costs of approach mains fronting on property not owned by the developer
but required and necessary to connect property to be developed shall be borne solely by the developer. The total
costs of extending the mains to and across the owner's property shall be borne solely by the owner, with the
following exceptions:
(1) Upon approval and acceptance of the system by the city, on any mains larger than twelve-inch
(12"), the city may elect to participate in the cost by refunding to the owner the difference between
the cost of the oversized main and the twelve-inch (12") main.
(2) The city also will pay to the subdivider pro rata charges received from applicants who desire to
tie into the line, with the total payment not to exceed the amount of the subdivider's cost of the offsite
improvements.
(3) The maximum period of time for the pro rata reimbursement to the subdivider for the off-site
mains shall not exceed ten (10) years. The subdivider shall have no claim against the city for any
expenses not reimbursed and any pro rata charges not received within ten (10) years, nor any fees
received after ten (10) years.
(c) Oversized mains within subdivisions. Detailed construction plans for the improvements complying with
the city's technical construction standards and specifications for public works construction shall be drawn by a
registered professional engineer and approved by the city prior to any construction. The construction shall be
inspected and approved prior to final acceptance by the city. The sizes of the mains shall be determined by the
city in conformance with the water utility infrastructure plan. Developers of subdivisions shall bear the entire
costs of water systems within their subdivisions, except that, on any mains larger than twelve-inch (12"), the city
may elect to participate in the cost and refund the difference between the cost of the oversized main and the
twelve-inch (12") main. Adequate size of such water mains shall be determined by the city, and its decision will
be final.
Sec. 13.03.065 City not required to make extensions or participate in cost
In no event will the city be required to make extensions or participate in the cost of improvements under the
provisions of this division if there are no funds available or if, at the discretion of the city, the extension or
improvements may not be practical or otherwise warranted.
Sec. 13.03.066 Methods of enforcing payment of pro rata or improvement costs
Nothing herein shall be deemed in any way to be an exclusive method of enforcing the payment of the pro rata
or improvement costs against the consumers, subdivider, and property owners, and this procedure shall not be
deemed in any manner to be a waiver of the city's right to validly assess the property owners, subdividers, and/or
consumers concerned for cost of the installation of water mains and to fix and enforce liens against said
property, all of which may be done as provided by ordinance in the manner prescribed by law.
(Ordinance 040501A, sec. 2, adopted 4/5/01)
ARTICLE 13.04 PRIVATE WATER WELLS*
Sec. 13.04.001 Requirements for new wells
(a) Required permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a new private water well without first
applying for and obtaining all necessary building permits from the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/244
(b) Location and drilling requirements. A new private water well shall be drilled by a licensed water well
driller pursuant to the administrative rules of the state department of licensing and regulation, 16 Texas
Administrative Code, chapter 76, as amended, and/or other applicable regulatory agencies.
Sec. 13.04.002 Requirements for existing wells
(a) The owner or resident of property on which a private water well is located as of the effective date of this
article must register the preexisting water well with the city within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this
article.
(b) A private water well shall not be used as a water supply for human consumption within the statesanctioned
service area authorized by the city’s certificate of convenience and necessity.
(c) If the owner or resident of property on which a private water well is located as of the effective date of this
article is using water from a private well for household use or human consumption and the well is directly
connected to the city’s water distribution system, then the owner or resident of such property shall immediately
disconnect or cause to be disconnected the private water well from the city’s water distribution system.
(d) There shall be no direct or indirect connection of a private water well and the city’s public water
distribution system after the effective date of this article.
Sec. 13.04.003 Construction requirements
(a) Maximum well casing diameter. A private water well shall have a maximum casing size of six and onehalf
inches (6-1/2") O.D. (outside diameter).
(b) Installation of approved backflow prevention device. Prior to the connection and use of a private water
well, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on the side of the meter facing the house, in a
separate box. Said device shall be no closer than twenty-four inches (24") to the water meter.
Sec. 13.04.004 Exemptions
Except for the backflow prevention device requirements contained in section 13.04.003(b), the owner of a
private water well constructed prior to the effective date of this article shall be exempt from the construction
requirements set forth herein.
(Ordinance 101906, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/06)
ARTICLE 13.05 CROSS-CONNECTIONS*
Sec. 13.05.001 Definitions
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. If a word or term used in this article is not contained in the following list, its definition, or
other technical terms used, shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the most current edition of the Manual
of Cross-Connection Control, published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research, University of Southern California.
Air gap. A physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or
appurtenance and an open or non-pressure-receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An approved airgap
separation shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow
rim of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device, which in no case shall be less than one inch.
Approved backflow prevention assembly or backflow assembly or assembly. An assembly to counteract
backpressure or prevent backsiphonage. This assembly must appear on the list of approved assemblies issued by
the University of Southern California’s Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/244
Auxiliary supply. Any water source or system other than the public water system that may be available in the
building or on the property.
Backflow. The flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases,
or substances into the city’s water system.
Backpressure. Any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply
pressure at the point of consideration that would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of
flow and the introduction of fluids, mixtures or substances from any source other than the intended source.
Backsiphonage. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable
water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in
the potable water supply system.
Boresight or boresight to daylight. Providing adequate drainage for backflow prevention assemblies installed in
vaults through the use of an unobstructed drainpipe.
City. The City of Crandall, Texas, or its duly authorized designee.
City manager. The city’s appointed city manager or his designee.
Contamination. The entry into or presence in a public water supply system of any substance that may be
deleterious to health and/or quality of the water.
Cross-connection. Any physical arrangement where a potable water supply is connected, directly or indirectly
(actual or potential), with any other nonpotable water system, used water system or auxiliary water supply,
sewer, drain, conduit, swimming pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture, swamp cooler, air conditioner unit,
fire protection system, or any other assembly that contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage, or other
liquid of unknown or unsafe quality that may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water system
as a result of backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover
assemblies, or other temporary or permanent assemblies through which, or because of which, backflow may
occur are considered to be cross-connections.
Cross-connection control inspector. A person who is a certified inspector recognized and approved by the city.
Customer. Any person who contracts with the city for water service.
Customer service inspector or CSI. An individual who has fulfilled the requirements set out in the state
commission on environmental quality Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems, as amended.
Degree of hazard. The low or high hazard classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential crossconnections.
Designee. A person appointed, authorized or approved by the city.
Double-check valve backflow prevention assembly or double-check assembly or double-check. An assembly that
consists of two independently operating check valves that are spring-loaded or weighted. The assembly comes
complete with a shut-off valve on each side of the checks, as well as test cocks to test the checks for tightness.
Health hazard. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable
water system or the consumer’s potable water system that would be a danger to health.
High hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that potentially could allow a
substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable water supply.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/244
Low hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential cross-connection that potentially could allow a
substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to one’s health to backflow into the potable water supply.
Mobile unit. Any vehicle, tank or trailer that uses water from the city’s public water supply and that may have
the potential to introduce contaminants or pollutants into a potable water system. They include, but are not
limited to, carpet-cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles, landscape/lawn care vehicles, pest control vehicles,
and portable power washers.
Nonresidential use. All uses not specifically included in “residential uses” defined in this section.
Plumbing code. The current adopted plumbing code and amendments adopted by the city.
Plumbing hazard. An internal or plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer’s potable water system that may
be either a pollutional or a contamination-type hazard.
Plumbing inspector. A person who is a licensed plumbing inspector recognized by the city.
Point-of-use isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer’s water system at the point at
which the actual or potential cross-connection exists.
Pollutional hazard. An actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability
of the public or the consumer’s potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard,
as defined. The maximum degree of intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded
under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to
the system or its appurtenances.
Potable water supply. Any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use.
Premise or premises. Any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile
structures, and structures located on it.
Premises isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water
system and the water user.
Pressure vacuum breaker assembly or PVBA or PVB. An assembly consisting of a spring-loaded check valve
loaded to the closed position and an independently operating air inlet valve loaded to the open position, and
installed as a unit with and between two shut-off valves and with suitable connections for testing.
Public water system or system. Any public or privately owned water system that supplies water for public
domestic use. The system must meet all the health requirements set forth by the state commission on
environmental quality. The system will include all services, reservoirs, facilities and any equipment used in the
process of producing, treating, storing or conveying water for public consumption.
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure principle assembly or RP
assembly or RP. An assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a
hydraulically operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check
valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located test cocks
and tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of the assembly.
Residential use. Includes single-family dwellings, duplexes, multiplex housing and apartments where the
individual units are each on a separate meter, or in cases where two or more units are served by one meter.
Service connection. The point of delivery at which the public water system connects to the private supply line or
lateral.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/244
System hazard. An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or
consumer’s potable water supply or of a pollution or contamination that would have a detrimental effect on the
quality of the potable water in the system.
TCEQ. The state commission on environmental quality or its succeeding state governmental agency.
Tester. A person who has met all state commission on environmental quality requirements to be a certified
backflow prevention assembly technician.
(1) A general tester means a person who is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies, except
on firelines.
(2) A fireline tester means a person who is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on
firelines. The state fire marshal’s office requires that a person performing maintenance on firelines
must be employed by an approved fireline contractor.
Thermal expansion. The increase in pressure caused by the heating or rise in the temperature of water. When a
system becomes closed due to the installation of a backflow assembly, this problem can be acute.
Used water. Water supplied by a public water system to a water user’s system after it has passed through the
service connection.
Sec. 13.05.002 Purpose
Pursuant to title 30, Texas Administrative Code, sections 290.44 and 290.46, it is the responsibility of the city to
protect its drinking water supply by instituting and enforcing a cross-connection program. The purpose of this
article, therefore, is to comply with the above-cited regulatory requirements and to protect the water supply of
the city from contamination or pollution due to any cross-connections.
Sec. 13.05.003 Backflow prevention assembly requirements
A certified cross-connection inspector employed by or under contract with the city shall determine the type and
location of backflow assembly and enclosure to be installed within the city’s water service area. The assembly
shall be required in each of the following circumstances, and subject to the following requirements as indicated,
but the inspector is in no way limited to the following circumstances:
(1) When the nature and extent of any activity at the premises, or materials used in connection with
any activity at the premises, or materials stored at the premises, could contaminate or pollute the
potable water supply.
(2) When the premises have one or more cross-connections as that term is defined in this article.
(3) When internal cross-connections are present that are not correctable.
(4) When intricate plumbing arrangements are present that make it impractical to ascertain whether
cross-connections exist.
(5) When the premises have a repeated history of cross-connections being established or
reestablished.
(6) When entry to the premises is restricted so that inspections for cross-connections cannot be
made with sufficient frequency to assure that cross-connections do not exist.
(7) When materials are being used such that, if backflow should occur, a health hazard could result.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/244
(8) When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed by an inspector to
be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations.
(9) When an appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been filed with the city
manager or his designee.
(10) All new commercial and industrial construction will be required to install a backflow
assembly at the meter. This assembly will be a minimum of a double-check or commensurate with
the degree of hazard as determined by the city’s designated cross-connection inspector.
(11) An approved backflow assembly will be required to be installed at the service connection of
new residential services if it has been determined by a cross-connection inspector that an actual or
potential cross-connection exists. This assembly will be commensurate with the degree of actual or
potential hazard.
(12) When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of such building is
not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed at the service connection to provide protection of the public water supply in the event of the
most hazardous use of the building.
(13) Any used water return system that has received approval from the city manager or his
designee.
(14) If a point-of-use assembly has not been tested or repaired as required by this article, the
installation of a reduced pressure principle assembly will be required at the service connection.
(15) If a cross-connection inspector or the city’s designated inspector determines that additions or
rearrangements have been made to the plumbing system without the proper permits as required by the
city’s current plumbing code, premises isolation shall be required.
(16) All multi-story buildings or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank.
(17) Retrofitting shall be required on all high hazard connections, landscape irrigation systems and
wherever else the city manager or his designee deems retrofitting necessary.
(18) An approved double detector check valve assembly shall be the minimum protection on all
fire sprinkler systems. An RP assembly shall be installed if any solution other than the potable water
can be introduced into the sprinkler system. Retrofitting shall be required on all systems, and
wherever an inspector deems necessary.
(19) All lawn irrigation systems, commercial, industrial and residential, shall have a minimum of a
double check assembly. An RP assembly will be required if any solution or any other source of
supply is used or if it is deemed necessary by an inspector.
(20) All auxiliary water supplies.
Sec. 13.05.004 Mobile units
(a) A person who owns or operates any vehicle that uses water from the city’s public water system shall obtain
a use permit from the city manager or his designee before accessing the public water system. The city manager
or his designee may require a fixed air gap or a backflow assembly commensurate with the degree of hazard
mounted either on the vehicle or piping.
(b) The failure of the owner or operator of the vehicle to comply with this article shall be grounds for the city
to revoke any permit or license issued under the city’s Code of Ordinances to operate the vehicle or the business
for which such vehicle is used.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/244
(c) The city manager or his designee may deny a permit to any person who is not in compliance with this
article or who has a history of violating the requirements of this article.
(d) All assemblies used to protect the water supply when using a mobile unit must abide by the maintenance
and testing sections of this article.
Sec. 13.05.005 Multiple service connections
Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply shall have a backflow assembly at
each service connection to that premises. Each assembly shall be commensurate with the degree of the highest
potential hazard on that premises.
Sec. 13.05.006 Compliance with plumbing code
As a condition of water service, customers shall install, maintain, and operate their piping and plumbing systems
in accordance with the plumbing code. If there is a conflict between this article and the plumbing code, the more
restrictive provision shall apply.
Sec. 13.05.007 Thermal expansion
It is the responsibility of the property owner to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion if a closed system
has been created by the installation of a backflow assembly.
Sec. 13.05.008 Pressure loss
Any water pressure drop caused by the installation of a backflow assembly shall not be the responsibility of the
city. The city may give reasonable assistance to a property owner regarding information on adequate sizing of
assemblies and proper plumbing practices to provide for required pressure and flows.
Sec. 13.05.009 Residential service connections
Any residential property which has been determined to have an actual or potential cross-connection shall be
equipped with an approved backflow prevention assembly installed in accordance with this article.
Sec. 13.05.010 Customer service inspections
(a) Pursuant to TCEQ water system regulations, a customer service inspection for cross-connection control
shall be completed by the city prior to providing continuous water service in each of the following
circumstances:
(1) Water service to a newly constructed facility or previously existing premises.
(2) After any material improvement to a building(s) or premises.
(3) Any correction or addition to the plumbing of any facility or premises served by the public
water system of the city.
(4) The regulatory authority deems it necessary.
(b) Permanent water service shall not be supplied to a new construction facility(ies) until after the customer
service inspection is completed.
Sec. 13.05.011 Certification of inspectors and testers
(a) Certification of cross-connection inspectors. Inspectors performing cross-connection control duties within
the city must be approved by the city manager or his designee and shall meet the following requirements:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/244
(1) Be employed by or under contract with the city;
(2) Attend a cross-connection control inspector certification-training course approved by the city.
(b) Certification of backflow prevention assembly testers.
(1) All backflow assembly testers operating within the city shall be certified in accordance with all
applicable regulations of TCEQ. No person shall operate as a backflow prevention assembly tester
within the city without first being annually registered with the city manager or his designee.
(2) At the time of registration or renewal or upon the city manager’s or his designee’s request, each
person certified as a backflow prevention assembly tester shall furnish evidence to show that he/she
is insured and bonded to perform services on private property, and has current required licenses.
(3) Persons certified as backflow prevention assembly testers shall meet the following
requirements:
(A) Hold a TCEQ-approved certification;
(B) Receive confined-space entry training certification;
(C) Provide proof of general commercial liability insurance and automobile insurance; and
(D) Provide proof of assembly testing gauge calibration.
Sec. 13.05.012 Certified backflow prevention assembly tester responsibilities
(a) No certified backflow assembly tester shall operate within the city without first registering with the city
manager or his designee.
(b) A registration shall remain in effect provided:
(1) The tester maintains eligibility for registration and certification as defined in this article;
(2) The tester tests a minimum of 15 assemblies a year in the state;
(3) The tester attends and successfully completes a recertification training course every three years;
and
(4) Registration is not revoked by the city manager or his designee.
(c) Upon recertifying, a tester shall renew his/her registration with the city manager or his designee. If a
certification remains expired for a period of one year, the tester shall reestablish registration eligibility.
(d) Each applicant for registration shall:
(1) Provide proof of current certification that was issued within 60 days of the date of registration,
or provide current test reports with proof of testing in the state within 60 days prior to registration.
(2) Provide evidence to the city manager or his designee to establish that the applicant has
available the necessary tools and equipment to properly test backflow prevention assemblies.
(3) Provide evidence to the city manager or his designee that the applicant has successfully
completed “Permit Confined-Space Entry Training” as specified by Federal Occupational Safety and
Health Agency regulations, 29 CFR 1910.146, as amended.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/244
(4) Submit a list identifying all test gauges by the name of the manufacturer, model number, and
the serial numbers of each gauge that will be used in testing backflow prevention assemblies.
(e) A registered backflow prevention assembly tester:
(1) Shall annually have each recorded test kit tested for accuracy and calibrated according to
TCEQ regulations, and submit a copy of the test results at the time of registration or renewal.
(2) Shall perform competent and accurate certifications of each backflow prevention assembly
tested, and submit complete reports thereof to the city manager or his designee.
(3) Shall list registered serial numbers of test gauges on tests and maintenance reports prior to
submitting them to the city manager or his designee.
(4) Shall not change the design or operation characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly.
(5) Shall submit to the city the original test form the next business day after testing.
(6) Shall provide a copy of the completed test report to the property owners and/or persons in
charge of the premises within 15 days after testing.
(7) Shall maintain testing and/or repair records for a minimum of three years.
(f) After notice and hearing, the city manager or his designee may revoke a registration if the city manager or
his designee determines that the tester:
(1) Has made false, incomplete or inaccurate assembly testing reports;
(2) Has used inaccurate gauges;
(3) Has used improper testing procedures;
(4) Has expired insurance coverage;
(5) Is not in compliance with safety regulations;
(6) Has failed to submit the required information on his/her test kits or failed to calibrate gauges
annually as required by this section; or
(7) Has violated any other provision of this section.
Sec. 13.05.013 Payment of costs
The cost of complying with these regulations shall be the responsibility of the property owners and their lessees.
These costs include but are not limited to purchasing, installation, testing and repair of the assembly. These costs
shall include point-of-use and premises isolation assemblies. Any cost incurred by the city to enforce this article
is the responsibility of the property owners and lessees.
Sec. 13.05.014 Assembly requirements
(a) Testing of assemblies.
(1) The city manager or his designee will inspect and test, or cause to be inspected and tested, all
assemblies in each of the following circumstances:
(A) Immediately after installation;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/244
(B) Immediately after repair;
(C) Whenever the assembly is moved; and
(D) A minimum of once a year for all commercial assemblies. Residential landscape
irrigation assemblies shall be tested bi-annually, except landscape irrigation systems that require
RP protection shall be tested at least annually.
(2) Assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the city manager or his designee
deems it necessary.
(3) Assembly testing shall be performed by a certified and registered backflow prevention
assembly tester, in accordance with TCEQ approved test procedures.
(4) It is the responsibility of the property owner, customer or lessee to have all assemblies tested in
accordance with this article.
(5) The city shall not be liable for damage to an assembly that occurs during testing.
(b) Maintenance of assemblies.
(1) A person who owns, operates or manages premises in which required backflow prevention
assemblies are installed shall maintain such assemblies in proper working order at all times, including
repair as required. Maintenance and repair of assemblies shall be done in accordance with all
applicable regulations of the TCEQ and this article.
(2) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained in a manner that allows them to be tested
by a method that has been approved by TCEQ.
(c) Installation requirements. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the
following requirements, to ensure their proper operation and accessibility:
(1) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with all plumbing codes
recognized by the city and this article. The assembly installer shall obtain the required plumbing
permits prior to installation and shall have the assembly inspected by a certified cross-connection
inspector and as required by the plumbing code.
(2) No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be submerged in
water or installed in a location subject to flooding. If a double-check valve assembly is installed in a
vault, brass plugs shall be maintained in the test ports at all times and adequate drainage shall be
provided.
(3) Assemblies shall be installed at the point of delivery of the water supply, before any branch in
the line, and on private property located just inside the boundary of the city’s right-of-way. An
inspector may specify other areas for installation of the assembly.
(4) The assembly shall be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions with an
approved enclosure.
(5) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model approved by the city.
(6) All vertical installations shall be approved in writing by the city manager or his designee prior
to installation.
(7) The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for maintenance and testing.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/244
(8) If the city manager or his designee grants written permission to install the backflow assembly
inside of a building, the assembly shall be readily accessible between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
(9) If an assembly is installed pursuant to this article and is installed five feet or higher above the
floor, it shall be equipped with rigidly and permanently installed scaffolding acceptable to the city
manager or his designee. This installation shall also meet all applicable requirements set out by the
U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the state occupational safety and health
laws. The property owner shall register all backflow assemblies with the city manager or his
designee. Registration shall consist of date of installation, manufacturer, model, serial number of the
backflow prevention assembly, and initial test report.
(10) Assemblies installed more than five feet above floor level shall have a suitable platform for
use by testing or maintenance personnel.
(11) Lines shall be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be
required ahead of the assembly.
(12) The property owner assumes all responsibility for leaks and damage. The owner shall also see
that any vault is kept reasonably free of silt and debris.
Sec. 13.05.015 Installation standards
(a) Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP). All RP assemblies will be tested in each
of the following circumstances immediately upon installation, after repair, and annually.
(1) RPs shall be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to the
public health if introduced into the potable water system. An RP is normally used in locations where
an air gap is impractical. An RP is effective against both backsiphonage and backpressure.
(2) RPs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being
served.
(3) Premises where non-interruption of water supply is critical shall be provided with two
assemblies of the same type installed in parallel. They shall be sized in such a manner that either
assembly will provide the minimum water requirements while the two together will provide the
maximum flow required.
(4) Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings that could be used for connecting a bypass line shall
not be installed.
(5) The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and shall be located in an
area where water damage to buildings or furnishings will not occur from relief valve discharge. An
approved air gap funnel assembly may be used to direct minor discharges away from the assembly;
this assembly will not control flow in a continuous relief situation. Drain lines will need to
accommodate full relief valve discharge flow.
(6) Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances
established below. Daylight drain ports shall be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge
from the assembly.
(7) All assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum of 12 inches on the back side, and
24 inches on the test-cock side, and the relief valve opening shall be at least 12 inches plus nominal
size of assembly above the floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of six feet is required in
vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of 24 inches square is required on
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/244
all vault lids. All assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least a six-inch clearance on all
sides.
(8) All RP assemblies shall be tested in accordance with this article.
(9) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviations
shall be prohibited without prior written approval of the city manager or his designee.
(10) RP assemblies may be installed in a vault only if relief valve discharge can be drained to
daylight through a boresight type drain. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated
flow of the assembly and shall be screened on both ends.
(11) An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RP assemblies. This air gap
shall be at least twice the inside diameter of the incoming supply line as measured vertically above
the top rim of the drain and in no case less than one inch.
(b) Double-check valve backflow prevention assembly (DC).
(1) Double-check valve assemblies may be utilized at premises where a substance is handled that
would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system.
(2) DCs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being
served.
(3) Premises where non-interruption of water supply is critical shall be provided with two
assemblies of the same type installed in parallel. They shall be sized in such a manner that either
assembly will provide the minimum water requirements while the two together will provide the
maximum flow required.
(4) Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipe fittings that could be used for connecting a bypass line shall
not be installed.
(5) The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for testing and maintenance. DCs
may be installed below grade, providing all test cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All vaults shall
be well drained, constructed of suitable materials, and sized to allow for the minimum clearances
established below.
(6) Assemblies two inches and smaller shall have at least a three-inch clearance below and on both
sides of the assembly, and, if located in a vault, the bottom of the assembly shall be not more than 24
inches below grade. All assemblies larger than two inches shall have a minimum clearance of 12
inches on the back side, 24 inches on the test-cock side, and 12 inches below the assembly.
Headroom of six feet is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening
of 24 inches square is required on all vault lids.
(7) Vertical installations are allowed on sizes up to and including four inches that meet the
following requirements:
(A) Internally spring-loaded check valves;
(B) Flow is upward through the assembly;
(C) University of Southern California certifies that the assembly can be used in a vertical
position; and
(D) Approved by the city manager or his designee.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/244
(8) All DCs shall be tested in accordance with this article.
(9) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. No deviations
shall be permitted without prior written approval of the city manager or his designee.
(c) Double-detector check-valve assembly (DDC). Double-detector check-valve assemblies may be utilized in
all installations requiring a double-check valve assembly and detector metering. DDCs shall comply with the
installation requirements applicable for double-check valve assemblies (DCs).
(d) Pressure vacuum breaker assembly (PVB).
(1) PVBs may be utilized at point-of-use protection only and where a substance is handled that
would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. PVBs
protect against backsiphonage only and shall not be installed where there is potential for
backpressure.
(2) The assembly shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches above the highest use outlet or
overflow level downstream from the assembly.
(3) PVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from
water discharge.
(4) The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum
clearance of 12 inches all around the assembly.
(5) PVBs shall be located between 12 inches and 60 inches above ground level.
(6) A strainer with blowout tapping may be required ahead of the assembly.
(7) All PVBs must be tested in compliance with this article.
(8) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. No deviations
shall be permitted without prior written approval of the city manager or his designee.
(e) Atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB).
(1) AVBs provide minimal protection and are approved for very low hazard applications only.
AVBs protect against backsiphonage only and are prohibited where there is potential for
backpressure.
(2) The assembly shall be installed a minimum of six inches above the highest use outlet or
overflow level downstream from the assembly.
(3) Shut-off valves downstream from the assembly are prohibited.
(4) AVBs shall be allowed only for those applications where there are fewer than 12 hours per day
continuous use.
(5) AVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage may occur from
water discharge.
(6) AVBs shall be allowed for point-of-use protection only in accordance with the plumbing code.
AVBs, in some installations, may not be recognized as adequate protection by the city manager or his
designee, so additional protection may be required.
(f) Air gap separation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/244
(1) Air gap separations provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and may be utilized at
premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the
potable water system.
(2) An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured
vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel (in no case less than one inch). If splashing is a
problem, tubular screens may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a 45-degree angle. The air
gap distance is measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses shall not be allowed.
(3) Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way and shall be available for inspection at all
reasonable times.
(4) Side walls, ribs or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps when spaced from the inside edge
of the spout opening a distance greater than three times the diameter of the effective opening for a
single, or a distance greater than four times the effective opening for two intersecting walls.
(5) In cases where there are three or more side walls, ribs or similar obstructions extending from
the water surface to or above the horizontal plane of the spout opening other than as specified in
subsection (4) above, the air gap shall be measured from the top of the wall.
(6) The effective opening shall be the minimum cross-sectional area at the seat of the control valve
or the supply pipe or tubing that feeds the assembly or outlet. If two or more lines supply one outlet,
the effective opening shall be the sum of the cross-sectional areas of the individual supply lines or the
area of the single outlet, whichever is smaller.
Sec. 13.05.016 Responsibility for compliance
It is the responsibility of all property owners, users, customers and lessees to abide by the conditions of this
article. The customer at leased or rented premises is responsible for the installation, testing and repair of all
backflow assemblies on the premises.
Sec. 13.05.017 Access to premises
(a) Every person provided water service by the city directly or indirectly shall, during the hours of 8:00 a.m.
through 5:00 p.m., permit the city manager or his designee, or their designee, to enter their premises and
buildings for the purpose of inspecting pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the water is used to determine
compliance with this article.
(b) If any water user refuses access to his premises for inspection by an inspector, the water user shall install a
reduced pressure principle assembly at the service connection to the premises.
(c) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the premises to be inspected shall be
promptly removed by the water user at the written or verbal request of the city manager or his designee and shall
not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
Sec. 13.05.018 Permits
All city and local permits and plumbing code permits required by the city must be met and maintained to meet
the requirements of this article.
Sec. 13.05.019 Enforcement; violations; penalty
(a) Generally.
(1) The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article
by any one or more of the enforcement mechanisms set forth in this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/244
(2) The inspectors, agents or representatives of the city charged with enforcement of this article
shall be deemed to be performing a governmental function for the benefit of the general public, and
neither the city, the city manager or his designee, nor the individual inspector, agent, or representative
of the city engaged in inspection or enforcement activities under this article, when acting in good
faith and without malice, shall ever be held liable for any loss or damage, whether real or asserted,
caused or alleged to have been caused as a result of the performance of such governmental function.
(3) Failure on the part of any customer to discontinue the use of all cross-connections, to
physically separate cross-connections or to install and/or test the required assembly to protect a crossconnection
is sufficient cause for the immediate discontinuance of public water service to the
premises, and, in addition, shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by fine of not less than $1.00
nor more than $2,000.00, and each and every day said violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(4) Any customer (property owner or lessee) who fails to bring his property into compliance with
this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed the maximum allowable by law. Each day that such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
(5) Any person who has knowingly made any false statement, representation, or certification in any
application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to
this article or any order issued under it, or who has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered
inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall upon conviction be
fined in an amount not to exceed the maximum allowable by law.
(6) A person is criminally responsible for a violation of this article if the person:
(A) Commits or assists in the commission of a violation; or
(B) Is a property owner, tenant, lessee or other person in control of the premises determined
to be the source of a violation.
(7) A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by
fine of not less than $1.00 nor more than $2,000.00, and each and every day said violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Emergency suspension of water service.
(1) The city manager or his designee may, without prior notice, suspend water service to any
premises when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened backflow that:
(A) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment or to the
health or welfare of persons; or
(B) Presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the city’s public water
supply.
(2) As soon as is practicable after the suspension of service, the city manager or his designee shall
notify the owner or person in charge of the premises of the suspension in person or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, and shall order such person to correct the cross-connection that allowed the
backflow to occur. When time permits, the city manager or his designee should also notify the owner
or person in charge prior to suspending water service.
(3) If the person fails to comply with an order issued under subsection (2) of this subsection, the
city manager or his designee may take such steps as the city manager or his designee deems
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/244
necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the public water supply or to minimize danger to
persons.
(4) The city manager or his designee shall not reinstate suspended services until:
(A) The person presents proof, satisfactory to the city manager or his designee, that the crossconnection
has been eliminated or protected and its cause determined and corrected;
(B) The person pays the city for all costs the city incurred in responding to the backflow or
threatened backflow; and
(C) The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service.
(5) A person whose service has been suspended may appeal such enforcement action to the city
manager or his designee, in writing, within ten days of notice of the suspension.
(6) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service to premises suspended
pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the city manager or his designee.
(7) The remedies provided by this section are in addition to any other remedies set forth in this
article. Exercise of this remedy shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking other action
against a violator.
(c) Non-emergency termination of water supply.
(1) The city manager or his designee may terminate the city-provided water supply of any water
user who violates the following conditions:
(A) Refusing the city manager or his designee reasonable access to the water user’s premises
for the purpose of inspection;
(B) Hindering or denying the city manager or his designee access to backflow prevention
assemblies;
(C) Failing to install a reduced pressure principle assembly;
(D) Failing to install and maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance with this
article; or
(E) Failing to install, maintain and operate his piping and plumbing systems in accordance
with the plumbing code.
(2) The city manager or his designee will notify a water user of the proposed termination of his
water supply. The water user may petition the city manager or his designee for a reconsideration and
hearing within 15 days of service termination.
(3) Exercise of this enforcement option by the city manager or his designee shall not be a bar to,
nor a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the water user.
(4) The city manager or his designee shall not reinstate suspended services until:
(A) The person presents proof, satisfactory to the city manager or his designee, that the crossconnection
has been eliminated or protected and its cause determined and corrected; and
(B) The person pays the city for all costs the city will incur in reinstating service.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/244
(d) Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and are not exclusive of
any other remedies that the city may have under state or federal law or other city ordinances. The city may take
all or any combination of these actions against a violator. The city may take more than one enforcement action
against any violator. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ordinance 091106B, sec. 2, adopted 9/11/06)
ARTICLE 13.06 INDUSTRIAL WASTE*
Sec. 13.06.001 Definitions
Approving authority. The mayor, or his duly authorized representative.
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand). The quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature
of twenty degrees (20°) centigrade.
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called
house lateral and house connection).
City. The City of Crandall, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf.
COD (chemical oxygen demand). A measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter
present in the water and wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical
oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not
necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand.
Control manhole. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer
discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
Control point. A point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the
public sewer.
Garbage. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from
the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce.
Industrial waste. Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business, or from the
development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct
from normal wastewater.
Industrial waste charge. The charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city’s
sewerage system.
Milligrams per liter (mg/l). Means the same as parts per million, and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligramper-
liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater.
Normal domestic wastewater. Wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary
sewers and in which the average concentration of suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/l and BOD is not
more than 250 mg/l.
Overload. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered
design capacity.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/244
Person. Includes a corporation, organization, government, or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership, association and any other legal entity.
pH. The negative of the logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter.
Public sewer. A pipe or conduit carrying wastewater in which owners of abutting properties shall have the use,
subject to control by the city.
Sanitary sewer. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both,
and into which stormwater, surface water, groundwater and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed.
Slug. Any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent, or
in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty-four (24) [hour] concentration or flows during normal operation.
Standard Methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition at the time of
analysis of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved, and
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the
Water Environment Federation.
Storm sewer. A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic
wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed.
Stormwater. Rainfall or any other forms of precipitation.
Superintendent. The water and wastewater superintendent of the city, or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
Suspended solids. Solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water,
wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device.
To discharge. Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose
of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions.
Trap. A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other
harmful substances.
Unpolluted wastewater. Water containing:
(1) No free or emulsified grease or oil;
(2) No acids or alkalis;
(3) No phenols or other substances producing taste or odors in receiving water;
(4) No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution;
(5) No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases;
(6) Color not exceeding fifty (50) units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of
determination as specified in Standard Methods.
Waste. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic,
agricultural or industrial activities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/244
Wastewater. A combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and
industrial establishments, together with any ground, surface, and storm water that may be present.
Wastewater facilities. All facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial
wastes.
Wastewater service charge. The charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in
strength the concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater.
Wastewater treatment plant. Any facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and treating
wastewater, industrial waste, and sludge from the sanitary sewers.
Watercourse. A natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(A))
Sec. 13.06.002 Prohibited discharges
(a) No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes
may:
(1) Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities;
(2) Constitute a hazard to humans or animals;
(3) Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent.
(b) All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(B))
Sec. 13.06.003 Chemical discharges
(a) No discharge to public sewers may contain:
(1) Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l.
(2) Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply.
(3) Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l.
(4) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(5) Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (COD).
(b) No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain:
(1) Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
(2) Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two and
one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65° centigrade).
(3) Objectionable or toxic substances exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree
that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/244
(4) Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the
provisions of section 13.06.002(a).
(c) No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than
5.5, or higher than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel at the wastewater facilities.
(d) All waste, wastewater, or other substances containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste- and odorproducing
substances shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After
treatment of the composite wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by
state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges to receiving waters.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(C))
Sec. 13.06.004 Heavy metals and toxic materials
(a) No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in subsection
(b) below.
(b) The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter, determined
on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods, are:
Arsenic 0.05 mg/l
Barium 5.0 mg/l
Boron 1.0 mg/l
Cadmium 0.02 mg/l
Chromium (total) 5.0 mg/l
Copper 1.0 mg/l
Lead 0.1 mg/l
Manganese 1.0 mg/l
Mercury 0.005 mg/l
Nickel 1.0 mg/l
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/244
Selenium 0.02 mg/l
Silver 0.1 mg/l
Zinc 5.0 mg/l
(c) No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the
approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable
provisions.
(d) Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include but are not limited to:
(1) Antimony.
(2) Beryllium.
(3) Bismuth.
(4) Cobalt.
(5) Molybdenum.
(6) Uranyl ion.
(7) Rhenium.
(8) Strontium.
(9) Tellurium.
(10) Herbicides.
(11) Fungicides.
(12) Pesticides.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(D))
Sec. 13.06.005 Garbage
(a) No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can
be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half
(1/2) inch in any dimension are prohibited.
(b) The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage
grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(E))
Sec. 13.06.006 Stormwater and other unpolluted drainage
(a) No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/244
(1) Unpolluted stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage.
(2) Unpolluted cooling water.
(3) Unpolluted industrial process waters.
(4) Other unpolluted drainage.
(b) In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act and other statutes, the approving authority may designate
storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) above may be
discharged.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(F))
Sec. 13.06.007 Temperature
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees (150°)
Fahrenheit (65° centigrade), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment
plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees (10°) Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase
to plant influent temperature of one hundred ten degrees (110°) Fahrenheit. (1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(G))
Sec. 13.06.008 Radioactive waste
(a) No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the
approving authority.
(b) The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations,
regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(H))
Sec. 13.06.009 Impairment of facilities
(a) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing:
(1) Obstruction to the flow in sewers.
(2) Interference with the operation of treatment processes or facilities.
(3) Excessive loading of treatment facilities.
(b) Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to, materials which
exert or cause concentrations of:
(1) Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l, including but not limited to:
(A) Fuller’s earth.
(B) Lime slurries.
(C) Lime residues.
(2) Dissolved solids greater than 500 mg/l, including but not limited to:
(A) Sodium chloride.
(B) Sodium sulfate.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/244
(3) Excessive discoloration, including but not limited to:
(A) Dye wastes.
(B) Vegetable tanning solutions.
(4) BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity.
(c) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may:
(1) Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers.
(2) Overload skimming and grease-handling equipment.
(3) Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment
processes due to the non-amenability of the substance to bacterial action.
(4) Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities.
(d) No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which:
(1) Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed.
(2) Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(e) The approving authority may regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may:
(1) Impair the treatment process.
(2) Cause damage to collection facilities.
(3) Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater.
(4) Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use.
(f) No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a)
of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size, including but not limited to:
(1) Ashes.
(2) Cinders.
(3) Sand.
(4) Mud.
(5) Straw.
(6) Shavings.
(7) Metal.
(8) Glass.
(9) Rags.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/244
(10) Feathers.
(11) Tar.
(12) Plastics.
(13) Wood.
(14) Unground garbage.
(15) Whole blood.
(16) Paunch manure.
(17) Hair and fleshings.
(18) Entrails.
(19) Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(20) Slops.
(21) Chemical residues.
(22) Paint residues.
(23) Bulk solids.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(I))
Sec. 13.06.010 Unauthorized discharge of wastewater
(a) Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sewer system shall be used by all
persons discharging:
(1) Wastewater.
(2) Industrial waste.
(3) Polluted liquids.
(b) Unless authorized by the state commission on environmental quality, no person may deposit or discharge
any waste included in subsection (a) above on public or private property in or adjacent to any:
(1) Natural outlet.
(2) Watercourse.
(3) Storm sewer.
(4) Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
(c) The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive
suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state, and
local governments.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(J))
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/244
Sec. 13.06.011 Acceptance of restricted wastes
(a) If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities,
processes, equipment or receiving water, create a hazard to life or health, or create a public nuisance, the
approving authority shall require:
(1) Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers.
(2) Control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(3) Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes.
(b) The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included
under subsection (a) above.
(c) The approving authority shall inject [reject] wastes when it determines that a discharge or proposed
discharge is included under subsection (a) above and the discharger does not meet the requirements of
subsection (a) above.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(K))
Sec. 13.06.012 Pretreatment facilities
(a) If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and
installation of equipment and processes.
(b) The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes,
ordinances, and other laws.
(c) Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing or other facilities shall
provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(L))
Sec. 13.06.013 Traps
(a) Discharges requiring a trap include:
(1) Grease, or waste containing grease in excessive amounts.
(2) Oil.
(3) Sand.
(4) Flammable wastes.
(5) Other harmful ingredients.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(M))
(b) Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the
approving authority provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority,
locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection, and maintain
the trap in effective operating condition. Additionally, all traps must be 100% evacuated, as opposed to
vacuuming up the grease and leaving the water in the bottom of the trap. (1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(M);
Ordinance 60597, sec. 1, adopted 6/5/97)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/244
(c) When a trap is evacuated, a representative from the establishment must be present and witness the removal
of all materials from the trap. That establishment representative must sign a copy of the manifest and provide the
city public works director with a copy of the manifest within fifteen (15) days.
(d) The driver responsible for hauling the material must sign the manifest and turn a copy into the disposal
company. A representative from the disposal company must sign off on the manifest and return a copy to the city
public works director within thirty (30) days.
(Ordinance 60597, sec. 1, adopted 6/5/97)
Sec. 13.06.014 Control manhole
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own
expense and as required by the approving authority, install an accessible and safely located control manhole,
install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste, and
maintain the equipment and facilities. (1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(N))
Sec. 13.06.015 Sampling and testing
(a) Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of
constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property.
(Note: The particular analysis involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite sample from all
outfalls of the premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not
always, BOD and suspended solids analysis are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH’s
are determined from periodic grab samples.)
(b) Examination and analysis of the characteristics of water and wastes required by this article shall be:
(1) Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods.
(2) Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point
authorized by the approving authority.
(c) BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from a composite sample.
(d) The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids.
(e) The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are
taken.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(O))
Sec. 13.06.016 Payment of cost of collection and treatment
(a) Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and
treatment.
(b) When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the city, or its authorized
representative, shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing terms of acceptance by the city and
payment by the person making the discharge.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(P))
Sec. 13.06.017 Agreement for payment of charges
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/244
(a) If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city does not require overloading the sewage
collection, treatment, or disposal facilities of the city, then, prior to approval, the city and the person making the
discharge shall enter an agreement which provides that the discharger pay an industrial waste charge to be
determined from the schedule of charges.
(b) If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city requires that wastewater collection,
treatment, or other disposal facilities of the city be improved, expanded, or enlarged in order to treat the waste,
then, prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter an agreement which provides
that the discharger pay in full all added costs the city may incur due to acceptance of the waste.
(c) The agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Amortization of all capital outlay for collecting and treating the waste, including new capital
outlay and the proportionate part of the value of the existing system used in handling and treating the
waste.
(2) Operation and maintenance costs including salaries and wages, power costs, costs of chemicals
and supplies, and proper allowances for maintenance, depreciation, overhead, and office expense.
Amortization shall be completed in a twenty-year period and payment shall include all debt service costs.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(Q))
Sec. 13.06.018 Schedule of charges
Industrial waste charges shall be calculated by the following formula and the volume and charges adjusted
annually in proportion with the annual operating expenses. The following definitions for vo, bo, and so shall be
used and the percentage multiple adjusted annually if required when costs for volume, BOD, and suspended
solids vary from the stated multiples. All values in the formula shall be adjusted annually with proper
consideration given to the initial capital investment and any improvements and/or additional expenditures.
vo = The value of vo shall equal 0.6 multiplied by the total amount of operation and
maintenance cost minus the total annual sludge handling cost all divided by the plant’s total
annual volume of flow.
Example: vo = 0.6 (O&M Cost - Sludge Cost)/(Volume/1,000 gallons) = Dollars per 1,000
gallons
bo = The value of bo shall equal 0.4 multiplied by the total annual O&M cost minus the annual
sludge handling cost divided by the total annual pounds of BOD; to that figure shall be added
75% of the total annual sludge handling cost divided by the total annual pounds of BOD.
Example: bo = 0.4 (O&M Cost - Sludge Cost)/BOD Pounds + 75% Sludge Handling
Cost/BOD Pounds = Dollars per pound of BOD
so = The value of so shall equal 0.25 multiplied by the total annual sludge handling cost divided
by the total annual suspended solids in pounds.
Example: so = 0.25 (Solid Cost)/Suspended Solid Pounds = Dollars per pound of
suspended solids
Vi = Volume of wastewater from industrial users, gal./year.
Bi = Amount of BOD from industrial users, lb./year.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/244
Si = Amount of SS from industrial users, lb./year.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(R))
Sec. 13.06.019 Adjustment of charges
(a) The city shall adjust charges to reflect the current costs of wastewater treatment at least annually based on
the results of sampling and testing.
(b) Increases in charges shall be retroactive for two (2) billing periods and shall continue for six (6) billing
periods unless subsequent tests determine that the charge should be further increased.
(c) The city shall review at least annually the basis for determining increases or decreases in charges and shall
adjust the charges to reflect increases or decreases in wastewater treatment costs based on the previous year’s
experience.
(d) The city shall bill the discharger by the month and shall show industrial waste charges as a separate item
on the regular bill for water and sewer charges. The discharger shall pay monthly in accordance with practices
existing for payment of sewer charges.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(S))
Sec. 13.06.020 Savings clause
A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of this article may continue
without penalty so long as he:
(1) Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge without permission of the approving
authority.
(2) Has discharged the industrial waste at least twelve (12) months prior to the effective date of
this article.
(3) Applies for and is granted a permit no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the
effective date of this article.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(T))
Sec. 13.06.021 Discharge permit
(a) The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of the savings clause
provided that the person:
(1) Submits an application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of this
article on forms supplied by the approving authority.
(2) Secures approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment
facilities when required.
(3) Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements, including, but not limited
to, provisions for:
(A) Payment of charges.
(B) Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/244
(C) Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength.
(4) Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this article and approval of the approving
authority.
(b) A person applying for a new discharge shall:
(1) Meet all conditions of subsection (a) above.
(2) Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(U))
Sec. 13.06.022 Power to enter property
(a) The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of
enforcing this article.
(b) Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment’s rules and regulations concerning
safety, internal security, and fire protection.
(c) Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the city shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and
demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling
operation.
(d) The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for
the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, or maintenance of any portion of the
sewer system lying within the easements, and conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be
conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.
(e) No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind
and source of discharge to the public sewers.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(V))
Sec. 13.06.023 Authority to disconnect service
(a) The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from
the system when:
(1) Acids or chemicals damaging to the sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer
causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of
wastewater.
(2) A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is
no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is
delivering wastewater to the city’s system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that
is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment, or the industrial customer:
(A) Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the
approving authority.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/244
(B) Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an
imbalance in the wastewater treatment system.
(C) Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due.
(D) Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers.
(b) If service is disconnected pursuant to subsection (a)(2) above, the city shall:
(1) Disconnect the customer.
(2) Supply the customer with the governmental agency’s report and provide the customer with all
pertinent information.
(3) Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional
pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his
industrial wastes.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(W))
Sec. 13.06.024 Notice of violation
The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. No person may continue discharging
in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in the notice. (1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(X))
Sec. 13.06.025 Penalty
(a) A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is
punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each act of violation and for each day of
violation.
(b) In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) above, the city is entitled to pursue all other
criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person
continuing prohibited discharges.
(1982 Code, ch. 11, sec. 15(Y))
Sec. 13.06.026 Failure to pay charges
In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the
other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. (1982 Code,
ch. 11, sec. 15(Z))
ARTICLE 13.07 DISPOSAL OF FATS, OILS AND GREASE
Sec. 13.07.001 Definitions
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have
the meanings hereinafter designated. If a word or term used in this article is not contained in the following list, it
shall have the definition provided for such word or term in Texas Administrative Code, chapter 25, part 1,
chapter 229, “Food and Drug.”
Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the “Clean Water Act,” as amended, 33 U.S.C.
1251, et seq.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/244
BOD. The value of the five-day test for biochemical oxygen demand, as described in the latest edition of
“Standard Methods for the Examination of Water & Wastewater” (“SMEWW”), which is adopted and
incorporated herein for all purposes.
COD. The value of the test for chemical oxygen demand, as described in SMEWW.
Discharge. The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source. Discharge shall include
an indirect discharge of pollutants.
EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Fats, oils and greases (FOG). The organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that
contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These compounds are detectable and measurable using
analytical test procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All such compounds
are sometimes referred to herein as “grease” or “greases.”
Generator. Any person who disposes of grease from a nondomestic structure, who owns or operates a grease
trap/grease interceptor or whose act or process produces grease trap waste.
Grease trap and interceptor. A device designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate and retain
light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils, and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer
collection system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation
activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. Grease traps and
interceptors are also referred to herein as “grease traps/interceptors.”
Grease trap waste. The material collected in and from a grease trap/interceptor in the sanitary sewer service line
of a commercial, institutional, or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the solids
resulting from the de-watering processes.
Interference. A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources,
inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or is
a cause of a violation of the city’s TPDES permit.
pH. The measurement of the relative acidity or alkalinity of water, which is defined as the negative logarithm
(base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration.
POTW or publicly owned treatment works. A water-treatment system which is owned by a state or municipality
as defined by the act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling
and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and
other conveyances that convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also includes the municipality,
as defined in section 502(4) of the act, which has jurisdiction over the discharges to and from such a watertreatment
system. For purposes of this article, the terms “sanitary sewer system” and “POTW” may be used
interchangeably.
TCEQ. The state commission on environmental quality, and its predecessor or successor agencies.
TPDES. The Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program, which has federal regulatory authority
over discharges of pollutants to Texas surface water and is administered by TCEQ.
Transporter. A person who is registered with and authorized by TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water
treatment sludge, domestic septage, chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance
with 30 Texas Administrative Code, section 312.142.
TSS. The value of the test for total suspended solids, as described in SMEWW.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/244
User. Any person, including a person located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, who contributes, causes
or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including a person who contributes such
wastewater from mobile sources.
Sec. 13.07.002 Applicability and prohibitions
(a) This article shall apply to all generators of the POTW.
(b) Grease traps or interceptors shall not be required for residential users.
(c) Generators that produce or generate fats, oils, or greases as a result of food manufacturing, processing,
preparation, or food service shall install, use, and maintain appropriate grease traps or interceptors, as required in
section 13.07.003. These facilities include, but are not limited to restaurants, food manufacturers, food
processors, hospitals, hotels and motels, prisons, nursing homes, and any other facility preparing, serving, or
otherwise making any foodstuff available for consumption.
(d) No generator may intentionally or unintentionally allow the discharge of any petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil, or any fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the
POTW in such amounts as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system, or as to cause
pollutants to pass through the POTW into the environment.
Sec. 13.07.003 Installation and maintenance requirements
(a) Installations.
(1) New facilities. Food processing or food service facilities which are newly proposed or
constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service
facility, where such facility did not previously exist, shall be required to design, install, operate and
maintain a grease trap/interceptor in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes or other
applicable ordinances. Grease traps/interceptors shall be installed and inspected prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
(2) Existing facilities. Existing grease traps/interceptors must be operated and maintained in
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations and this article, unless otherwise specified in
writing and approved by the POTW.
(3) All grease trap/interceptor waste shall be properly disposed of at a facility in accordance with
federal, state or local regulation.
(b) Cleaning and maintenance.
(1) Grease traps/interceptors shall be maintained in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions
and in an efficient operating condition at all times to prevent a discharge.
(2) Each time a grease trap/interceptor is pumped, the grease trap/interceptor shall be fully
evacuated unless the grease trap/interceptor volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum
truck, in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the trap
is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period, in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code section
312.143.
(c) Self-cleaning.
(1) A generator with a self-cleaning grease trap/interceptor must receive approval from the POTW,
on an annual basis, prior to removing grease from any self-cleaning grease trap/interceptor located
inside a building, provided that:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/244
(A) The grease trap/interceptor is no more than 50-gallons in liquid/operating capacity;
(B) Proper on-site material disposal methods are implemented (e.g., absorb liquids into solid
form and dispose into solid waste receptacle);
(C) The local solid waste authority allows such practices;
(D) Grease trap/interceptor waste is placed in leak-proof, sealable container(s) located on the
premises in an area for a transporter to pump out; and
(E) Detailed records on grease removal activities are prepared and maintained.
(2) A generator with a self-cleaning grease trap/interceptor must submit a completed self-cleaning
request to the POTW for approval. The written request shall include the following information:
(A) Business name and street address;
(B) Grease trap/interceptor owner name, title, and phone number;
(C) Description of maintenance frequency, method of disposal, method of cleaning and size
(in gallons) of the grease trap/interceptor; and
(D) Signed statement that the generator will maintain records of waste disposal and produce
them for compliance inspections.
(3) Generators who self-clean must adhere to all the requirements, procedures and detailed
recordkeeping outlined in their approved application to ensure compliance with this article. A
maintenance log shall be kept by self-cleaning generators that indicates, at a minimum, the following
information:
(A) Date the grease trap/interceptor was serviced;
(B) Name of the person or company servicing the grease trap/interceptor;
(C) Waste disposal method used;
(D) Gallons of grease removed and disposed of;
(E) Waste oil added to grease trap/interceptor waste; and
(F) Signature of the generator after each cleaning that certifies that all grease was removed
and disposed of properly, the grease trap/interceptor was thoroughly cleaned and all parts were
replaced that are in operable condition.
(4) Violations incurred by a generator who self-cleans will be subject to enforcement action
including fines and/or removal from the self-cleaner program.
(d) Cleaning schedules.
(1) Grease traps/interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and
floating materials do not accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease trap/interceptor, to ensure
the discharge emitted is in compliance with local discharge limits and to ensure no visible grease is
observed in the discharge.
(2) Grease traps/interceptors subject to these standards shall be completely evacuated a minimum
of every 90 days, or more frequently when:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/244
(A) Twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the wetted height of the grease trap/interceptor, as
measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating
materials, sediment, oils or greases;
(B) The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other pollutant levels established
by the POTW; or
(C) There is a history of noncompliance.
(3) Any generator or person who owns or operates a grease trap/interceptor may submit to the
POTW a request in writing for an exception to the ninety (90) day pumping frequency of their grease
trap/interceptor. The POTW may grant an extension for required cleaning frequency on a case-bycase
basis if:
(A) The generator has demonstrated the grease trap/interceptor will produce an effluent,
based on defensible analytical results, in consistent compliance with established local discharge
limits such as BOD, TSS, FOG, or other parameters as determined by the POTW; or
(B) Less than twenty-five (25) percent of the wetted height of the grease trap/interceptor, as
measured from the bottom of the device to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating
materials, sediment, oils or greases on the date of the written request for an exception.
(4) In the event of an exception, the grease trap/interceptor shall be fully evacuated, cleaned, and
inspected at least once every 180 days.
(e) Manifest requirements.
(1) Each pump-out of a grease trap or interceptor must be accompanied by a manifest to be used
for recordkeeping purposes.
(2) Generators shall maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records shall
be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall include:
(A) Name, address, telephone, and commission registration number of the transporter;
(B) Name, signature, address, and phone number of the generator and the date collected;
(C) Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported;
(D) Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting, transporting and depositing
the waste;
(E) Date and place where the waste was deposited;
(F) Identification (permit or site registration number, location, and operator) of the facility
where the waste was deposited;
(G) Name and signature of the facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the
waste and the amount of waste received;
(H) The volume of the grease waste received; and
(I) A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters, generators and POTWs in
tracking the volume of grease transported.
(3) Manifests shall be divided into five parts and records shall be maintained as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/244
(A) One part of the manifest shall have the generator and transporter information completed
and shall be retained by the generator at the time of waste pickup.
(B) The remaining four parts of the manifest shall have all required information completely
filled out and signed by the generator and transporter before distribution of the manifest, as
follows:
(i) One part of the manifest shall go to the FOG receiving facility;
(ii) One part shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing
the collection and disposition of waste;
(iii) One copy of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter to the generator
within fifteen (15) days after the waste is received at the disposal or processing facility;
and
(iv) One part of the manifest shall be delivered to the POTW by the generator within 5
days of receipt from the transporter.
(4) Copies of manifests maintained to the generator shall be retained for five (5) years and be
readily available for review by the POTW.
(f) Alternative treatment.
(1) A person commits an offense if the person introduces, or causes, permits, or suffers the
introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier into a grease trap/interceptor. Surfactants,
solvents, and emulsifiers are materials which allow the grease to pass from the grease trap/interceptor
into the POTW system, and include, but are not limited to, enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene,
and other solvents.
(2) It is an affirmative defense to the enforcement of subsection (f)(1) that the use of surfactants or
soaps is incidental to normal kitchen hygiene operations.
(3) Bioremediation media may be used with the POTW’s approval, if the person has demonstrated,
to the satisfaction of the POTW, that laboratory testing, which is appropriate for the type of grease
trap/interceptor to be used, has verified that:
(A) The media is a pure live bacterial product which is not inactivated by the use of domestic
or commercial disinfectants and detergents, strong alkalis, acids, and/or water temperatures of
160/F (71/C);
(B) The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease
trap/interceptor and does not increase the potential for oil and grease to be discharged into the
sanitary sewer;
(C) The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming in the sanitary sewer; and
(D) The BOD, COD and TSS discharged into the sanitary sewer after use of the media does
not exceed the BOD, COD, and TSS which would be discharged if the product were not being
used and the grease trap/interceptor was being properly maintained. pH levels must be between
five (5) and eleven (11).
(4) All testing designed to satisfy the criteria set forth in subsection (f)(3) shall be scientifically
sound and statistically valid. All tests to determine FOG, TSS, BOD, COD, pH, and other pollutant
levels shall use appropriate tests which have been approved by the EPA and the TCEQ, and which are
defined in title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, part 136 or title 30, Texas Administrative Code
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/244
section 319.11. All testing shall be open to inspection by the POTW, and shall meet the POTW’s
approval.
Sec. 13.07.004 Schedule of penalties
(a) Discharge civil penalty. If the POTW determines that a generator is responsible for a blockage of a POTW
system line due to a discharge in excess of the allowable discharge limits, the generator shall owe a civil penalty
of $1,000.00 for the first violation, $1,500.00 for a second violation, and $2,000.00 for the third violation within
a two-year period. Further violations within a two-year period shall result in an increase in the civil penalty by
$500.00, per violation, and may also result in termination of utility service and/or loss of certificate of
occupancy for the generator.
(b) General civil penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be issued to a written
warning for the first violation. A person found to be responsible for violating any provision of this article shall
owe a civil penalty of $1,000.00 for the second violation, a civil penalty of $1,500.00 for the third violation, and
a civil penalty of $2,000.00 for the fourth violation within a two-year period. Further violations within a twoyear
period shall result in an increase in the civil penalty by $500.00, per violation, and may result in termination
of utility service and/or loss of certificate of occupancy for the generator.
(c) Injunction. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any violation of any provision of this article which constitutes
an immediate danger or threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by
the city for such purpose.
(d) Criminal penalty. Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision or requirement of this
article, shall also be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount
not to exceed $2,000.00, such offenses being violations of the health and safety ordinance of the city. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or on which a violation or failure to comply occurs or
continues to occur. This article shall be in addition to and cumulative of the provisions for civil penalty,
injunction, abatement of the nuisance by the city and charging the cost of same against the owner of the
property.
(e) In addition to any other remedies or penalties contained herein, the city may enforce the provisions of this
article pursuant to the applicable provisions of chapter 54 of the Texas Local Government Code, which chapter
provides for the enforcement of municipal ordinances.
(Ordinance 040110, sec. 2, adopted 4/1/10)
ARTICLE 13.08 WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN*
Sec. 13.08.001 Adopted
The Model Water Conservation and Drought Contingency and Water Emergency Response Plan for North Texas
Municipal Water District Member Cities and Customers, with appendices A–I attached thereto, is hereby
adopted, in its entirety, as the plan for water conservation, drought contingency and water emergency response
for the city. The adopted plan as approved by the city council is attached to Ordinance 090408B as an exhibit.
(Ordinance 090408B, sec. 2, adopted 9/4/08)
Sec. 13.08.002 Penalty
Any customer, defined pursuant to 30 Tex. Admin. Code chapter 291, failing to comply with the provisions of
the plan shall be subject to a fine of up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and/or discontinuance of water
service by the city. Proof of a culpable mental state is not required for a conviction of an offense under this
section. Each day a customer fails to comply with the plan is a separate violation. The city’s authority to seek
injunctive or other civil relief available under the law is not limited by this section. (Ordinance 090408B, sec. 7,
adopted 9/4/08)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/244
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 14.02 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
Sec. 14.02.001 Adopted
The Unified Development Code as adopted by the city is not included in this code, but is hereby specifically
saved from repeal. A copy of the Unified Development Code and amendments thereto shall be maintained and
available on file in the offices of the city. (Editorially supplied)

July 21, 2011 1
Chapter 14
City of Crandall
Unified Development Code
Adopted by Ordinance No. 051911
May 19, 2011
Amended by Ordinance 072111
July 21, 2011
July 21, 2011 2
Acknowledgements
City Council
Cody Frazier, Mayor
Don Balser, Mayor Pro Tem
Shannon Barnes
Pat Branson
Jeff Hajek
Wayne Lukaris
Planning and Zoning Commission
Shane Croker, Chairman
John Chase
Ken Godey
Jeff Hajek, City Council Representative
Kathy Mackey
In Memoriam: Bill Teaquist
City Staff
L. Scott Wall, City Manager
Jana Shelton, City Secretary
Joe Villarreal, Director of Public Works
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 21, 2011
Table of Contents
Table of Contents ............................................................................................................. i
SECTION 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS .................................................................. 95
A. SHORT TITLE 95
B. PURPOSE AND INTENT 95
(1) Protect, promote, improve and provide for the public health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the City; ............................................................. 95
(2) Ensure the safe, orderly and efficient development and expansion of the City
in accordance with and pursuant to its Comprehensive Plan; ................................ 95
(3) Conserve, develop, protect and utilize natural resources, in keeping with the
public interest; ........................................................................................................ 95
(4) Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration or diffusion
of population; ......................................................................................................... 95
(5) Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the value of
buildings and improvements upon the land, and minimize conflicts among the uses
of land and buildings; ............................................................................................. 95
(6) Provide for open space; ............................................................................... 95
(7) Minimize pollution of air and water, assure the adequacy of drainage
facilities, safeguard water resources and preserve the integrity and aesthetic
quality of the community; ....................................................................................... 95
(8) Lessen congestion in the streets and provide convenient, safe and efficient
circulation for vehicular and pedestrian traffic; and ................................................ 95
(9) Facilitate the adequate and efficient provision of transportation, water,
wastewater, schools, parks, public safety, recreational facilities, and other public
facilities and services. ............................................................................................ 95
C. AUTHORITY 95
D. JURISDICTION 95
(1) Jurisdiction within City Limits ........................................................................ 95
(2) Jurisdiction within Extraterritorial Jurisdiction ............................................... 96
(a) The use of any building or property for business, industrial, residential, or other purposes; ................................ 96
(b) The bulk, height, or number of buildings constructed on a particular tract of land; ............................................. 96
(c) The size of a building that can be constructed on a particular tract of land, including without limitation any
restriction on the ratio of building floor space to the land square footage;...................................................................... 96
(d) The number of residential units that can be built per acre of land; or ................................................................... 96
(e) The size, type, or method of construction of a water or wastewater facility that can be constructed to serve a
developed tract of land if: ............................................................................................................................................... 96
1) the facility meets the minimum standards established for water or wastewater facilities by state and federal
regulatory entities; and .............................................................................................................................................. 96
2) the developed tract of land is: .......................................................................................................................... 96
a) located in a county with a population of 2.8 million or more; and ............................................................. 96
b) served by: ................................................................................................................................................... 96
i) on-site septic systems constructed before September 1, 2001, that fail to provide adequate services; or
96
ii) on-site water wells constructed before September 1, 2001, that fail to provide an adequate supply of
safe drinking water. ......................................................................................................................................... 96
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 2
E. CONSISTENCY WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 96
(1) Growth Management .................................................................................... 97
(a) New development should be compatible with existing development and community character. ......................... 97
(b) New development should maintain the character, look and feel of the City. ........................................................ 97
(c) New development should occur in a fiscally responsible manner for the City. .................................................... 97
(2) Environmental Protection ............................................................................. 97
(a) Development should preserve and protect waterways and floodplains. ................................................................ 97
(b) Development should preserve and protect surface and ground water resources and hydrologically-active areas. 97
(c) Developers should cooperate with local governmental entities to ensure water quality. ...................................... 97
(d) Development should promote and encourage water conservation practices. ........................................................ 97
(e) Development should preserve and protect air quality. .......................................................................................... 97
(f) Development should seek public acquisition of open space or develop conservative development options for
areas of environmental concern....................................................................................................................................... 97
(g) Agricultural and ranch lands should be priority areas for open space preservation. The City is interested in
preserving natural open space areas. ............................................................................................................................... 97
(h) Development should promote awareness and implementation of Best Management Practices (“BMPs”) for
purposes of water quality and land conservation. ............................................................................................................ 97
(3) Housing ........................................................................................................ 97
(a) Development should provide housing alternatives for individuals of all income levels within the City’s
jurisdictional area. ........................................................................................................................................................... 97
(b) Development should encourage housing that is compatible with existing neighborhoods and land uses. ............ 97
(c) Development should promote cluster development when and where appropriate. ............................................... 97
(4) Economic Development ............................................................................... 97
(a) Development should promote economic development opportunities along US-175 and along major arterials such
as FM 148. ...................................................................................................................................................................... 97
(b) Development should promote economic development consistent with other land use policies. ........................... 97
(c) Development should promote quality development that is compatible with neighboring areas. .......................... 98
(5) Historic Preservation .................................................................................... 98
(a) Development should preserve and enhance historic areas and sites throughout the City’s jurisdictional area. .... 98
(b) Development should use community history to promote tourism and economic development. ........................... 98
(6) Parks and Recreation ................................................................................... 98
(a) Development should connect existing and proposed parks in accordance with the City’s Comprehensive Plan. 98
(b) Development should provide and preserve open space and park land in new neighborhoods and associated with
new schools. .................................................................................................................................................................... 98
(c) Development should encourage maintenance and safety of parks and recreation resources. ............................... 98
(7) Circulation .................................................................................................... 98
(a) Development should improve access to major thoroughfares identified by the City. ........................................... 98
(b) Development should encourage the interconnection of streets and street network designs to provide ample, safe,
and appropriately scaled access through and between neighborhoods and to commercial centers. ................................ 98
(c) Development should provide safe and efficient vehicular connectivity. .............................................................. 98
(d) Development should provide for safe and effective hike and bike trails. ............................................................. 98
(e) Development should ensure that access is safely managed and integrated into land use and site designs. ........... 98
(f) Development should encourage adequate parking and aesthetically pleasing layouts of parking for new
commercial, office and retail development, provided that the parking fields do not deter ease of pedestrian access into
and through new developments, and do not deter or detract from community character. ............................................... 98
(g) Development should provide for safe and ample pedestrian connectivity throughout new and/or existing
developments, including schools, park sites, and commercial areas. .............................................................................. 98
(8) Urban Design ............................................................................................... 98
(a) Development should encourage and provide incentives for blending of land uses and mixed-use development. 98
(b) Development should utilize streetscape design criteria to encourage safe and desirable pedestrian access and
community attractiveness. ............................................................................................................................................... 98
(c) Development should utilize appropriate building area and bulk regulations, configurations, project scales and
architectural design for new developments within the community. ................................................................................ 98
(d) Signage should not detract from the visual integrity of the community. .............................................................. 99
(9) Civic and Public Spaces ............................................................................... 99
(a) Civic buildings and civic spaces should be given prominent sites. ....................................................................... 99
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 3
(b) Elementary school sites should be provided as new neighborhood developments are approved, so as to be within
walking distance of a majority of the dwelling units in adjoining neighborhoods. The location of neighborhood schools
should be coordinated with the appropriate school district. ............................................................................................ 99
F. VESTED RIGHTS “ISSUANCE OF LOCAL PERMITS” 99
G. APPORTIONMENT OF MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE COSTS 99
(1) If the City requires, as a condition of approval for a property development
project, that a developer bear the costs of municipal infrastructure improvements
by the making of dedications, the payment of fees, or the payment of construction
costs, the developer's portion of the costs may not exceed the amount required for
infrastructure improvements that are roughly proportionate to the impact generated
by the proposed development as approved by a professional engineer who is
licensed by the State of Texas, and is retained by the City. ................................... 99
(2) A developer who disputes the determination made under SECTION 1G(1)
above may appeal to the City Council. At the appeal hearing, the developer may
present evidence and testimony under procedures adopted by the City Council.
After hearing any testimony and reviewing the evidence, the City Council shall
make a determination within thirty (30) days following the final submission of any
testimony or evidence by the developer. If the City Council takes no action within
thirty (30) days, the appeal shall be deemed to have been denied. ....................... 99
(3) A developer may appeal the determination of the City Council to a county or
district court of the county in which the development project is located within thirty
(30) days after the final determination by the City Council. .................................... 99
(4) The City may not require a developer to waive the right of appeal authorized
by this section as a condition of approval for a development project. .................... 99
H. MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 99
(1) The provisions of this UDC shall be interpreted and applied as the minimum
requirements for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare. ........ 99
(2) Whenever the requirements of this UDC are in conflict with the requirements
of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the requirement
that is most restrictive or that imposes the higher standards, as determined by the
City Manager, shall apply. .................................................................................... 100
(3) The issuance of any permit, certificate or approval in accordance with the
standards and requirements of this UDC shall not relieve the recipient of such
permit, certificate or approval from the responsibility of complying with all other
applicable requirements of any other county, special district, state or federal
agency having jurisdiction over the structures or land uses for which the permit,
certificate or approval was issued. ....................................................................... 100
I. EFFECTIVE DATE 100
J. SEVERABILITY 100
K. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 100
L. VALIDITY 101
SECTION 2 - OFFICIAL MAPS ............................................................................. 101
A. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 101
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 4
(1) There shall be a map known and designated as the Official Zoning Map,
which shall show the boundaries of all zoning districts within the City and which by
reference is made a part of this UDC. One (1) original official and two (2) copies of
the Official Zoning Map are hereby adopted bearing the affidavit of the City
Secretary and shall be filed and maintained as follows: ...................................... 101
(a) The original Official Zoning Map shall be maintained by the City Secretary; ................................................... 101
(b) One (1) copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be maintained in the office of the City Planner; ....................... 101
(c) One (1) copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be filed with the City Building Official; and ............................ 101
(d) One (1) electronic copy of the Zoning Map shall be posted on the City’s website. ............................................ 101
(2) The boundaries of the zoning districts as set out in SECTION 5E are and
shall be delineated upon the Official Zoning Map of the City; said map being a part
of this UDC as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail. ....................... 101
(3) All amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be made immediately after
their enactment and the date of the change shall be the effective date of the
amending ordinance adopted by the City Council. The two (2) copies of the official
Zoning Map identified in SECTION 2A(1) above, shall be updated quarterly to
reflect changes adopted by ordinance of the City Council. .................................. 101
(4) Reproductions for information purposes may, from time to time, be made of
the Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map may be made available to the
public in the City Secretary’s Office for inspection only. ...................................... 101
B. DISTRICT BOUNDARY INTERPRETATION 101
(1) The boundaries of zoning districts are indicated upon the Official Zoning
Map of the City. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as
shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: ...................... 102
(a) Boundaries indicated as following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such
centerlines. .................................................................................................................................................................... 102
(b) Boundaries indicated as following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. ................... 102
(c) Boundaries indicated as following City limits shall be construed as following such City limits. ....................... 102
(d) Boundaries indicated as following shorelines of creeks shall be construed to follow such shorelines; and in the
event of their movement, the boundaries shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated
as following the centerlies of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water should be construed to follow such
centerlines. .................................................................................................................................................................... 102
(e) In unsubdivided (unplatted) property, the zoning district boundary lines on the Official Zoning Map shall be
determined by use of the scale appearing on the map. .................................................................................................. 102
(f) In the case of a zoning district boundary line dividing a property into two (2) parts, the property will remain
divided until the property owner, City, firm or corporation petitions the City Council for rezoning. ........................... 102
(g) Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council, the zoning
district adjoining each side of such street, alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such
vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended
districts. ......................................................................................................................................................................... 102
SECTION 3 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS...................................................... 102
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS 102
(1) Source of Authority ..................................................................................... 102
(2) Implied Authority ......................................................................................... 102
(3) Limitation on Authority ................................................................................ 103
(a) City Policy .......................................................................................................................................................... 103
(b) Representations Concerning Future Action on Petition or Application .............................................................. 103
(c) Representations Concerning Future Amendments .............................................................................................. 103
(d) Effect of Development Standards on Liability Claims ....................................................................................... 103
(e) No Waivers ......................................................................................................................................................... 104
(f) Conflict in Authority .......................................................................................................................................... 104
1) Internal Inconsistency ................................................................................................................................... 104
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 5
2) Incomplete Provisions ................................................................................................................................... 104
B. CITY COUNCIL 104
(1) Authority Granted ....................................................................................... 105
(2) Duties and Approval Authority .................................................................... 105
(a) An application for amendment to the text or maps within the Comprehensive Plan; ......................................... 105
(b) An application for amendment to the text of this UDC; ..................................................................................... 105
(c) An application for annexation; ........................................................................................................................... 105
(d) An application to establish or amend a zoning district map classification, including creation or amendment of an
overlay district; ............................................................................................................................................................. 105
(e) An application for a preliminary plat, final plat or replat and waiver requests to same; ..................................... 105
(f) An application for historic landmark or district designation; ............................................................................. 105
(g) An application for approval of a conceptual plan as part of a planned development district (“PD”);................. 105
(h) An application for a specific use permit (“SUP”); .............................................................................................. 105
(i) An application for approval of a development agreement within the City’s corporate boundaries and in the City’s
ETJ; 105
(j) An application to extend City utilities to land located in the City’s ETJ; ........................................................... 105
(k) An appeal of the decision of any City board, commission or City staff, except as expressly provided for in this
UDC; and ...................................................................................................................................................................... 105
(l) Any application for a development agreement as set forth in the LGC and this UDC. ...................................... 105
C. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 105
(1) Authority Granted ....................................................................................... 105
(2) Structure of the Commission and Operational Procedures......................... 105
(3) Duties and Approval Authority .................................................................... 106
(a) The Commission shall have the authority to review and make a recommendation to the City Council on the
following applications: .................................................................................................................................................. 106
1) An application for amendment to the text or maps in the Comprehensive Plan; ........................................... 106
2) An application for amendment to the text of this UDC; ................................................................................ 106
3) An application for a preliminary plat; ........................................................................................................... 106
4) An application for a final plat; ...................................................................................................................... 106
5) An application for an amending plat; ............................................................................................................ 106
6) An application for a minor plat; .................................................................................................................... 106
7) An application for a replat; ............................................................................................................................ 106
8) An application for a site plan; ....................................................................................................................... 106
9) An application for historic landmark or district designation; ........................................................................ 106
10) An application for approval of a conceptual plan as part of a PD district; .................................................... 106
11) Variances relating to subdivisions and transportation (see SECTION 8, SECTION 9, SECTION 12,
SECTION 13, and SECTION 14); ........................................................................................................................... 106
12) An application for subdivision master plan; .................................................................................................. 106
13) An application to establish or amend a zoning district map classification, including creation or amendment of
an overlay district; and ............................................................................................................................................. 106
14) An application for approval of a rezoning request, including an application for a SUP. ............................... 106
(b) The Commission shall keep accurate minutes of each meeting, which shall be maintained within the office of the
City Secretary. .............................................................................................................................................................. 106
D. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 106
(1) Authority Granted ....................................................................................... 106
(2) Structure of the BOA .................................................................................. 106
(a) Composition and Term ....................................................................................................................................... 106
(b) Rules and Meetings ............................................................................................................................................ 106
(c) Minutes ............................................................................................................................................................... 107
(d) Vote Required for Decisions .............................................................................................................................. 107
1) Reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official; .............................. 107
2) Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the BOA is required to pass under this UDC; or ....... 107
3) Authorize a variance from the terms of a zoning regulation.......................................................................... 107
(e) Filing of Decisions ............................................................................................................................................. 107
(3) Duties and Approval Authority .................................................................... 107
(a) To hear and decide appeals when error is alleged in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
an administrative official of the City in the enforcement of this UDC or an ordinance adopted under this UDC. ........ 107
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 6
(b) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this UDC when the UDC requires the BOA to do so. .... 107
(c) To authorize, in specific cases, a variance from the zoning regulations of this UDC if the variance is not contrary
to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the regulations of this UDC would result in
unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the ordinance is observed and substantial justice is done. A variance
shall not be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor shall it be based solely on economic gain or loss,
nor shall it permit any person a privilege in developing a parcel of land not permitted by this UDC to other parcels of
land in the district. In order to make a finding of hardship and grant a variance from the zoning regulations of this
UDC, the BOA must determine the following: ............................................................................................................. 107
1) The requested variance does not violate the intent of this UDC or its amendments; ..................................... 108
2) Special conditions of restricted area, topography or physical features exist that are peculiar to the subject
parcel of land and are not applicable to other parcels of land in the same zoning district; ...................................... 108
3) The hardship is in no way the result of the applicant’s own actions; and ...................................................... 108
4) The interpretation of the provisions in this UDC or any amendments thereto would deprive the applicant of
rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district that comply with the same provisions. .. 108
(d) To hear and decide other matters as authorized by the City Council and deemed necessary in pursuit of the spirit
and intent of this UDC. ................................................................................................................................................. 108
(e) Permit the reconstruction, extension or enlargement of a building occupied by nonconforming uses, on a lot or
tract occupied by such building, provided such reconstruction, extension or enlargement does not prevent the return of
such property to a conforming use. ............................................................................................................................... 108
(f) Permit the extension of or enlargement of a building occupied by a nonconforming use, under such conditions as
the BOA may deem necessary in order to protect other properties in the neighborhood, provided such extension or
enlargement: .................................................................................................................................................................. 108
1) Does not prevent the return of such property to a conforming use; ............................................................... 108
2) Does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the ground area of the existing building; ............................. 108
3) Will not prevent compliance with applicable side yard requirements; and ................................................... 108
4) Does not allow such building to be used for any use that would normally be restricted to a more restrictive
classification. ........................................................................................................................................................... 108
(g) Require the discontinuance of a nonconforming use of land or structure under any plan whereby the full value of
the structure and facilities can be amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the general
character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to conform to the regulations of this UDC. All actions
to discontinue a non-conforming use of land or structure shall be taken with due regard for the property rights of the
persons affected when considered in light of the public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated
nonconforming use and the conservation and preservation of property. The BOA may, from time to time, on its own
motion, or upon cause presented by any interested property owners, inquire into the existence, continuation,
termination, or maintenance of any nonconforming use within the City. ...................................................................... 108
(h) Interpret the exact location of zoning district boundaries where such location cannot reasonably be determined
from the approved Zoning Map. ................................................................................................................................... 109
(4) Appeal of Administrative Official Determination .......................................... 109
(a) Procedure ............................................................................................................................................................ 109
(b) Stay of Proceedings ............................................................................................................................................ 109
(c) Hearings of Appeals ........................................................................................................................................... 109
(5) Appeals of BOA Decisions ......................................................................... 109
(a) Procedure ............................................................................................................................................................ 109
(b) Writ of Certiorari ................................................................................................................................................ 109
(c) Return of Certified Copies .................................................................................................................................. 110
(d) Hearing and Testimony ...................................................................................................................................... 110
(e) Decision of the Court.......................................................................................................................................... 110
E. ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY 110
(1) Authority Granted ....................................................................................... 110
(2) Administrative Structure ............................................................................. 110
(3) Duties and Approval Authority .................................................................... 111
(a) The City Manager shall have the authority to review and make a recommendation to the City Council on the
following applications: .................................................................................................................................................. 111
1) An application for approval of a development agreement within the City’s corporate boundaries and in the
City’s ETJ; ............................................................................................................................................................... 111
2) An appeal of the decision of any City board, commission or City staff, except as expressly provided for in
this UDC; and .......................................................................................................................................................... 111
3) An application for a development agreement as set forth in the LGC and this UDC. ................................... 111
(b) The City Manager shall have the authority to review and make a recommendation to the Commission on the
following applications: .................................................................................................................................................. 111
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 7
1) An application for amendment to the text or maps in the Comprehensive Plan; ........................................... 111
2) An application for amendment to the text of this UDC; ................................................................................ 111
3) An application to establish or amend a zoning district map classification, including the creation or
amendment of an overlay district; ............................................................................................................................ 111
4) An application for historic landmark or district designation; ........................................................................ 111
5) An application for approval of a conceptual plan as part of a PD; ................................................................ 111
6) An application for a SUP; ............................................................................................................................. 111
7) An application for a subdivision master plan; ............................................................................................... 111
8) An application for a preliminary plat; ........................................................................................................... 111
9) An application for a final plat; ...................................................................................................................... 111
10) An application for an amending plat; ............................................................................................................ 111
11) An application for a minor plat; .................................................................................................................... 111
12) An application for a replat; ............................................................................................................................ 111
13) An application for a site plan; and ................................................................................................................. 111
14) An application for annexation. ...................................................................................................................... 111
(c) The City Manager shall have the authority to review and make a recommendation to the Board of Adjustment on
the following applications: ............................................................................................................................................ 111
1) An appeal when error is alleged in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official of the City; and .................................................................................................................... 111
2) An application for special exceptions to the terms of this UDC when the UDC requires the BOA to do so. 111
(d) The City Manager shall have final approval authority on the following applications: ....................................... 112
1) An application for a minor plat, as authorized by this UDC and LGC Section 212.0065; ............................ 112
2) An application for an Amending Plat, as authorized by this UDC, and LGC Section 212.0065; .................. 112
3) Home occupation permits as authorized by SECTION 7D(3) of this UDC; and ........................................... 112
4) Other applications as authorized by this UDC. ............................................................................................. 112
(e) A record of any action taken with respect to final approval of a development application shall be provided to the
appropriate board, commission or City Council for review. ......................................................................................... 112
F. Other Boards and Commissions 112
(1) Reserved .................................................................................................... 112
SECTION 4 - PROCEDURES AND APPLICATIONS ........................................... 112
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT 112
B. INITIATION OF APPLICATION 112
(1) Application Submittal .................................................................................. 112
(2) Determination of Application Completeness ............................................... 112
(a) All development applications shall be subject to a determination of completeness by the City Manager. ......... 112
(b) No application shall be deemed complete and accepted for processing unless it is accompanied by all documents
required by and prepared in accordance with the requirements of this UDC. For a determination of completeness to be
issued, an application must include the following:........................................................................................................ 112
1) Payment of the appropriate fee; ..................................................................................................................... 112
2) An accurate metes and bounds description of the subject property (or other suitable legal description,
identifying the property as a lot of record); ............................................................................................................. 113
3) A survey exhibit and other appropriate exhibits as identified in this section for the individual permit; and . 113
4) Any additional documents, forms or other materials required by the City Manager or identified in this UDC
for the processing of a specific development application. ....................................................................................... 113
(c) The City Manager may from time to time identify additional requirements for a complete application that are not
contained within, but are consistent with the application contents and standards set forth in this UDC. ...................... 113
(d) A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive
requirements of this UDC. ............................................................................................................................................ 113
(e) Not later than the tenth (10th) business day after the date an application is submitted, the City Planner shall make
a written determination whether the application constitutes a complete application. This determination shall include a
statement that all information and documents required by this UDC for the type of permit being requested or other
requirements have been submitted. A determination that the application is incomplete shall be mailed to the applicant
within such time period by United States Mail at the address listed on the application. The determination shall specify
the documents or other information needed to complete the application and shall state that the application will expire if
the specified documents or other information are not submitted within forty-five (45) days after the date the application
was submitted. .............................................................................................................................................................. 113
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 8
(f) An application filed on or after the effective date of this amended and restated UDC shall be deemed complete
on the eleventh (11th) business day after the application has been received, if the applicant has not otherwise been
notified that the application is incomplete. For purposes of this section, the applicant shall be deemed to have been
notified if the City has mailed a copy of the determination as provided in SECTION 4B(2)(e) above. ........................ 113
(g) The processing of an application by any City employee prior to the time the application is determined to be
complete shall not be binding on the City as the official acceptance of the application for filing. However, this
application may be denied for incompleteness within the forty-five (45)-day period as provided in SECTION 4B(2)(e)
above. 113
(h) A development application shall be deemed to expire on the forty-fifth (45th) day after the application is
submitted to the City Manager for processing if the applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary
to meet the requirements of this UDC or other requirements as specified in the determination provided to the applicant.
Upon expiration, the application will be returned to the applicant together with any accompanying documents.
Thereafter, a new application must be submitted. ......................................................................................................... 113
(i) No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has expired pursuant to this section, or from
the filing of a complete application that is subsequently denied. .................................................................................. 114
(3) Application Withdrawal ............................................................................... 114
C. NOTICE REQUIREMENTS 114
(1) Published Notice ........................................................................................ 114
(2) Written Notice ............................................................................................. 114
D. PUBLIC HEARINGS 114
(1) Public Hearing Required ............................................................................. 114
(2) Conduct of Public Hearing .......................................................................... 115
(a) The City staff may present a description of the proposed project and a written or oral recommendation, if
requested. Any written recommendation shall be available to the public upon request at or about the time that the
agenda packet for the body conducting the hearing is compiled. .................................................................................. 115
(b) The applicant may present any information it deems appropriate. ..................................................................... 115
(c) Testimony in support of the application may be presented by any individual who expresses an interest in the
proposed project. ........................................................................................................................................................... 115
(d) Testimony in opposition to the application may be presented by any individual who expresses an interest in the
proposed project. ........................................................................................................................................................... 115
(e) At the discretion of the chairperson, the City staff and the applicant may respond to any statement by the public.
115
(f) The body conducting the hearing may exclude or disregard testimony or evidence that it finds to be irrelevant,
immaterial or unduly repetitious. .................................................................................................................................. 115
(g) At the sole discretion of the chairperson of the body conducting the hearing, an individual may be permitted to
pose relevant questions to staff, the applicant or the body conducting the public hearing, as directed by the chairperson.
115
(h) Closure of the public hearing. ............................................................................................................................. 115
(i) If the public hearing is held before an advisory body, the advisory body (i.e., Commission) shall make a
recommendation and shall prepare a written report with its recommendations to the City Council. ............................ 115
(3) Continuance of Public Hearing ................................................................... 115
(4) Additional Rules ......................................................................................... 115
(5) Joint Public Hearing ................................................................................... 116
(a) The City Council shall establish the date of the joint public hearing by motion at a regular or special meeting. 116
(b) The City Council shall cause notice of the joint public hearing to be provided as required by this UDC and the
TOMA and, by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of its members, may prescribe the type of notice for the joint public hearing.
116
(c) The advisory body (i.e., Commission) and the City Council shall be convened for the public hearing and for any
action to be taken on the petition or application. ........................................................................................................... 116
(d) The advisory body (i.e., Commission) and the City Council may take action on the application at the same
meeting, provided that the City Council shall not take action until the written report and recommendation of the
advisory body (i.e., Commission) have been received. ................................................................................................. 116
E. POST-DECISION PROCEDURES 116
(1) Notification Required .................................................................................. 116
(2) Reapplication Following Denial .................................................................. 116
(3) Amendments and Revisions to Approved Application ................................ 117
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 9
F. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT 117
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 117
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 117
(a) Application Required .......................................................................................................................................... 117
(b) Accompanying Applications .............................................................................................................................. 117
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 117
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 117
(b) Notification Requirements .................................................................................................................................. 118
(c) Commission Recommendation ........................................................................................................................... 118
(d) Decision by City Council ................................................................................................................................... 118
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 118
(a) The proposed amendment promotes the health, safety, or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly,
efficient and healthful development of the City; ........................................................................................................... 118
(b) An amendment to the text is consistent with other policies of the Comprehensive Plan, taking into account the
nature of any proposed map amendment associated with the text amendment; ............................................................ 118
(c) An amendment to the Thoroughfare Master Plan or any other applicable maps contained in the Comprehensive
Plan is consistent with the policies of the Comprehensive Plan that apply to the map being amended, taking into
account the nature of any proposed land use associated with the map amendment; ..................................................... 118
(d) Any proposed amendment is consistent with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan; .................. 118
(e) Any proposed amendment addresses circumstances that have changed since the last time the plan map or text
was considered, implements plan policies better than the current plan map or text, corrects a mapping error, or
addresses a deficiency in the plan; and ......................................................................................................................... 118
(f) Other criteria that, at the discretion of the Commission and City Council, are deemed relevant and important in
the consideration of the amendment. ............................................................................................................................. 118
G. AMENDMENT OF UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE 118
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 119
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 119
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 119
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 119
(b) Notification Requirements .................................................................................................................................. 119
(c) Commission Recommendation ........................................................................................................................... 119
(d) Decision by City Council ................................................................................................................................... 119
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 119
(a) The proposed amendment promotes the health, safety, or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly,
efficient and healthful development of the City. ........................................................................................................... 120
(b) An amendment to the text is consistent with other policies of this UDC and the City. ...................................... 120
(c) Any proposed amendment is consistent with the goals and objectives of this UDC and the City. ..................... 120
(d) Other criteria which, at the discretion of the Commission and the City Council, are deemed relevant and
important in the consideration of the amendment. ........................................................................................................ 120
H. ANNEXATION 120
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 120
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 120
(a) Application Required .......................................................................................................................................... 120
(b) Accompanying Applications .............................................................................................................................. 120
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 120
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 120
(b) Development Agreement .................................................................................................................................... 121
(c) Notification Requirements .................................................................................................................................. 121
(d) Service Plan Required ........................................................................................................................................ 121
(e) Decision by City Council ................................................................................................................................... 121
(f) Other Procedures Applicable .............................................................................................................................. 121
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 121
(a) The application is consistent with the requirements of Texas law and this UDC; .............................................. 121
(b) The annexation promotes the health, safety, or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and
healthful development of the City; ................................................................................................................................ 121
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 10
(c) The property owners and residents of the area consent to the annexation; ......................................................... 121
(d) The application includes a service plan as required by this SECTION 4H; ........................................................ 121
(e) The annexation is consistent with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan; and ............................ 121
(f) Other criteria which, at the discretion of the Commission and City Council, are deemed relevant and important in
the consideration of the amendment. ............................................................................................................................. 121
I. DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS FOR PROPERTY IN THE ETJ 121
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 121
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 122
(a) Application Required .......................................................................................................................................... 122
(b) Accompanying Applications .............................................................................................................................. 122
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 122
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 122
(b) Preparation and Negotiation of Agreement ........................................................................................................ 122
(c) Decision by City Council ................................................................................................................................... 122
(d) Recording Agreement ......................................................................................................................................... 122
J. UTILITY SERVICE EXTENSION WITHIN THE ETJ 122
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 122
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 123
(a) Application Required .......................................................................................................................................... 123
(b) Accompanying Applications .............................................................................................................................. 123
1) An application for utility service extension shall be accompanied by a request for voluntary annexation. The
City may, at its option, elect to annex the property upon request if the property meets the requirements of LGC
Chapter 43 and this UDC or may delay the annexation until such time the City deems necessary to promote the
health, safety or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City.
123
2) An application for utility service extension may be accompanied by an application for a subdivision master
plan prepared in accordance with SECTION 8E of this UDC. A subdivision master plan may not be approved until
final approval of the utility service extension by the City Council. ......................................................................... 123
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 123
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 123
(b) Review and Processing of Request ..................................................................................................................... 123
(c) Decision by City Council ................................................................................................................................... 123
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 124
(a) Whether the proposed development to be served by the extension is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan; 124
(b) Whether the extension is proposed to be constructed in accordance with all applicable City ordinances,
regulations and standards; ............................................................................................................................................. 124
(c) Whether it is feasible to annex the property, and any intervening or adjacent and abutting property which is
needed for utility rights-of-way, into the City in conformity to Chapter 43 of the LGC; .............................................. 124
(d) Whether the utility extension would compromise the City's ability to timely provide adequate water or
wastewater facilities to property inside the City; .......................................................................................................... 124
(e) Whether the utility extension will lead to premature development that cannot be served efficiently and timely by
emergency services and roadway, drainage or park facilities; ...................................................................................... 124
(f) Whether the utility extension is financially feasible to the City given the proposed means of financing the
extension; ...................................................................................................................................................................... 124
(g) Whether the utility extension will lead to significant degradation of water quality or other environmental
resources, either from construction of the water or wastewater improvements, development of the property owner’s
land, or development of other land that may be served through the extended facilities; ............................................... 124
(h) Whether the property owner proposes to extend wastewater facilities without utilizing City water facilities; and
124
(i) The extent to which the proposed agreement promotes the health, safety or general welfare of the City and the
safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City. ..................................................................................... 124
K. VARIANCES 124
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 124
(a) The BOA shall have the ability to authorize, in specific cases, a variance from the zoning regulations of this
UDC if the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this UDC is observed and substantial justice is
done. A variance shall not be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor shall it be based solely on
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 11
economic gain or loss, nor shall it permit any person a privilege in developing a parcel of land not permitted by this
UDC to other parcels of land in the district. .................................................................................................................. 124
(b) Approval of a variance legitimizes a condition that would otherwise be a violation of this UDC and authorizes a
property owner to submit subsequent development applications consistent with the approved variance. ..................... 125
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 125
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 125
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 125
(b) Notification Requirements .................................................................................................................................. 125
1) Written notice; and ........................................................................................................................................ 125
2) Published notice. ........................................................................................................................................... 125
(c) Decision by the BOA.......................................................................................................................................... 125
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 125
(a) The requested variance does not violate the intent of this UDC or its amendments; .......................................... 125
(b) Special conditions of restricted area, topography or physical features exist that are peculiar to the subject parcel
of land and are not applicable to other parcels of land in the same zoning district; ...................................................... 125
(c) The hardship is in no way the result of the applicant’s own actions; and ........................................................... 125
(d) The interpretation of the provisions in this UDC or any amendments thereto would deprive the applicant of
rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district that comply with the same provisions. ....... 126
(5) Appeals of BOA Decisions ......................................................................... 126
L. SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS 126
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 126
(a) The BOA shall have the ability to authorize a modification of zoning standards applicable to particular types of
development within any zoning district which is consistent with the overall intent of the zoning ordinance and for
which express standards are prescribed, but that requires additional review to determine whether the development with
the modification is compatible with adjoining land uses and the character of the neighborhood in which the
development is proposed. An application for a special exception may be filed for only those modifications specifically
identified in this UDC. .................................................................................................................................................. 126
(b) Approval of a special exception authorizes a property owner to submit subsequent development applications
consistent with the approved special exception. ............................................................................................................ 126
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 126
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 126
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 126
(b) Notification Requirements .................................................................................................................................. 126
1) Written notice; and ........................................................................................................................................ 126
2) Published notice. ........................................................................................................................................... 126
(c) Decision by the BOA.......................................................................................................................................... 127
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 127
(a) That granting the special exception serves an obvious and necessary purpose. .................................................. 127
(b) That granting the special exception will ensure an equal or better level of land use compatibility than the
otherwise applicable standards. ..................................................................................................................................... 127
(c) That granting the special exception will not materially or adversely affect adjacent land uses or the physical
character of uses in the immediate vicinity of the proposed development because of inadequate buffering, screening,
setbacks or other land use considerations. ..................................................................................................................... 127
(d) That granting the special exception will not adversely affect adjoining property values in any material way. .. 127
(e) That granting the special exception will be generally consistent with the purposes and intent of this UDC. ..... 127
(f) That the use or special exception being sought is specifically identified in the permitted uses section of the
controlling zoning district for the subject property as identified in this UDC. .............................................................. 127
(g) That the applicant’s requested use or exception specifically meets or exceeds the express standards prescribed
for the property in the controlling zoning district. ......................................................................................................... 127
(5) Appeal of Decision on Special Exception ................................................... 127
M. APPEAL OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION DETERMINATION 127
(1) Purpose and Applicability ........................................................................... 127
(2) Appeal Requirements ................................................................................. 128
(3) Processing of Appeal and Decision ............................................................ 128
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 128
(b) Stay of Proceedings ............................................................................................................................................ 128
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 12
(c) Notification Requirements .................................................................................................................................. 128
1) Written notice; and ........................................................................................................................................ 128
2) Published notice. ........................................................................................................................................... 129
(d) Decision on Appeal ............................................................................................................................................ 129
(e) Notification of Decision on Appeal .................................................................................................................... 129
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 129
(5) Expiration and Extension ............................................................................ 129
N. PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND
COMMUNITY FACILITIES AGREEMENTS 129
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 129
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 129
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 129
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 129
(b) Decision by the City Manager ............................................................................................................................ 130
(c) Revisions to Construction Plans ......................................................................................................................... 130
(d) Appeals ............................................................................................................................................................... 130
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 130
(a) The plans are consistent with the approved preliminary plat and the proposed final plat; .................................. 130
(b) The plans conform to all applicable regulations pertaining to the construction and installation of public
infrastructure improvements; and.................................................................................................................................. 130
(c) The plans have been reviewed and approved by the City Manager. ................................................................... 131
(5) Timing of Public Infrastructure Improvement Construction ......................... 131
(a) Completion Prior to Final Plat Recordation ........................................................................................................ 131
(b) Installation after Final Plat Approval .................................................................................................................. 131
(c) Off-Site Easements ............................................................................................................................................. 131
(6) Community Facilities Agreement ................................................................ 131
(a) Obligations under Agreement ............................................................................................................................. 131
1) Covenants to complete the improvements; .................................................................................................... 132
2) Covenants to warranty the improvements for a period of two (2) years following final acceptance by the City;
132
3) Covenants to provide a maintenance bond in the amount of one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the
costs of the improvements for such two (2)-year warranty period; .......................................................................... 132
4) Provisions for participation in the costs of the public infrastructure improvements by the City, if authorization
has been obtained from the City Council, and a performance bond and payment bond for such improvements from
the contractor in favor of the City as a co-obligee; .................................................................................................. 132
5) Provisions for securing the obligations of the agreement consistent with SECTION 4N(7) below; and ....... 132
6) Such other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the property owner and the City, or as may be required
by this UDC. ............................................................................................................................................................ 132
(b) Covenants to Run with the Land ........................................................................................................................ 132
(7) Security for Completion of Improvements ................................................... 132
(a) Security .............................................................................................................................................................. 132
1) A cash escrow with the City; or .................................................................................................................... 132
2) A performance bond provided by a licensed surety company authorized to underwrite federal obligations; or
132
3) A certificate of deposit issued by any financial institution which is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation or Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation assigned to the City and providing for the City to
withdraw the deposit if necessary to complete construction; or ............................................................................... 132
4) An irrevocable letter of credit in a form approved by the City Attorney; and ............................................... 133
5) A conditional assignment to the City of the construction contract between the property owner or developer
and a general contractor for the construction of the deferred public infrastructure improvements in a form acceptable
to the City Attorney. ................................................................................................................................................ 133
(b) Amount and Acceptability .................................................................................................................................. 133
(c) Building Permits ................................................................................................................................................. 133
(d) Remedies ............................................................................................................................................................ 133
1) Declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the public infrastructure improvements be installed
regardless of the extent of completion of the development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default; . 133
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 13
2) Obtain funds under the security and complete the public infrastructure improvements itself or through a third
party; 133
3) Obtain funds under the security and hold the funds in escrow for completion of the public infrastructure
improvements at a future date; or ............................................................................................................................ 133
4) Assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party, including a subsequent owner of the
development in exchange for the subsequent owner's agreement and posting of security to complete the public
infrastructure improvements serving the tract. ......................................................................................................... 133
(8) Inspection and Final Acceptance of Public Improvements ......................... 133
(a) Inspections .......................................................................................................................................................... 134
(b) Submission of As-Built Plans or Record Drawings ............................................................................................ 134
1) One (1) set of full size plans; ......................................................................................................................... 134
2) Electronic (digital) copies of all plans in CAD .dxf or .dwg format and .pdf format; ................................... 134
3) Design Engineer’s Certificate of Review; and .............................................................................................. 134
4) Letter with guaranties and costs of all infrastructure being dedicated to the City to include information
regarding: linear feet of streets, public drainage, sewer lines and water lines. ......................................................... 134
(c) Final Acceptance of Infrastructure Improvements .............................................................................................. 134
(d) Disclaimer .......................................................................................................................................................... 135
(9) Maintenance and Warranty of Improvements ............................................. 135
(a) Maintenance During Construction ...................................................................................................................... 135
(b) Bond ................................................................................................................................................................... 135
O. BUILDING PERMITS 135
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 135
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 135
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 135
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 135
(b) Decision by the Building Official ....................................................................................................................... 136
(c) Appeals ............................................................................................................................................................... 136
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 136
(a) The application generally conforms to all prior approved development applications for the property and any
variance authorizing variation from the standards otherwise applicable to the permit; ................................................. 136
(b) The location of the structure on the property is in accordance with all prior approved development applications,
the City’s Code of Ordinances, and all other applicable local, state and federal regulations; ....................................... 136
(c) The proposed plan for construction or alteration conforms to the City’s adopted Building Code and other
applicable construction codes adopted by the City; ...................................................................................................... 136
(d) All applicable fees, including impact fees, have been paid; ............................................................................... 136
(e) A final plat of the property has been recorded in the Kaufman County plat records; and .................................. 136
(f) All public infrastructure required has been installed and accepted by the City. ................................................. 136
(5) Issuance ..................................................................................................... 136
(a) Additions to existing structures which do not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the building’s floor area in
existence at the time of the adoption of this UDC; and ................................................................................................. 136
(b) Interior finish-out or improvements to existing structures. ................................................................................. 136
(6) Cancellation of Building Permit ................................................................... 136
P. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY 137
(1) A Certificate of Occupancy (“CO”) shall be required for any of the following:137
(a) Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered; ........................................................ 137
(b) Change in use of an existing building to a different use; and ............................................................................. 137
(c) Change in the use of land to a different use. ....................................................................................................... 137
(2) No such use, or change of use, shall take place until a CO therefor shall
have been issued by the Building Official. ........................................................... 137
(3) A record of all COs shall be kept on file in the City Secretary’s office, and
copies shall be furnished upon request to any person in accordance with Texas
law. 137
(4) Procedure for New or Altered Buildings - Written application for a CO for a
new building or for an existing building that is to be altered shall be made at the
same time as the application for the building permit for such building. Said CO
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 14
shall be issued after the Building Official orders the building or structure inspected
and finds no violations of the provisions of this UDC, or other regulations that are
enforced by the Building Official. Said CO shall be issued by the Building Official
after the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof has been completed
in conformity with all applicable provisions of this UDC and City building codes. 137
(5) Procedure for Vacant Land or a Change in Building Use - Written application
for a CO for the use of vacant land, a change in the use of land or a change in the
use of a building, or for a change from a nonconforming use to a conforming use,
shall be made to the Building Official. If the proposed use is a conforming use, as
herein provided, written application shall be made to said Building Official. If the
proposed use is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this UDC and
other applicable City codes, the CO shall be issued after the application for same
has been made and all required inspections are completed and approved by the
Building Official within ten (10) days following receipt of the application. ............ 137
(6) Contents of CO - Every CO shall contain the following information: ........... 137
(a) Building permit number; .................................................................................................................................... 137
(b) The address of the building; ............................................................................................................................... 137
(c) The name and address of the owner; .................................................................................................................. 137
(d) A description of that portion of the building for which the CO is issued; .......................................................... 137
(e) A statement that the described portion of the building has been inspected for compliance with the requirements
of the City’s building codes for the particular group and division of occupancy; ......................................................... 137
(f) The name of the Building Official; ..................................................................................................................... 138
(g) Use(s) allowed; ................................................................................................................................................... 138
(h) Maximum number of persons/occupants; and .................................................................................................... 138
(i) Issue date of the CO. .......................................................................................................................................... 138
(7) Posting of CO - The CO shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises and shall not be removed except by the Building Official. .................... 138
(8) Revocation of CO - The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a
CO issued under the provisions of this UDC whenever the CO is issued in error, or
on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or when it is determined that the
building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation
or any of the provision of this UDC or the building code and other codes adopted
by the City, and any amendments thereto. .......................................................... 138
(9) Temporary CO - Pending the issuance of a regular Certificate, a temporary
CO may be issued by the Building Official for a time period not exceeding one
hundred eighty (180) calendar days during the completion of alterations or during
partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Issuance of a temporary
CO shall only be upon a finding by the Building Official that early occupancy of the
premises prior to completion will not, in his/her opinion, be detrimental to the
occupant’s or others’ health, safety or welfare. Issuance of a temporary CO shall
not be construed to alter the respective rights, duties or obligations of the owner or
of the City relating to the use occupancy of the premises or any other matter
covered by this UDC. ........................................................................................... 138
(10) CO for Nonconforming Uses - A CO shall be required for all lawful
nonconforming uses of land and/or buildings created by adoption of this UDC.
Application for such CO for a nonconforming use shall be filed with the Building
Official by the owner or occupant of the structure or land that is occupied by the
nonconforming use within one (1) year following the effective date of this UDC. It
shall be the duty of the Building Official to issue a CO for a lawful nonconforming
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 15
use upon receipt of application for same, but failure to apply for such CO for a
nonconforming use (i.e., by the owner or occupant of the premises) shall be
evidence that said nonconforming use was either illegal or did not lawfully exist as
of the effective date of this UDC. ......................................................................... 138
Q. COMPLETION OF BUILDINGS IN PROGRESS 138
SECTION 5 - ZONING DISTRICTS ...................................................................... 138
A. PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 139
B. DIMENSIONAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL STANDARDS 139
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 139
(2) Additional Dimensional and Development Standards ................................. 139
(a) All lots developed shall comply with the lot area, minimum setbacks and height requirements established in
SECTION 5E for the zoning district(s) in which the lot(s) is/are located. .................................................................... 139
(b) All lots developed for nonresidential purposes shall comply with lot, area, minimum setbacks, and maximum
height requirements established for the zoning district(s) in which the lot(s) is located, as established in SECTION 5E.
139
(c) All lots shall have at least the minimum area, width and depth as indicated in SECTION 5E. .......................... 139
(d) Platted subdivisions established by a duly approved plat filed prior to adoption of this UDC shall be exempt from
meeting any new lot width, depth, and/or square footage requirements. ....................................................................... 139
(e) No lot existing at the time of passage of this UDC shall be reduced in size below the minimum area requirements
set forth in SECTION 5E. ............................................................................................................................................. 139
(f) Minimum lot size requirements shall not apply to previously platted lots that are annexed into the City, but shall
apply in the event of a vacation and replat of such property. All other requirements of this UDC shall, nevertheless,
apply. 139
(g) No portion of any building on a residential lot may be located on any lot closer to any lot line or to the street
right-of-way line than is authorized in SECTION 5E, unless otherwise listed below: .................................................. 140
1) Where the frontage on one (1) side of a street is divided by two (2) or more zoning districts, the front yard
setback shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire frontage between the nearest
intersecting streets. .................................................................................................................................................. 140
2) Where the building setback line has been established by plat and exceeds the requirements of this UDC, the
more restrictive setback line shall apply. ................................................................................................................. 140
3) The front yard setback shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, covered
porch, covered terrace, or attached accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions may project into the required
front yard, not to exceed twenty-four inches (24”). ................................................................................................. 140
4) Side Yards: Every part of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed except for accessory buildings
as permitted herein and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and other architectural
features projecting, not to exceed, twelve inches (12”) into the required side yard, and roof eaves projecting, not to
exceed, twenty-four inches (24”) into the required side yard. .................................................................................. 140
5) Rear Yards: Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty
inches (30”) above the general ground level of the graded lot, except for accessory buildings as permitted and the
ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and roof overhangs and other architectural features
projecting, not to exceed, twenty-four inches (24”) into the required rear yard. ...................................................... 140
6) Where lots have double frontage, running from one (1) street to another, a required front yard setback shall be
provided on both streets. .......................................................................................................................................... 140
7) Mixed Use Building: In a building serving dwelling and other uses, in any district, the height and area
regulations applicable to nonresidential buildings shall apply. ................................................................................ 140
8) There shall be only one (1) residential dwelling on each platted residential lot of a duly recorded plat. ...... 140
C. ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES 140
(1) Boundaries shown as approximately following the centerlines of streets,
highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines. ........................ 140
(2) Boundaries shown as approximately following platted lot lines shall be
construed as following such lot lines. ................................................................... 141
(3) Boundaries shown as approximately following City limits shall be construed
as following such City limits. ................................................................................ 141
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 16
(4) Boundaries shown as following railroad lines shall be construed to be
located along the centerline of the railroad right-of-way lines. ............................. 141
(5) Boundaries shown as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such
shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as
moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries shown as approximately following
the centerlines of streams, rivers, creeks, canals, bodies of water, or drainage
ways shall be construed to follow such centerlines, and in the event of change in
any such centerlines shall be construed to move with such centerlines. ............. 141
(6) Boundaries shown as parallel to, or extensions of, features described in
SECTION 5C(1) through SECTION 5C(5) above shall be so construed. The scale
of the Map shall determine distances that are not specifically indicated on the
Zoning Map. ......................................................................................................... 141
(7) Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of
the City Council, or whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the
zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way
shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or
public way and all areas so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all
regulations of the extended districts. ................................................................... 141
(8) The zoning classification applied to a tract of land adjacent to a street shall
extend to the centerline of the street unless, as a condition of zoning approval, it is
specifically stated that the zoning classification shall not apply to the street. ...... 141
(9) Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information
shown on the Zoning Map, or if there arises a question as to how or whether a
parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the
application of SECTION 5C(1) through SECTION 5C(8) above, then the BOA shall
interpret the zoning district boundaries. If the BOA cannot ascertain the zoning of
the property, then the property shall be considered classified as “A” (Agricultural
district) in the same manner as provided for newly annexed territory. ................. 141
(10) If the zoning of property is invalidated by a judgment of a court of
competent jurisdiction, the property shall be considered classified as "A"
(Agricultural district) in the same manner as provided for newly annexed territory.141
(11) Zoning changes which are still valid and which were made between the
effective date of the previous Zoning Ordinance (Ordinance No. 050406, as
amended), adopted on May 8, 2006, and the effective date of this Ordinance are
indicated in approximate locations on the Zoning Map. For exact legal
descriptions, refer to the adopting ordinances for each particular zoning change.141
D. ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED 141
(1) The City is hereby geographically divided into zoning districts and the
boundaries of those districts herein are delineated upon the Official Zoning Map of
the City. The use and dimensional regulations, and other standards, as set out in
this section apply to each district. Zoning districts are established in compliance
with adopted Comprehensive and Thoroughfare Plans. The districts established
herein shall be known as: .................................................................................... 142
(2) Permitted Uses ........................................................................................... 142
(3) Special Requirements for Single-Family (SF) Zoning Districts ................... 142
(a) Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes, and shall be
parked and stored behind the front building façade of the main structure (i.e., the house). .......................................... 142
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 17
(b) Electrical fencing and barbed wire are prohibited as perimeter fencing except for containment of farm animals on
parcels of five (5) or more acres. ................................................................................................................................... 142
(c) Open storage is prohibited (except for usable materials for the resident's personal use or consumption such as
firewood, garden materials, farm equipment that is in usable and running condition, etc., which cannot be stored in any
required setback and which shall be screened from view of public streets and neighboring properties). ...................... 143
(d) Single-family homes, including town homes and manufactured homes, with side-entry garages where lot
frontage is only to one street (not a corner lot) shall have a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') from the door face of the
garage or carport to the side property line for maneuvering. The minimum setback from any garage door to a street or
alley right-of-way line shall also be twenty-five feet (25’). .......................................................................................... 143
(e) The elimination of a garage space by enclosing the garage with a stationary building wall shall be prohibited
unless another garage of the same size (i.e., that has the same number of parking spaces) is built elsewhere on the lot
within the proper setbacks, not exceeding the maximum lot coverage, etc. .................................................................. 143
(f) Swimming pools shall comply with the City of Crandall’s codes/ordinances pertaining to same. ..................... 143
(g) Site plan approval shall be required for any nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private
recreation facility, etc.) in the Agricultural District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district
shall conform to the NS-Neighborhood Service district standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping,
exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc. ............................................................. 143
(h) Other Regulations - As established by SECTION 7, SECTION 8, and SECTION 9 of this UDC. ................... 143
(4) Special Requirements for Certain Nonresidential Zoning Districts ............. 143
(a) Parking requirements are as set forth in SECTION 10 of this UDC. .................................................................. 143
(b) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9E of this UDC. All façades of main buildings that
face a public street or a residentially zoned district shall have façade offsets of at least five feet (5’) for every fifty-foot
(50’) length of flat wall, both horizontally and vertically, and such offsets shall comprise at least fifteen percent (15%)
of the total overall horizontal façade length for horizontal offsets, and average vertical façade height for vertical offsets
(i.e., above the average vertical roof plane of the building as viewed on plan elevations). ........................................... 143
(c) Driveway Spacing (i.e., distance between driveways, measured edge-to-edge): ................................................ 143
1) Arterial street – One driveway per two hundred (200) linear feet of frontage. .............................................. 143
2) Collector street – One driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of frontage. ........................................... 144
3) Local/residential street – One driveway per fifty (50) linear feet of frontage unless a platted lot’s frontage is
less than fifty feet (50’) but in conformance with the Development Standards’ requirements for minimum lot
frontage, in which case one driveway shall be allowed per platted lot. ................................................................... 144
4) Minimum distance from driveway to street corner – Seventy-five feet (75’), as measured from the street
corner radius point of tangency. Fifty feet (50’) may be permitted via site plan approval by the City Council, upon
recommendation by the Commission, provided that the lesser distance of fifty feet (50’) is approved in writing by
the City Manager or, if located on a State roadway, it is approved in writing by the local representative of the Texas
Department of Transportation. ................................................................................................................................. 144
(d) Site Plan Review - Review and approval of a site plan by the Commission and the City Council (in accordance
with SECTION 8N of this UDC) shall be required for any tract/lot within these zoning districts. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued unless all construction and development conforms to the Site Plan as approved by the City
Council. ......................................................................................................................................................................... 144
(e) Landscaping Requirements – Landscaping is required for these zoning districts. See SECTION 9G of this UDC.
144
(f) Screening Requirements – Screening is required in these zoning districts. See SECTION 9H of this UDC. .... 144
(g) Building facade (i.e., elevation) plans shall be submitted for review and approval along with the Site Plan.
Facade plans shall clearly show how the building(s) will look, especially as viewed from the major thoroughfare upon
which the property faces and/or sides, and will portray a reasonably accurate depiction of the materials and colors to be
used. The City Manager may require submission of additional information and materials (possibly actual samples of
materials to be used) during the Site Plan review process. ............................................................................................ 144
(h) Recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes or temporary buildings may not be used for on-site dwelling
or permanent nonresidential purposes. .......................................................................................................................... 144
(i) Where outside storage or display of merchandise is allowed, the following requirements shall be met: ........... 144
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees,
pumpkins, etc.) shall meet the following requirements:........................................................................................... 144
a) Storage ..................................................................................................................................................... 144
i) Shall not occupy any of the parking spaces that are required by this UDC for the primary use(s) of the
property (except on a temporary basis only, which is a maximum of thirty (30) days per display and a
maximum of two displays per calendar year); ............................................................................................... 144
ii) Shall not pose a safety or visibility hazard, nor impede public vehicular or pedestrian circulation, either
on-site or off-site, in any way; and ................................................................................................................ 145
iii) Shall not extend into public right-of-way or onto adjacent property. .................................................. 145
b) All outside display items shall be removed at the end of business each day (except for large seasonal items
such as Christmas trees). .................................................................................................................................... 145
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 18
2) Long-term or permanent open storage shall require issuance of a Specific Use Permit (SUP) in accordance
with SECTION 5I of this UDC, shall be limited to a maximum of five percent (5%) of the total lot area, shall not be
located in front of (i.e., on the street side of) or on top of the building, and must be screened in accordance with the
provisions of SECTION 9H of this UDC (i.e., cannot be visible from any public street or adjacent property).
However, periodic temporary display of seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) is allowed during the
appropriate time periods (see provisions for outside display above). ...................................................................... 145
3) All merchandise shall be displayed in a neat, orderly manner, and the display area shall be maintained in a
clean, litter-free manner. .......................................................................................................................................... 145
(j) Other regulations apply as established in SECTION 7, SECTION 8, and SECTION 9 of this UDC. ............... 145
E. ZONING DISTRICTS 145
(1) A - Agricultural District ................................................................................ 145
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 145
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 146
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building/house, whichever is less. ...... 146
2) Forty-five feet (45') for uninhabited agricultural structures (e.g., barns, silos, water towers, etc.), provided
they are no closer than one hundred feet (100') from any residential structure on the premises, and they are set back
at least one hundred feet (100') or three (3) times their height (whichever is greater) from any front, side or rear
property line. ............................................................................................................................................................ 146
3) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling
units, etc. .................................................................................................................................................................. 146
4) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9, of this UDC). ......................................................... 146
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 146
1) Size of Lots ................................................................................................................................................... 146
a) Minimum Lot Area - Five (5) acres. ........................................................................................................ 146
b) Minimum Lot Width - Two hundred and fifty feet (250'). ....................................................................... 146
c) Minimum Lot Depth - Two hundred feet (200'). ...................................................................................... 146
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 146
a) Minimum Front Yard - Fifty feet (50'). .................................................................................................... 146
b) Minimum Side Yard - Fifteen percent (15%) of the lot width, but need not exceed fifty feet (50'); twentyfive
feet (25') from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot. ............................................................................ 146
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty-five feet (25'). ......................................................................................... 146
3) Maximum Lot Coverage ............................................................................................................................... 146
4) Parking Regulations ...................................................................................................................................... 146
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building
line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces on a paved driveway having a
minimum length of twenty-five feet (25’) s measured from the street right-of-way line. ................................... 146
b) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC. ................................................................................................... 146
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – Two thousand two hundred and fifty (2,250) square feet. ......... 146
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12 .......................................................................................................................... 146
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this UDC. ............................................... 146
(2) SF-E - Single-Family Estate Residential District ......................................... 146
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 147
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 147
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building/house, whichever is less. ...... 147
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling
units, etc. .................................................................................................................................................................. 147
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9, of this UDC). ......................................................... 147
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 147
1) Size of Lots ................................................................................................................................................... 147
a) Minimum Lot Area - Forty thousand (40,000) square feet; maximum density one (1) dwelling unit per
acre. 147
b) Minimum Lot Width - One hundred and twenty feet (120’). ................................................................... 147
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred and twenty feet (120’). ................................................................... 147
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 147
a) Minimum Front Yard - Forty feet (40'). ................................................................................................... 147
b) Minimum Side Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’); twenty-five feet (25’) from a street right-of way line for a
corner lot. ........................................................................................................................................................... 147
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’). ........................................................................................ 147
3) Maximum Lot Coverage ............................................................................................................................... 147
4) Parking Regulations ...................................................................................................................................... 147
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 19
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building
line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces on a paved driveway having a
minimum length of twenty-five feet (25’) as measured from the street right-of-way line. ................................. 147
b) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC. ................................................................................................... 147
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – Two thousand two hundred and fifty (2,250) square feet. ......... 148
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12 .......................................................................................................................... 148
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this UDC. .............................................. 148
(3) SF-20 - Single-Family Residential-20 District ............................................. 148
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 148
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 148
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building/house, whichever is less. ...... 148
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling
units, etc. .................................................................................................................................................................. 148
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC). .......................................................... 148
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 148
1) Size of Lots ................................................................................................................................................... 148
a) Minimum Lot Area - Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet; maximum density two (2) dwelling units per
acre. 148
b) Minimum Lot Width - One hundred ten feet (110’). ................................................................................ 148
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred twenty feet (120’). .......................................................................... 148
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 148
a) Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30'). .................................................................................................. 148
b) Minimum Side Yard – Fifteen feet (15’); twenty-five feet (25') from a street right-of-way line for a corner
lot. 148
c) Minimum Rear Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’). ........................................................................................ 148
3) Maximum Lot Coverage ............................................................................................................................... 148
4) Parking Regulations ...................................................................................................................................... 149
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building
line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces on a paved driveway having a
minimum length of twenty-five feet (25’) as measured from the street right-of-way line. ................................. 149
b) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC. ................................................................................................... 149
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – Two thousand two hundred and fifty (2,250) square feet. ......... 149
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12 .......................................................................................................................... 149
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this UDC. ............................................... 149
(4) SF-12.5 - Single-Family Residential-12.5 District ....................................... 149
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 149
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 149
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building/house, whichever is less. ...... 149
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling
units, etc. .................................................................................................................................................................. 149
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC). .......................................................... 149
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 149
1) Size of Lots ................................................................................................................................................... 149
a) Minimum Lot Area - Twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet; also, the minimum average lot
area shall be thirteen thousand five hundred (13,500) square feet in order to provide diversity in lot sizes within
each SF-12.5 neighborhood; maximum density three (3) dwelling units per acre. ............................................. 149
b) Minimum Lot Width – Eighty-five feet (85’). ......................................................................................... 149
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred twenty feet (120’). .......................................................................... 150
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 150
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’). ....................................................................................... 150
b) Minimum Side Yard – Ten feet (10’) for interior side yard; twenty-five feet (25') from a street right-ofway
line for a corner lot. ..................................................................................................................................... 150
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’). ........................................................................................ 150
3) Maximum Lot Coverage ............................................................................................................................... 150
4) Parking Regulations ...................................................................................................................................... 150
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building
line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces on a paved driveway having a
minimum length of twenty-five feet (25’) as measured from the street right-of-way line. ................................. 150
b) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC. ................................................................................................... 150
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – One thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet; also, the
minimum average floor area shall be two thousand (2,000) square feet in order to provide diversity in house sizes
within each SF-12.5 neighborhood. ......................................................................................................................... 150
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 20
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12 .......................................................................................................................... 150
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this UDC. ............................................... 150
(5) SF-9 - Single-Family Residential-9 District ................................................. 150
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 150
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 150
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building/house, whichever is less. ...... 151
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling
units, etc. .................................................................................................................................................................. 151
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC). .......................................................... 151
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 151
1) Size of Lots ................................................................................................................................................... 151
a) Minimum Lot Area - Nine thousand (9,000) square feet; also, the minimum average lot area shall be ten
thousand (10,000) square feet in order to provide diversity in lot sizes within each SF-9 neighborhood;
maximum density three and one-half (3.5) dwelling units per acre. ................................................................... 151
b) Minimum Lot Width – Seventy-five feet (75’). ....................................................................................... 151
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred ten feet (110’). ................................................................................ 151
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 151
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’) ........................................................................................ 151
b) Minimum Side Yard – Ten feet (10’) for interior side yard; fifteen feet (15’) for a corner lot on a
residential or collector street; twenty-five feet (25’) for a corner lot on an arterial street. .................................. 151
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’). ........................................................................................ 151
3) Maximum Lot Coverage ............................................................................................................................... 151
4) Parking Regulations ...................................................................................................................................... 151
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building
line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces on a paved driveway having a
minimum length of twenty-five feet (25’) as measured from the street right-of-way line. ................................. 151
b) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC. ................................................................................................... 151
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – One thousand six hundred and fifty (1,650) square feet; also, the
minimum average floor area shall be one thousand seven hundred and fifty (1,750) square feet in order to provide
diversity in house sizes within each SF-9 neighborhood. ........................................................................................ 151
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12 .......................................................................................................................... 151
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this UDC. ............................................... 151
(6) SF-6.5 - Single-Family Residential-6.5 District ........................................... 152
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 152
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 152
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building/house, whichever is less. ...... 152
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling
units, etc. .................................................................................................................................................................. 152
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC). .......................................................... 152
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 152
1) Size of Lots ................................................................................................................................................... 152
a) Minimum Lot Area - Six thousand five hundred (6,500) square feet; also, the minimum average lot area
shall be seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet in order to provide diversity in lot sizes within each SF-
6.5 neighborhood; maximum density four and one-half (4.5) dwelling units per acre. ...................................... 152
b) Minimum Lot Width – Sixty-five feet (65’). ........................................................................................... 152
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred feet (100’). ...................................................................................... 152
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 152
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’). ....................................................................................... 152
b) Minimum Side Yard – Eight feet (8’) of the lot width for interior side yard; fifteen feet (15’) for a corner
lot on a residential or collector street; twenty-five feet (25’) for a corner lot on an arterial street. ..................... 152
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’). ........................................................................................ 152
3) Maximum Lot Coverage ............................................................................................................................... 152
Forty percent (40%) for the main building; sixty percent (60%) for the main building and any accessory buildings,
driveways and parking areas combined. .................................................................................................................. 152
4) Parking Regulations ...................................................................................................................................... 153
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building
line on the same lot as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces on a paved driveway having a
minimum length of twenty-five feet (25’) as measured from the street right-of-way line. ................................. 153
b) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC. ................................................................................................... 153
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – One thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet; also, the minimum
average floor area shall be one thousand six hundred and fifty (1,650) square feet in order to provide diversity in
house sizes within each SF-6.5 neighborhood. ........................................................................................................ 153
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 21
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12 .......................................................................................................................... 153
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this UDC. ............................................... 153
(7) SF-PH - Single-Family Residential-Patio Home District (Zero-Lot-Line
Homes) ................................................................................................................ 153
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 153
(b) Permitted Uses .................................................................................................................................................... 153
(c) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 153
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building/house, whichever is less. ...... 153
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling
units, etc. .................................................................................................................................................................. 153
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC). .......................................................... 153
(d) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 153
1) Size of Lots ................................................................................................................................................... 154
a) Minimum Lot Area - Four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet; also, the minimum average lot area
shall be five thousand two hundred (5,200) square feet in order to provide diversity in lot sizes within each SFPH
neighborhood; maximum density six (6) dwelling units per acre. ................................................................ 154
b) Maximum Project Size - The maximum size of a patio home development shall be ten (10) acres. ........ 154
c) Minimum Lot Width – Forty-five feet (45'). ............................................................................................ 154
d) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred feet (100'). ...................................................................................... 154
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 154
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty feet (20’); twenty-five feet (25') to the garage door face for front-entry
homes. ................................................................................................................................................................ 154
b) Minimum Side Yard - One side yard reduced to zero feet (0'); other side yard a minimum of ten feet (10')
required with fifteen feet (15') required on corner lots adjacent to a residential or collector street, and twenty-five
feet (25’) required on corner lots adjacent to an arterial street. .......................................................................... 154
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20’); twenty-five feet (25’) for rear garage entry............................ 154
3) Maximum Lot Coverage ............................................................................................................................... 154
4) Parking Regulations ...................................................................................................................................... 154
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building
line on the same lot as the main structure, plus one (1) additional parking space on a paved driveway. ............ 154
b) Visitor Parking - One half (0.5) parking space per dwelling unit (off-street) which is located within six
hundred feet (600’) of the dwelling unit. ............................................................................................................ 154
c) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC. ................................................................................................... 154
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – One thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet. ........................ 154
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12 .......................................................................................................................... 154
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this UDC. ............................................... 154
(e) Special Requirements ......................................................................................................................................... 154
1) Patio home developments shall be developed as zero-lot-line homes. One side yard shall be reduced to zero
feet, while the other side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet (10'; fifteen feet for a corner lot on the residential or
collector street side, or twenty-five feet for a corner lot on an arterial street). A minimum six-foot (6') wide
maintenance easement shall be placed on the adjacent lot (i.e., the other side of the zero-lot-line) to enable the
property owner to maintain that portion of his/her house that is on the zero-lot-line. Side yards and maintenance
easements shall be shown on the subdivision plat. A minimum separation between patio homes of ten feet (10') shall
be provided. Roof overhangs will be allowed to project into the maintenance easement a maximum of twenty-four
inches (24"). ............................................................................................................................................................. 155
2) Maintenance Requirements for Common Areas - A property owners association is required for continued
maintenance of common land and facilities. ............................................................................................................ 155
3) Usable Open Space Requirements - Except as provided below, any patio home subdivision shall provide
useable open space that equals or exceeds ten percent (10%) of the gross platted area, excluding rights-of-way for
collector and larger-sized streets. Useable open space shall not be required for a patio home development if it
contains twenty (20) or fewer lots, and if the property contiguous (i.e., abutting or separated only by a residential or
collector size street) to the subdivision is either developed for use(s) other than patio homes or is restricted by
zoning to not permit patio home development. Properties that are separated by thoroughfares larger than a collector
street and/or by drainage/utility easements in excess of sixty feet (60') in width shall not be considered as
contiguous. Usable open space shall meet the requirements of SECTION 7D(4). ................................................. 155
4) Single-family lots and detached dwellings constructed in this district shall conform to the standards as set
forth in the SF-9 zoning district. .............................................................................................................................. 155
(8) SF-TH – Single Family Residential-Town Home District ............................ 155
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 155
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 156
1) Three (3) stories, or forty feet (40') for the main building/house, whichever is less...................................... 156
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 22
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling
units, etc. .................................................................................................................................................................. 156
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC). .......................................................... 156
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 156
1) Size of Lots ................................................................................................................................................... 156
a) Minimum Lot Area - Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per dwelling unit; also, the minimum
average lot area shall be three thousand hundred (3,000) square feet in order to provide diversity in lot sizes
within each SF-TH neighborhood; maximum density eight (8) dwelling units per acre. ................................... 156
b) Maximum Project Size - The maximum size of a town home development shall be ten (10) acres. ........ 156
c) Minimum Lot Width – Twenty-five feet (25'). ........................................................................................ 156
d) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred feet (100'). ...................................................................................... 156
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 156
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’). ....................................................................................... 156
b) Minimum Side Yard – None between buildings. Ten feet (10’) of the lot width for interior side yard;
fifteen feet (15’) for a corner lot on a residential or collector street; twenty-five feet (25’) for a corner lot on an
arterial street. ...................................................................................................................................................... 156
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20’); twenty-five feet (25’) for rear garage entry............................ 156
3) Maximum Lot Coverage ............................................................................................................................... 156
4) Parking Regulations ...................................................................................................................................... 156
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed parking spaces behind the front building
line on the same lot as the main structure, plus one (1) additional parking space on a paved driveway. ............ 156
b) Visitor Parking - One half (0.5) parking space per dwelling unit (off-street) which is located within six
hundred feet (600’) of the dwelling unit. ............................................................................................................ 157
c) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC. ................................................................................................... 157
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – One thousand (1,000) square feet. ............................................. 157
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12 .......................................................................................................................... 157
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this UDC. ............................................... 157
(d) Special Requirements ......................................................................................................................................... 157
1) All town home developments are subject to site plan review and approval by the City Manager. The site plan
shall show the typical layout of the town home lot and an overall layout of the development. ............................... 157
2) Maintenance Requirements for Common Areas - A property owners association is required for continued
maintenance of common land and facilities. ............................................................................................................ 157
3) Usable Open Space Requirements - Except as provided below, any town home development shall provide
usable open space which equals or exceeds ten percent (10%) of the gross platted area, excluding rights-of-way for
collector and larger sized streets. Useable open space shall not be required for a town home development if it
contains twenty (20) or fewer lots, and if the property contiguous (i.e., abutting or separated only by a residential or
collector size street) to the development is either developed for use(s) other than town homes or is restricted by
zoning to not permit town home development. Properties that are separated by thoroughfares larger than a collector
street and/or by drainage/utility easements in excess of sixty feet (60') in width shall not be considered as
contiguous. Usable open space shall meet the requirements of SECTION 7D(4). .................................................. 157
4) Single-family lots consisting of detached dwellings constructed in this district shall conform to the standards
as set forth in the SF-6.5 zoning district. ................................................................................................................. 157
(9) MF-15 – Multi-Family Residential-15 District (Apartments) ........................ 157
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 157
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 158
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building/house; where a structure exceeds
twenty-five feet (25’) in height, it shall be set back from the front property line two (2) additional feet beyond the
required front yard setback for each foot above twenty-five feet (25’) in height. .................................................... 158
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached garage, garden shed, carports, gazebo,
clubhouse, mail kiosks, laundry rooms, etc. ............................................................................................................ 158
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC). .......................................................... 158
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 158
1) Size of Lots ................................................................................................................................................... 158
a) Minimum Lot Area – Three thousand (3,000) square feet per dwelling unit, not to exceed fifteen (15)
dwelling units per acre (calculated on gross acreage). The minimum lot (i.e., project) size shall be ten (10) acres.
158
b) Minimum Lot Width - Eighty feet (80'). .................................................................................................. 158
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred twenty feet (120'). ........................................................................... 158
d) Special Exception - If a property was platted or zoned for MF-15 prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance, then it can remain its original size and configuration and does not have to meet the minimum project
size, lot width or lot depth stated above. The property shall conform to all other MF-15 development standards
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 23
herein, unless the building setbacks shown on a recorded plat vary from those contained herein, in which case
the platted setbacks shall prevail unless a replat modifies same. ........................................................................ 158
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 158
a) Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30'). All areas adjacent to a street shall be deemed front yards. See
SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for additional setback requirements. .................................................................... 158
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20'), unless adjacent to a single-family, duplex, patio home
or single-family attached district; then side and rear setbacks shall be according to the height of the multi-family
building, as follows: ........................................................................................................................................... 158
i) One-story building – twenty-five feet (25’). ....................................................................................... 159
ii) Two-story building – sixty feet (60’). ................................................................................................. 159
iii) Over two-story building – seventy-five feet (75’). ............................................................................. 159
c) Building Separation ................................................................................................................................. 159
i) One-story buildings - Fifteen feet (15') for buildings without openings; twenty feet (20’) for buildings
with openings. ............................................................................................................................................... 159
ii) Two-story buildings (or a two-story building adjacent to a one-story building) -Twenty feet (20') for
buildings without openings; twenty-five feet (25’) for buildings with openings. .......................................... 159
iii) Over two-story buildings (or an over two-story building adjacent to a one- or two-story building) -
Twenty-five feet (25') for buildings with or without openings. ..................................................................... 159
3) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit ....................................................................................................... 159
a) Efficiency unit - Five hundred (500) square feet per unit. ....................................................................... 159
b) One-bedroom unit - Seven hundred twenty-five (725) square feet per unit. ............................................ 159
c) Two- or more bedroom unit - Eight hundred seventy-five (875) square feet for the first two bedrooms,
plus an additional one hundred twenty-five (125) square feet for each bedroom over two (e.g., three-bedroom
unit must have 1,000 square feet, etc.). .............................................................................................................. 159
4) Maximum Lot Coverage ............................................................................................................................... 159
5) Parking Regulations ...................................................................................................................................... 159
a) 1.5 spaces for each efficiency or one-bedroom unit. ................................................................................ 159
b) 2 spaces for each two-bedroom unit. ........................................................................................................ 159
c) 2.5 spaces for each three-bedroom unit. ................................................................................................... 159
d) 3 spaces for each four- or more-bedroom unit. ........................................................................................ 159
e) The average number of parking spaces for the total development shall be no less than two (2) spaces per
dwelling unit, at least one (1) of which shall be enclosed (i.e., garage) for each dwelling unit. ......................... 159
f) No parking space may be located closer than ten feet (10’) from any building or closer than two feet (2’)
from any side or rear lot line. ............................................................................................................................. 160
g) All parking areas adjacent to public streets shall be screened from view. Screening may be in the form of
live plant materials, berms, low masonry walls that match the exterior finish of main buildings, or any
combination of the above. .................................................................................................................................. 160
h) See SECTION 10 of this UDC, for additional requirements. ................................................................... 160
6) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9E of this UDC. ............................................. 160
(d) Special Requirements ......................................................................................................................................... 160
1) Usable Open Space Requirements – Except as provided below, any multi-family development shall provide
usable open space which equals or exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of the total lot area. Usable open space areas shall
be in conformance with SECTION 7D(4). .............................................................................................................. 160
2) Landscape Area Requirements – A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total lot area shall be devoted to
a combination of landscaping (i.e., pervious surface area) and usable open space (see above). See SECTION 9G of
this UDC for landscaping requirements. .................................................................................................................. 160
3) Refuse Facilities - Every multi-family dwelling unit shall be located within two hundred feet (200') of a
refuse facility, measured along the designated pedestrian travel way, and at least six (6) cubic yards of refuse
container volume shall be provided for every thirty (30) dwelling units (or portion thereof). A refuse facility shall be
a dumpster or other similar container designed for receiving garbage in bulk for more than one dwelling, and all
refuse containers shall be maintained in accordance with local public health and sanitary regulations. Refuse
containers shall be located no closer than thirty feet (30') to any adjacent single-family property, shall be located so
as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies, and shall be screened in accordance with
SECTION 9H(2)(e) of this UDC. ............................................................................................................................ 160
4) Screening Requirements – See SECTION 9H for screening requirements. .................................................. 160
5) A swimming pool shall be provided in multi-family developments of fifty (50) or more units. ................... 160
6) One playground area containing at least five (5) pieces of play equipment shall be provided for every one
hundred (100) dwelling units, or fraction thereof. The playground equipment shall be of heavy duty construction,
such as is normally used in public arks or on public school playgrounds. ............................................................... 160
7) Single-family, patio home, duplex, or townhome residential units constructed in this district shall conform to
SF-9, SF-PH or SF-TH district standards, respectively. .......................................................................................... 161
8) Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes. ......... 161
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 24
9) Open storage is prohibited. ............................................................................................................................ 161
10) All points on the exterior facades of all buildings shall be within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a dedicated
fire lane easement (as measured by an unobstructed pathway, or route, for fire hoses). .......................................... 161
11) A four-foot (4’) wide paved walkway shall connect the front door of each ground floor unit to a parking area.
The minimum width of any sidewalk adjacent to head-in parking spaces shall be six feet (6’) to accommodate a
two-foot (2’) bumper overhang for vehicles. ........................................................................................................... 161
12) Buildings shall not exceed two hundred feet (200') in length. ....................................................................... 161
13) Boats, campers, trailers and other recreational vehicles shall be prohibited unless oversize parking areas are
provided as part of the approved site plan. This parking area shall not be used to meet the minimum parking
requirements and shall not be visible from a public street. ...................................................................................... 161
14) All buildings containing residential units shall provide signage that clearly identifies the numbers (i.e.,
addresses) of the units within each building. Signage shall be visible from entrances into the complex and/or from
vehicular drive aisles within the complex such that each individual unit is easy to locate by visitors, delivery
persons, and/or emergency personnel. ..................................................................................................................... 161
15) All parking areas shall have appropriate lighting and shall be positioned such that no light adversely impacts
adjacent residential areas. ........................................................................................................................................ 161
16) Site plan approval (see SECTION 8N of this UDC) shall be required for any multi-family or nonresidential
use (e.g., school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the MF-15 district. Any nonresidential
land use which may be permitted in this district shall conform to the NS-Neighborhood Service district standards
with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building construction, screening requirements, lighting,
signage, etc. ............................................................................................................................................................. 161
17) Other Regulations - As established by SECTION 7, SECTION 8, and SECTION 9 of this UDC. ............... 161
(10) SF-MH – Single-Family Residential-Manufactured Home District ........... 161
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 161
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 162
1) The maximum height for any structure in the manufactured home district shall be thirty-five feet (35'). ..... 162
2) The average height of the manufactured home frame above the ground elevation, measured at 90 degrees to
the frame, shall not exceed three feet (3'). ............................................................................................................... 162
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 162
1) Size of Lots ................................................................................................................................................... 162
a) Minimum Lot Area – Six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet. ....................................................... 162
b) Minimum Lot Width – Sixty feet (60’). ................................................................................................... 162
c) Minimum Lot Depth – One hundred ten feet (110’). ............................................................................... 162
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 162
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’). ....................................................................................... 162
b) Minimum Side Yard – Seven and one-half feet (7.5’); ten feet (10’) from a street right-of-way line for a
corner lot. ........................................................................................................................................................... 162
c) Minimum Rear Yard – Twenty feet (20’). ............................................................................................... 162
3) Maximum Lot Coverage ............................................................................................................................... 162
4) Soil and Ground Cover .................................................................................................................................. 162
5) Drainage ........................................................................................................................................................ 163
(d) Street Lighting .................................................................................................................................................... 163
(e) Parking Requirements ........................................................................................................................................ 163
(f) Carports .............................................................................................................................................................. 163
(g) Manufactured Home Installation ........................................................................................................................ 163
1) Axle and hitch assemblies shall be removed at the time of placement on the foundation. ............................ 163
2) Each manufactured home shall be totally skirted with masonry, pressure-treated wood, or other
nondegradable, fire resistant material which is compatible with the design and exterior materials of the primary
structure. .................................................................................................................................................................. 163
(h) Fire Safety Standards .......................................................................................................................................... 163
1) Access for Fire Fighting ................................................................................................................................ 163
2) Water Supply Facilities for Fire Department Operations .............................................................................. 163
(i) Recreation Area .................................................................................................................................................. 164
(j) Utilities ............................................................................................................................................................... 164
(k) Plat Required ...................................................................................................................................................... 164
(l) Miscellaneous Requirements .............................................................................................................................. 164
1) Every manufactured home lot owner shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with all requirements of
this UDC including proper installation of the manufactured home, proper installation of all utility connections and
proper tie-down of the manufactured home. ............................................................................................................ 164
2) Skirting with the necessary vents, screens and/or openings shall be required on all manufactured homes and
shall be installed within thirty (30) days after the placement of the manufactured home. ....................................... 164
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 25
3) Skirting, porches, awnings and other additions, when installed, shall be maintained in good repair. The use of
space immediately underneath a manufactured home for storage shall be permitted only under the following
conditions: ............................................................................................................................................................... 164
a) The storage area shall have a base of impervious material; ..................................................................... 164
b) Stored items shall not interfere with the underneath inspection of the manufactured home; and ............. 164
c) The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting. ........................................................................................ 164
(11) MHP – Manufactured Home Park ........................................................... 164
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 164
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 165
1) The maximum height for any structure in the manufactured home park district shall be thirty-five feet (35').
165
2) The average height of the manufactured home frame above the ground elevation, measured at 90 degrees to
the frame, shall not exceed three feet (3'). ............................................................................................................... 165
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 165
1) Size of Lots ................................................................................................................................................... 165
a) Minimum Lot Area – Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet; minimum lot area for
each space. .......................................................................................................................................................... 165
b) Minimum Lot Width – Not applicable. .................................................................................................... 165
c) Minimum Lot Depth – Not applicable. .................................................................................................... 165
2) Manufactured Home Park Size of Yards ....................................................................................................... 165
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’). ....................................................................................... 165
b) Minimum Side Yard – Twelve and one-half feet (12.5’); fifteen feet (15’) from a street right-of-way line
for a corner lot. ................................................................................................................................................... 165
c) Minimum Rear Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’). ........................................................................................ 165
d) Setback – For structures, other than the manufactured home, on each space, the minimum setback from
any space line shall be at least ten feet (10'). ...................................................................................................... 165
e) Distance – The minimum distance between manufactured homes at any point shall be twenty-five feet
(25'). 165
3) Recreational Vehicle Park Size of Yards ...................................................................................................... 165
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’). ....................................................................................... 165
b) Minimum Side Yard – Ten feet (10’); twenty-five feet (25’) from a street right-of-way line. ................. 165
c) Minimum Rear Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’). ........................................................................................ 165
d) Setback – For other structures on each space, the minimum setback from any space line shall be at least
ten feet (10'). ....................................................................................................................................................... 165
e) Distance – The minimum distance between recreational vehicles at any point shall be twenty-five feet
(25’). 166
f) Property line – No RV shall be placed or erected closer than five feet (5’) from the property line
separating the RV park from adjoining property, measuring from the nearest point of the RV.......................... 166
4) Maximum Lot Coverage ............................................................................................................................... 166
5) Soil and Ground Cover .................................................................................................................................. 166
6) Drainage ........................................................................................................................................................ 166
7) Storage Facilities ........................................................................................................................................... 166
(d) Street Lighting .................................................................................................................................................... 166
(e) Access, Traffic Circulation and Parking ............................................................................................................. 166
1) Internal Streets and Signage .......................................................................................................................... 166
2) Signs Prohibiting Parking Required .............................................................................................................. 167
3) Internal Street Construction and Maintenance .............................................................................................. 167
4) Emergency Ingress and Egress ...................................................................................................................... 167
5) Internal Street Dimensions ............................................................................................................................ 167
6) Parking Requirements ................................................................................................................................... 167
7) Unobstructed Access ..................................................................................................................................... 167
8) Intersections with Public Streets ................................................................................................................... 168
9) Common Area Parking Area Required .......................................................................................................... 168
10) Sidewalks ...................................................................................................................................................... 168
11) Access ........................................................................................................................................................... 168
(f) Street lighting ..................................................................................................................................................... 168
(g) Fire Safety Standards .......................................................................................................................................... 168
1) Access for Fire Fighting ................................................................................................................................ 168
2) Water Supply Facilities for Fire Department Operations .............................................................................. 169
(h) Recreation Area .................................................................................................................................................. 169
1) Recreation Area Required ............................................................................................................................. 169
2) Size of Recreation Area ................................................................................................................................. 169
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 26
3) Playground Location ..................................................................................................................................... 169
(i) Utilities ............................................................................................................................................................... 169
(j) Plat Required ...................................................................................................................................................... 169
(k) Manufactured Home Miscellaneous Requirements ............................................................................................ 170
1) Each manufactured home space shall have a minimum space size of sixty feet (60') by one hundred ten feet
(110') for each manufactured home. ........................................................................................................................ 170
2) Carports – See SECTION 7C of this UDC. ................................................................................................... 170
3) Manufactured Home Installation ................................................................................................................... 170
a) Axle and hitch assemblies shall be removed at the time of placement on the foundation. ....................... 170
b) Each manufactured home shall be totally skirted with masonry, pressure-treated wood, or other
nondegradable, fire resistant material which is compatible with the design and exterior materials of the primary
structure. ............................................................................................................................................................. 170
4) Every manufactured home lot owner shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with all requirements of
this UDC including proper installation of the manufactured home, proper installation of all utility connections and
proper tie-down of the manufactured home. ............................................................................................................ 170
5) Skirting with the necessary vents, screens and/or openings shall be required on all manufactured homes and
shall be installed within thirty (30) days after the placement of the manufactured home. ....................................... 170
6) Skirting, porches, awnings and other additions, when installed, shall be maintained in good repair. The use of
space immediately underneath a manufactured home for storage shall be permitted only under the following
conditions: ............................................................................................................................................................... 170
a) The storage area shall have a base of impervious material; ..................................................................... 170
b) Stored items shall not interfere with the underneath inspection of the manufactured home; and ............. 170
c) The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting. ........................................................................................ 170
7) Refuse and Garbage Handling ....................................................................................................................... 170
a) The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in a manufactured home park shall be so conducted as to
create no health hazards, rodent harborage or air pollution. One or both of the systems described in the
paragraphs b) and c) below shall be used in every park...................................................................................... 170
b) If refuse is gathered at the individual spaces, it shall be stored in fly-tight, watertight, rodent-proof
containers, and shall be located at each manufactured home space. Containers for this use shall be provided in
sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. ............................................................................... 170
c) Centrally located refuse containers having a capacity of three (3) cubic yards or larger may be provided. If
provided, such containers shall be so designed as to prevent spillage and container deterioration, and to facilitate
cleaning around them. ........................................................................................................................................ 171
d) The manufactured home park owner or agent shall ensure that refuse containers, if provided within the
manufactured home park, are maintained in a sanitary and usable condition. .................................................... 171
(l) Recreational Vehicle Miscellaneous Requirements ............................................................................................ 171
1) Size and Marking of Units or Sites ................................................................................................................ 171
2) Water Supply ................................................................................................................................................. 171
3) Collection and Removal of Waste and Garbage; Wastewater System........................................................... 171
4) Compliance ................................................................................................................................................... 171
(12) O – Office ................................................................................................ 171
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 171
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 172
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s). .................................................................. 172
2) One (1) story or fifteen feet (15’) for accessory buildings. .......................................................................... 172
3) Other (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC). ................................................................................ 172
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 172
1) Size of Lots ................................................................................................................................................... 172
a) Minimum Lot Area - Six thousand (6,000) square feet. ........................................................................... 172
b) Minimum Lot Width - Sixty feet (60’), except one hundred and twenty feet (120’) along U.S. Highway
175 frontage. ....................................................................................................................................................... 172
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred feet (100’). ...................................................................................... 172
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 172
a) Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30’) from the ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards adjacent
to a street shall be considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for additional setback
requirements). ..................................................................................................................................................... 172
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see
below). ................................................................................................................................................................ 172
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District – Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story
building, and an additional twenty feet (20’) for each story (or fraction thereof) above one story in height. ..... 172
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side yard setback between two nonresidential buildings may be reduced
to zero feet (0’) where the two buildings share a common interior lot line, where construction of a party wall in
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 27
accordance with the City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City Council on the site plan.
Where such a reduced side yard setback is utilized, the equivalent open space and landscape plantings and
buffers that are normally required along a shared side property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on each
respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just provided somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that
shows such a reduced 0’ side yard setback between two nonresidential buildings shall be discretionary in nature,
and shall be based upon an analysis of the location, the configuration, and the impact and compatibility of the
proposed construction with respect to adjacent land uses and structures. ........................................................... 172
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and accessory buildings; maximum eighty
percent (80%) impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). ................................ 173
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – One to one (1:1). ................................................................................ 173
5) Maximum Building Size - The maximum building foot print (first floor) area of a structure shall be
determined by applying the lot’s size, minimum building setbacks, maximum of fifty percent (50%) lot coverage,
minimum parking requirement, minimum landscaping percentage and areas, and other pertinent development
requirements. ........................................................................................................................................................... 173
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise ..................................................................................................... 173
1) Outside display or storage of merchandise and seasonal items is prohibited. ............................................... 173
(13) NS – Neighborhood Service ................................................................... 173
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 173
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 173
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s). .................................................................. 173
2) One (1) story or 15 feet for accessory buildings. .......................................................................................... 173
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9 of this UDC). ............................................................................... 173
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 173
1) Size of Lot ..................................................................................................................................................... 173
a) Minimum Lot Area - Six thousand (6,000) square feet. ........................................................................... 173
b) Minimum Lot Width - Sixty feet (60’), except one hundred and twenty feet (120’) along U.S. Highway
175 frontage. ....................................................................................................................................................... 173
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred feet (100’). ...................................................................................... 173
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 173
a) Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30’) from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to
a street shall be considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for additional setback requirements).
173
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see
below). ................................................................................................................................................................ 174
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District – Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story
building, and an additional twenty feet (20’) for each story (or fraction thereof) above one story in height. ..... 174
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side yard setback between two nonresidential buildings may be reduced
to zero feet (0’) where the two buildings share a common interior lot line, where construction of a party wall in
accordance with the City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City Council on the site plan
following a favorable recommendation by the Commission. Where such a reduced side yard setback is utilized,
the equivalent open space and landscape plantings and buffers that are normally required along a shared side
property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on each respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just
provided somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that shows such a reduced 0’ side yard setback between two
nonresidential buildings shall be discretionary in nature, and shall be based upon an analysis of the location, the
configuration, and the impact and compatibility of the proposed construction with respect to adjacent land uses
and structures. ..................................................................................................................................................... 174
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and accessory buildings; maximum eighty
percent (80%) impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). ................................ 174
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – One to one (1:1). ................................................................................ 174
5) Maximum Building Size - The maximum building foot print (first floor) area of a structure shall be
determined by applying the lot’s size, minimum building setbacks, maximum of 50% lot coverage, minimum
parking requirement, minimum landscaping percentage and areas, and other pertinent development requirements.
174
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise ..................................................................................................... 174
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees,
pumpkins, etc.) shall be allowed but shall not be placed/located more than twenty feet (20’) from the main building
or within any required front, side or rear yard. ........................................................................................................ 174
2) Long-term or permanent open storage is prohibited. ..................................................................................... 174
(14) R – Retail District .................................................................................... 174
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 174
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 175
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s). .................................................................. 175
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 28
2) One (1) story or fifteen feet (15’) for accessory buildings. ........................................................................... 175
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC). ............................................................................... 175
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 175
1) Size of Lot ..................................................................................................................................................... 175
a) Minimum Lot Area - Six thousand (6,000) square feet. ........................................................................... 175
b) Minimum Lot Width - Sixty feet (60’), except one hundred and twenty feet (120’) along U.S. Highway
175 frontage. ....................................................................................................................................................... 175
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred feet (100’). ...................................................................................... 175
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 175
a) Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30’) from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to
a street shall be considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for additional setback requirements).
175
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see
below). ................................................................................................................................................................ 175
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District – Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story
building, and an additional twenty feet (20’) for every story (or fraction thereof) above one-story in height. ... 175
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side yard setback between two nonresidential buildings may be reduced
to zero feet (0’) where the two buildings share a common interior lot line, where construction of a party wall in
accordance with the City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City Council on the site plan
following a favorable recommendation by the Commission. Where such a reduced side yard setback is utilized,
the equivalent open space and landscape plantings and buffers that are normally required along a shared side
property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on each respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just
provided somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that shows such a reduced 0’ side yard setback between two
nonresidential buildings shall be discretionary in nature, and shall be based upon an analysis of the location, the
configuration, and the impact and compatibility of the proposed construction with respect to adjacent land uses
and structures. ..................................................................................................................................................... 175
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and accessory buildings; maximum eighty
percent (80%) impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). ................................ 176
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – One to one (1:1). ................................................................................ 176
5) Maximum Building Size - The maximum building foot print (first floor) area of a structure shall be
determined by applying the lot’s size, minimum building setbacks, maximum of 50% lot coverage, minimum
parking requirement, minimum landscaping percentage and areas, and other pertinent development requirements.
176
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise ..................................................................................................... 176
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees,
pumpkins, etc.) shall be allowed but shall not be placed/located more than twenty feet (20’) from the main building
or within any required front, side or rear yard. ........................................................................................................ 176
2) Long-term or permanent open storage shall require issuance of a SUP. ....................................................... 176
(15) BP – Business Park District .................................................................... 176
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 176
1) To preserve natural and historic resources; maintain and enhance surface and ground water quality; and
promote architecturally attractive buildings and structures. ..................................................................................... 176
2) To ensure that the nature, scale, and function of uses pose no significant or unusual risk to the public health,
safety, and welfare. .................................................................................................................................................. 176
3) To ensure that the nature, scale, and function of uses generate a minimum of noise, heat, glare, odor, dust,
vibration, or other nuisances and do not emit harmful radiation or pollution into the air, water, or ground. ........... 176
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 176
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s). .................................................................. 177
2) One (1) story or 15 feet (15’) for accessory buildings. .................................................................................. 177
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC). ............................................................................... 177
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 177
1) Size of Lot ..................................................................................................................................................... 177
a) Minimum Lot Area - One-half acre (21,780 square feet) for any Business Park-zoned lot or site located
within Tier One, and ten thousand (10,000) square feet for any Business Park-zoned lot or site located within
Tier Two. ............................................................................................................................................................ 177
b) Minimum Lot Width - One hundred twenty feet (120’) for any Business Park-zoned lot or site located
within Tier One, and seventy-five feet (75') for any Business Park-zoned lot or site located within Tier Two. . 177
c) Minimum Lot Depth – One hundred seventy-five feet (175’) for any Business Park-zoned lot or site
located within Tier One, and one hundred feet (100’) for any Business Park-zoned lot or site located within Tier
Two. 177
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 177
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 29
a) Minimum Front Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’) from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards
adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for additional setback
requirements). ..................................................................................................................................................... 177
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see
below). ................................................................................................................................................................ 177
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District – Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story
building, and an additional twenty feet (20’) for every story (or fraction thereof) above one story in height. ... 177
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side-yard setback between two nonresidential buildings may be reduced
to zero feet (0’) where the two buildings share a common interior lot line, where construction of a party wall in
accordance with the City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City Council on the site plan
following a favorable recommendation by the Commission. Where such a reduced side-yard setback is utilized,
the equivalent open space and landscape plantings and buffers that are normally required along a shared side
property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on each respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just
provided somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that shows such a reduced 0’ side-yard setback between two
nonresidential buildings shall be discretionary in nature, and shall be based upon an analysis of the location, the
configuration, and the impact and compatibility of the proposed construction with respect to adjacent land uses
and structures. ..................................................................................................................................................... 177
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and accessory buildings; maximum eighty
percent (80%) impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). ................................ 178
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – Two to one (2:1). ............................................................................... 178
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise ..................................................................................................... 178
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees,
pumpkins, etc.) shall be allowed but shall not be placed/located more than thirty feet (30’) from the main building or
within any required front, side or rear yard. ............................................................................................................. 178
2) Long-term or permanent open storage shall require issuance of a SUP. ....................................................... 178
(16) OTC – Old Town Crandall District ........................................................... 178
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 178
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 178
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s). .................................................................. 178
2) One (1) story or fifteen feet (15’) for accessory buildings. ........................................................................... 178
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9 of this UDC). ............................................................................... 178
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 178
1) Size of Lot ..................................................................................................................................................... 178
a) Minimum Lot Area - none specified. ....................................................................................................... 178
b) Minimum Lot Width - twenty-five feet (25’). .......................................................................................... 178
c) Minimum Lot Depth - one hundred feet (100’). ....................................................................................... 178
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 178
a) Minimum Front Yard - to match existing sidewalk width, or a minimum of eight feet (8’) from the back of
the street curb where no sidewalk exists. ............................................................................................................ 178
b) Minimum Side Yard - zero feet (0’) if next to another Town Square district building, or shall match the
required front yard setback if on a street or alley corner. ................................................................................... 179
c) Minimum Rear Yard - twenty-five feet (25’). .......................................................................................... 179
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – sixty-five percent (65%) including main and accessory buildings. .................... 179
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – Two to one (2:1). ............................................................................... 179
(d) Parking Requirements ........................................................................................................................................ 179
1) For existing structures/uses (in existence prior to the effective date of this UDC) - Any existing parking, or
lack of same, for any existing structure or use within the TS district shall be considered a conforming parking
arrangement (including head-in and off-site parking arrangements in existence prior to the effective date of this
UDC). Additional parking shall only be required for significant additions to an existing building, for significant
expansion of an existing use (as determined by the City Manager), and for a newly constructed building within the
district. In the event of destruction of an existing structure within the Old Town Crandall district, said structure may
be rebuilt to its pre-destruction size with no requirements for additional parking provided that reconstruction
commences (i.e., a building permit is applied for and issued) within one (1) year of the date of destruction. If
reconstruction does not commence within the one-year time frame, or if the structure is rebuilt to exceed its predestruction
size, then the structure’s nonconforming parking status is deemed to expire and any reconstruction of the
structure must provide additional parking spaces in accordance with this UDC (this can be additional head-in or offsite
parking spaces, provided that this was the parking arrangement that existed for such structure prior to the
effective date of this UDC, and provided that such space is available without compromising other properties’ rights,
access, or public safety). .......................................................................................................................................... 179
2) For new structures and uses - One (1) space per two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area,
and each use shall provide a minimum of two (2) spaces. For any use which cannot provide off-street parking due
to the size or location of the lot, such parking may be provided on other property not more than two hundred feet
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 30
(200’) from the site. In cases where the parking requirement cannot be achieved, up to seventy-five percent (75%)
of the parking requirement may be waived by the City Council on the site plan, or may be provided as head-in
parking spaces and/or off-site with City Council approval on the site plan for such an alternative arrangement. ... 179
(e) Special Requirements ......................................................................................................................................... 179
1) Site Plan Review – Public hearing, review and approval of a site plan by the Commission and the City
Council shall be required for site redevelopment or the construction of any new structure within the Old Town
Crandall district. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all construction and development conforms to
the site plan as approved by the City Council. ......................................................................................................... 179
2) For site redevelopment or new construction, building facade (i.e., elevation) plans shall be submitted for
review and approval along with the site plan. Facade plans shall clearly show how the building(s) will look,
especially as viewed from the road(s) upon which the property faces and/or sides, and will portray a reasonably
accurate depiction of the materials and colors to be used. Architectural style and scale of new/renovated buildings
within the Old Town Crandall district shall be compatible with the styles and scale of other adjacent buildings, and
shall be historically accurate to the greatest extent possible in order to preserve the unique character of the
downtown area. ........................................................................................................................................................ 180
3) The City Manager may require submission of additional information and materials (possibly actual samples
of materials to be used) during the site plan review process. ................................................................................... 180
4) A public hearing is required by the Commission and the City Council for all site plans within the Old Town
Crandall district. Development standards for all uses in the Old Town Crandall district shall be established on the
site plan and all supporting information will be required at the time of approval. ................................................... 180
(f) Design Standards for the Old Town Crandall District ........................................................................................ 180
1) Façades of new, reconstructed and renovated buildings shall be compatible with, and shall promulgate and
enhance, the period design of the original Main Street buildings. False fronts or parapets may be added to existing
buildings in order to add character and detail to simple facades provided that they enhance the overall design
aesthetic and period character of the downtown area. .............................................................................................. 180
2) Predominant exterior finish colors shall be of fired brick, similar to that which is present on adjacent existing
buildings (other masonry materials may also be considered during site plan review). Trim (i.e., lintels, sills, door
jambs, cornices and other similar items) shall be brick, cast stone, stone, cast or wrought iron, concrete, or
cementitious fiber board trim, and colors shall be tones that are complementary to the predominant facade colors.
Wood trim may also be used for refurbishing existing buildings to their original construction condition (i.e., wood
shall not be used for trim on newly constructed buildings). Accent colors for friezes, doors and door frames,
window frames and mullions, signage, awnings, moldings and other similar features shall be colors that are
complementary to, and compatible with, the spirit and intent of the downtown streetscape (bright or fluorescent
colors which were not typically used in early Texas downtowns shall not be used). ............................................... 180
3) Reflective glass shall not be used for windows; detailing for windows, doors and other openings shall be of
wood, glass or a metal material that is complementary to the period or building style. The use of paned windows
(rather than large single-pane modern storefront style windows) shall be required on all new buildings in the Old
Town Crandall district. ............................................................................................................................................ 181
4) Façade openings shall comprise at least forty percent (40%) of the building’s façade area. ......................... 181
5) Awnings/Canopies ........................................................................................................................................ 181
a) Ratios -- Awnings shall be at an appropriate scale to the building size and configuration. They shall not
extend above the roof line of any single-story structure, or above the top of the second floor of any multi-story
structure at the awnings’ highest points. Awnings shall not completely obstruct any windows on the building.
181
b) Projection -- Since awnings must extend beyond the building face, a reasonable amount of projection shall
be allowed. No awning shall extend more than eight feet (8’) outward from the building face/surface. ........... 181
c) Colors and Materials -- A mixture of colors is recommended, but no more than three different colors shall
be used for awnings on a single building facade (excluding business logo, which may have more colors).
Materials shall be of cloth or canvas, or another material that is complementary to the period or building style
(metal shall be allowed only if comparable and complimentary to the gazebo, but plastic shall be prohibited). 181
d) Movement -- Except for slight movements that are normal for fabric canopies (i.e., along fringe, etc.), no
movement shall be allowed for awnings and canopy structures. ........................................................................ 181
6) Pedestrian Streetscape - Pedestrian spaces shall be treated with amenities that are selected based upon their
ability to unify the streetscape with the area’s historic past. It is important that elements such as construction
materials, colors, textures and fixture design complement the area’s historic qualities. These features shall be
repeated throughout the streetscape so as to unify the district as a whole. ............................................................... 181
7) Planters, window boxes, planter boxes and containers, street furniture, street and building lighting, benches,
trash receptacles, bollards, street signs, building signage, and other streetscape furnishings shall be complementary
to the historical time frame of the OTC area, and shall be located not more than five feet (5') from the building
front/facade or shall be located within the pedestrian zone directly in front of the applicable building or business.
The City shall be authorized to create and maintain a “pattern book” to guide, and regulate, the selection of all
streetscape amenities and fixtures for the purpose of ensuring compatibility among such amenities and fixtures
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 31
within the Old Town Crandall district. Conformance and compatibility with such designs shall be required, and
installations that are not in keeping with these designs and with the Old Town Crandall district’s overall historic
image shall be removed if so directed by the City. .................................................................................................. 181
8) Long-term and permanent open storage is prohibited in the Old Town Crandall district. ............................. 182
9) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees,
pumpkins, etc.) shall be allowed but limited to the following: ................................................................................ 182
a) Shall not be placed/located more than twelve feet (12') from the main building or within any required
front, side or rear yard. ....................................................................................................................................... 182
b) Shall not occupy any on-street or off-street parking spaces. .................................................................... 182
c) Shall not pose a safety or visibility hazard, nor impede public vehicular or pedestrian circulation, either
on-site or off-site, in any way (i.e., sidewalk sales cannot block the sidewalk or extend out into the street). .... 182
d) Shall only be located in front of the property/business that is selling the item(s). ................................... 182
e) All outside display items shall be removed at the end of business each day (except for large seasonal items
such as Christmas trees). .................................................................................................................................... 182
f) All merchandise shall be displayed in a neat, orderly manner, and the display area shall be maintained in a
clean, litter-free manner. ..................................................................................................................................... 182
10) Architectural Design – The architectural design of buildings and sites shall strive to achieve the following
objectives: ................................................................................................................................................................ 182
a) Architectural compatibility; ..................................................................................................................... 182
b) Human scale design; ................................................................................................................................ 182
c) Integration of uses; ................................................................................................................................... 182
d) Encouragement of pedestrian activity; ..................................................................................................... 182
e) Buildings that relate to, and are oriented toward, the pedestrian areas and surrounding buildings; ......... 182
f) Buildings that contain special architectural features to signify entrances; and ........................................ 182
g) All building materials shall be established on architectural elevations and supporting information. ....... 182
11) Other Regulations – As established in SECTION 7, SECTION 8, and SECTION 9 of this UDC. ............... 183
(17) HB – Highway Business District .............................................................. 183
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 183
1) To provide space for highway-oriented commercial uses. ............................................................................ 183
2) To provide adequate and appropriate separation and/or buffering of general business uses and residential or
less intensive commercial areas. .............................................................................................................................. 183
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 183
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s). .................................................................. 183
2) One (1) story for accessory buildings. ........................................................................................................... 183
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9, of this UDC). .............................................................................. 183
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 183
1) Size of Lot ..................................................................................................................................................... 183
a) Minimum Lot Area - One-half acre (21,780 square feet) for any nonresidentially-zoned lot or site located
within Tier One, and ten thousand (10,000) square feet for any nonresidentially-zoned lot or site located within
Tier Two. ............................................................................................................................................................ 183
b) Minimum Lot Width - One hundred twenty feet (120’) for any nonresidentially-zoned lot or site located
within Tier One, and seventy-five feet (75') for any nonresidentially-zoned lot or site located within Tier Two.
183
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred seventy-five feet (175’) for any nonresidentially-zoned lot or site
located within Tier One, and one hundred feet (100’) for any nonresidentially-zoned lot or site located within
Tier Two. ............................................................................................................................................................ 183
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 183
a) Minimum Front Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’) from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards
adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for additional setback
requirements). ..................................................................................................................................................... 183
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see
below). ................................................................................................................................................................ 184
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District – Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story
building, and an additional twenty feet (20’) for every story (or fraction thereof) above one story in height. ... 184
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side-yard setback between two nonresidential buildings may be reduced
to zero feet (0’) where the two buildings share a common interior lot line, where construction of a party wall in
accordance with the City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City Council on the site plan
following a favorable recommendation by the Commission. Where such a reduced side-yard setback is utilized,
the equivalent open space and landscape plantings and buffers that are normally required along a shared side
property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on each respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just
provided somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that shows such a reduced 0’ side yard setback between two
nonresidential buildings shall be discretionary in nature, and shall be based upon an analysis of the location, the
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 32
configuration, and the impact and compatibility of the proposed construction with respect to adjacent land uses
and structures. ..................................................................................................................................................... 184
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and accessory buildings; maximum eighty
percent (80%) impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). ................................ 184
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – Two to one (2:1). ............................................................................... 184
5) Parking Requirements - As established by SECTION 10 of this UDC. ........................................................ 184
6) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9E of this UDC. All façades of main buildings
that face a public street or a residentially zoned district shall have façade offsets of at least five feet (5’) for every
fifty-foot (50’) length of flat wall, both horizontally and vertically, and such offsets shall comprise at least fifteen
percent (15%) of the total overall horizontal façade length for horizontal offsets, and average vertical façade height
for vertical offsets (i.e., above the average vertical roof plane of the building as viewed on plan elevations). ........ 184
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise ..................................................................................................... 184
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees,
pumpkins, etc.) shall be allowed but shall not be placed/located more than thirty feet (30’) from the main building or
within any required front, side or rear yard. ............................................................................................................. 184
2) Long-term or permanent open storage shall require issuance of a Specific Use Permit (SUP). .................... 185
(18) C – Commercial District .......................................................................... 185
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 185
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 185
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s). .................................................................. 185
2) One (1) story or fifteen feet (15’) for accessory buildings. ........................................................................... 185
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC). ............................................................................... 185
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 185
1) Size of Lot ..................................................................................................................................................... 185
a) Minimum Lot Area - One-half acre (21,780 square feet) for any Commercial-zoned lot or site located
within Tier One, and ten thousand (10,000) square feet for any Commercial-zoned lot or site located within Tier
Two. 185
b) Minimum Lot Width - One hundred twenty feet (120’) for any Commercial-zoned lot or site located
within Tier One, and seventy-five feet (75') for any Commercial-zoned lot or site located within Tier Two. ... 185
c) Minimum Lot Depth – One hundred seventy-five feet (175’) for any Commercial-zoned lot or site located
within Tier One, and one hundred feet (100’) for any Commercial-zoned lot or site located within Tier Two. . 185
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 185
a) Minimum Front Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’) from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards
adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for additional setback
requirements). ..................................................................................................................................................... 185
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see
below). ................................................................................................................................................................ 185
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District – Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story
building, and an additional twenty feet (20’) for every story (or fraction thereof) above one story in height. ... 186
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side-yard setback between two nonresidential buildings may be reduced
to zero feet (0’) where the two buildings share a common interior lot line, where construction of a party wall in
accordance with the City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City Council on the site plan
following a favorable recommendation by the Commission. Where such a reduced side-yard setback is utilized,
the equivalent open space and landscape plantings and buffers that are normally required along a shared side
property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on each respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just
provided somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that shows such a reduced 0’ side yard setback between two
nonresidential buildings shall be discretionary in nature, and shall be based upon an analysis of the location, the
configuration, and the impact and compatibility of the proposed construction with respect to adjacent land uses
and structures. ..................................................................................................................................................... 186
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and accessory buildings; maximum eighty
percent (80%) impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). ................................ 186
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – Two to one (2:1). ............................................................................... 186
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise ..................................................................................................... 186
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees,
pumpkins, etc.) shall be allowed but shall not be placed/located more than thirty feet (30’) from the main building or
within any required front, side or rear yard. ............................................................................................................. 186
2) Long-term or permanent open storage shall require issuance of a Specific Use Permit (SUP). .................... 186
(19) LI – Light Industrial District ...................................................................... 186
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 186
1) To accommodate select commercial activities that may be appropriate near industrial uses and which may
serve the immediate needs of the industrial uses and those employed therein. ........................................................ 187
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 33
2) To ensure that the nature, scale, and function of uses pose no significant or unusual risk to the public health,
safety, and welfare. .................................................................................................................................................. 187
3) To ensure that the nature, scale, and function of uses generate a minimum of noise, heat, glare, odor, dust,
vibration, or other nuisances and do not emit harmful radiation or pollution into the air, water, or ground. ........... 187
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 187
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s). .................................................................. 187
2) One (1) story or fifteen feet (15’) for accessory buildings. ........................................................................... 187
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9, of this UDC). .............................................................................. 187
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 187
1) Size of Lot ..................................................................................................................................................... 187
a) Minimum Lot Area - One-half acre (21,780 square feet) for any LI-zoned lot or site located within Tier
One, and ten thousand (10,000) square feet for any LI-zoned lot or site located within Tier Two. .................... 187
b) Minimum Lot Width - One hundred twenty feet (120’) for any LI-zoned lot or site located within Tier
One, and seventy-five feet (75') for any LI-zoned lot or site located within Tier Two. ...................................... 187
c) Minimum Lot Depth – One hundred seventy-five feet (175’) for any LI-zoned lot or site located within
Tier One, and one hundred feet (100’) for any LI-zoned lot or site located within Tier Two. ............................ 187
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 187
a) Minimum Front Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’) from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards
adjacent to a street shall be considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for additional setback
requirements). ..................................................................................................................................................... 187
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see
below). ................................................................................................................................................................ 187
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District – Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story
building, and an additional twenty feet (20’) for every story (or fraction thereof) above one story in height. ... 187
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side-yard setback between two nonresidential buildings may be reduced
to zero feet (0’) where the two buildings share a common interior lot line, where construction of a party wall in
accordance with the City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City Council on the site plan
following a favorable recommendation by the Commission. Where such a reduced side-yard setback is utilized,
the equivalent open space and landscape plantings and buffers that are normally required along a shared side
property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on each respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just
provided somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that shows such a reduced 0’ side yard setback between two
nonresidential buildings shall be discretionary in nature, and shall be based upon an analysis of the location, the
configuration, and the impact and compatibility of the proposed construction with respect to adjacent land uses
and structures. ..................................................................................................................................................... 187
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and accessory buildings; maximum eighty
percent (80%) impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). ................................ 188
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – Two to one (2:1). ............................................................................... 188
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise ..................................................................................................... 188
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees,
pumpkins, etc.) shall be allowed but shall not be placed/located more than thirty feet (30’) from the main building or
within any required front, side or rear yard. ............................................................................................................. 188
2) Long-term or permanent open storage shall require issuance of a Specific Use Permit (SUP). .................... 188
(20) IP – Industrial Park District ...................................................................... 188
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 188
(b) Maximum Height ............................................................................................................................................... 188
1) Thirty-five feet (35’) for main building(s). ................................................................................................... 188
2) One (1) story or fifteen feet (15’) for accessory building(s). ......................................................................... 188
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC). ............................................................................... 188
(c) Area Regulations ................................................................................................................................................ 188
1) Size of Lot ..................................................................................................................................................... 188
a) Minimum Lot Area – One acre (43,560 square feet) for any IP-zoned lot or site located within Tier Two
(IP zoning shall not be located within Tier One, so shall not be located closer than 300 feet from U.S. Highway
175 or a major thoroughfare – however, an IP-zoned lot or site may derive access from U.S. Highway 175 or
other major thoroughfare via a public street or a private entrance that passes through other appropriately zoned
property provided that the applicable street right-of-way or common fire lane/access easement is dedicated by
plat or by other recorded instrument that is acceptable to the City). ................................................................... 188
b) Minimum Lot Width – One hundred feet (100') for any IP-zoned lot or site located within Tier Two
(within Tier One, an entrance for an IP-zoned lot or site from U.S. Highway 175 or other major thoroughfare
shall be the width of the access-giving public street or private fire lane/access easement). ............................... 189
c) Minimum Lot Depth – One hundred fifty feet (150') from the front (i.e., addressed) street right-of-way
line. 189
2) Size of Yards ................................................................................................................................................. 189
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 34
a) Minimum Front Yard - Fifty feet (50’) from ultimate right-of-way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a
street shall be considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for additional setback requirements). 189
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’) unless adjacent to a residentially zoned property
(see below). ........................................................................................................................................................ 189
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District – Fifty feet (50’) for one-story building,
and an additional twenty feet (20’) for every story (or fraction thereof) above one story in height.................... 189
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Sixty percent (60%) including main and accessory buildings; maximum eighty
percent (80%) impervious coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.). ................................ 189
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – Two to one (2:1). ............................................................................... 189
(d) Special Requirements ......................................................................................................................................... 189
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees,
pumpkins, etc.) shall be allowed but shall not be placed/located more than thirty feet (30’) from the main building or
within any required front, side or rear yard. ............................................................................................................. 189
2) Long-term or permanent open storage is allowed but shall be limited to a maximum of twenty percent (20%)
of the total lot area, shall not be located in front of (i.e., on the street side of) or on top of the building, and must be
screened in accordance with the provisions of SECTION 9H of this UDC (i.e., cannot be visible from any public
street or adjacent property). Long-term or permanent open storage that does not conform to all of the above
requirements may be allowed by applying for and obtaining a Specific Use Permit (SUP) in accordance with
SECTION 5I. ........................................................................................................................................................... 189
(21) PD – Planned Development District ........................................................ 190
(a) General Purpose and Description ....................................................................................................................... 190
(b) Application Requirements .................................................................................................................................. 190
1) Application Required .................................................................................................................................... 190
2) Accompanying Applications ......................................................................................................................... 190
3) Tax Certificate Required ............................................................................................................................... 190
4) Minimum Planned Development District Size .............................................................................................. 190
a) Single-Family Residential: two (2) acres; ................................................................................................ 190
b) Multi-Family Residential: two (2) acres; ................................................................................................. 190
c) Nonresidential: two (2) acres; or .............................................................................................................. 190
d) Mixed Residential and Nonresidential: five (5) acres. ............................................................................. 190
(c) Processing of Application and Decision ............................................................................................................. 190
1) Submittal ....................................................................................................................................................... 190
2) Notification Requirements ............................................................................................................................ 191
a) Written notice prior to consideration by the Commission; and ................................................................ 191
b) Published notice prior to consideration by the City Council. ................................................................... 191
3) Commission Recommendation ...................................................................................................................... 191
4) Decision by City Council .............................................................................................................................. 191
(d) Development Standards ...................................................................................................................................... 191
1) Development standards for each PD shall be set forth in the ordinance granting the PD and may include but
shall not be limited to uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths, building height, building
elevations, coverage, floor area ratio, parking, access, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting,
management associations, and other requirements as the City Council may deem appropriate. .............................. 191
2) In the PD, the particular controlling, or base, zoning district(s) to which uses specified in the PD are most
similar shall be stated in the granting ordinance. All PD applications shall list all requested variances from the
standard requirements set forth throughout this ordinance (applications without this list will be considered
incomplete). ............................................................................................................................................................. 191
3) The ordinance granting a PD shall include a statement as to the purpose and intent of the PD granted therein.
A specific list is required of variances in each controlling zoning district or districts and a general statement citing
the reason for the PD request. .................................................................................................................................. 192
4) The PD shall conform to all other sections of the UDC, unless specifically exempted in the granting
ordinance. ................................................................................................................................................................ 192
(e) Conceptual and Development Plan ..................................................................................................................... 192
1) Conceptual Plan: The applicant shall submit a conceptual plan. The plan shall show the applicant’s intent for
the use of the land within the proposed PD in a graphic manner and shall be supported by written documentation of
proposals and standards for development. ............................................................................................................... 192
a) A conceptual plan for residential land use shall show general use(s), thoroughfares, and preliminary lot
arrangements. For residential development which does not propose platted lots, the conceptual plan shall set
forth the size, type, and location of buildings and building sites, access, density, building height, fire lanes,
screening, parking areas, landscaped areas, and other pertinent development data. ........................................... 192
b) A conceptual plan for uses other than residential uses shall set forth the land use proposals in a manner to
adequately illustrate the type and nature of the proposed development. Data which may be submitted by the
applicant, or required by the City Council, may include, but is not limited to, the types of use(s), topography, and
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 35
boundary of the planned development area, physical features of the site, existing streets, alleys, and easements,
location of future public facilities, building heights and locations, parking ratios, and other information to
adequately describe the proposed development and to provide data for approval which is used in drafting the
final development plan. ...................................................................................................................................... 192
c) Changes of detail which do not alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to adjacent
property and which do not alter the uses permitted or increase the density, building height, or coverage of the site
and which do not decrease the off-street parking ratio, reduce the yards provided at the boundary of the site, or
significantly alter the landscape plans as indicated on the approved conceptual plan may be authorized by the
City Manager. If an agreement cannot be reached regarding whether or not a change of detail conforms to the
original concept plan, the City Council shall determine the conformity. ............................................................ 192
2) Development Plan: This plan shall set forth the final plans for development of the PD and shall conform to
the data presented and approved on the conceptual plan. Approval of the development plan shall be the basis for
issuance of a building permit. The development plan shall be acted on by the City Council, upon recommendation of
the Commission. The development plan may be submitted for the total area or any section of the planned
development. The development plan shall include: ................................................................................................ 193
a) A site inventory analysis including a scale drawing of existing vegetation, natural watercourses, creeks or
bodies of water, and an analysis of planned changes in such natural features as a result of the development and
including a delineation of any flood prone areas; ............................................................................................... 193
b) A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private streets and alleys; building sites or lots; and areas
reserved as parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility easements, school sites, street widening and street changes;
sidewalks and trails; the points of ingress and egress from existing and proposed streets; general location and
description of existing and proposed utility services, including size of water and sewer mains; the location and
width for all curb cuts and the land area of all abutting sites and the zoning classification thereof on an accurate
survey of the tract with the topographical contour interval of not more than five feet (5’); ............................... 193
c) A site plan in accordance with SECTION 8N of this UDC; .................................................................... 193
d) A landscape plan showing screening walls, ornamental planting, wooded areas, and trees to be planted;
and 193
e) An architectural plan showing elevations and signage style to be used throughout the development. Any or
all of the required information may be incorporated on a single drawing if such drawing is clear and can be
evaluated by City staff, the Commission and the City Council. ......................................................................... 193
(f) Criteria for Approval .......................................................................................................................................... 193
1) Whether the proposed PD implements and conforms to the policies of the adopted Comprehensive Plan; .. 193
2) Whether the proposed PD promotes the health, safety, and general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly,
efficient and healthful development of the City; ...................................................................................................... 193
3) Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change in zoning district classification and the standards
applicable to such uses will be appropriate in the immediate area of the land to be reclassified; ............................ 194
4) Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing public schools,
streets, water supply, sanitary sewers or other public services and utilities to the area; .......................................... 194
5) The extent to which the proposed PD will result in a more superior development than could be achieved
through conventional zoning; .................................................................................................................................. 194
6) Whether all of the applicant’s taxes owed to the City on the subject property have been paid in full (no
application will receive final approval until all taxes due are paid in full); and ....................................................... 194
7) Whether other criteria are met which, at the discretion of the Commission and City Council, are deemed
relevant and important in the consideration of the PD. ............................................................................................ 194
(g) Amendments ....................................................................................................................................................... 194
1) Corrections in spelling, distances and other labeling that do not affect the overall development concept; ... 194
2) Changes in building position or layout that are less than ten feet (10’) or ten percent (10%) of the total
building project or area; ........................................................................................................................................... 194
3) Changes in proposed property lines as long as the original total project acreage is not exceeded, and the area
of any base zoning district is not changed by more than five percent (5%); and ..................................................... 194
4) Changes in parking layouts as long as the number of required spaces and general original design are
maintained. .............................................................................................................................................................. 194
F. INITIAL ZONING UPON ANNEXATION 194
(1) Newly annexed property shall be deemed to be zoned Agricultural (“A”) until
such a time that the property becomes zoned to another permanent zoning district.
However, as soon as practical following annexation, but in no event more than one
hundred and eighty (180) calendar days thereafter, the City Council shall, on its
own motion or by property owners of the annexed area, initiate proceedings to
formally and legislatively establish Agricultural District zoning on the newly
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 36
annexed territory, whereupon the City Manager shall commence public notification
and other standard procedures for zoning amendments as set forth in this UDC.
Said proceedings to establish zoning may be undertaken concurrently with
annexation procedures (i.e., notified at the same time, public hearings scheduled
at the same time as annexation, etc.); however, zoning approval and formal
adoption of the ordinance establishing zoning must occur after annexation
approval and adoption have occurred, and as a separate and distinct action by the
City Council, after due consideration of the zoning request has been considered by
the Commission. .................................................................................................. 194
(2) The initial zoning of a land parcel, whether it is interim in nature, by initiation
of the landowner or by initiation of the City, must meet the requirements for
notification and public hearings as set forth in this UDC and all other applicable
State laws. ........................................................................................................... 195
(3) The owner of land to be annexed may submit an application for zoning the
property simultaneously with submission of the petition for annexation, but no such
annexation application may be made conditioned upon the approval of any
particular zoning classification. The Commission may consider the request for
zoning and make a recommendation to the City Council prior to final adoption of
the annexation ordinance. Any recommendation by the Commission shall be
conditioned upon approval of the annexation of the property by the City Council.
The City Council may act on an ordinance to establish the initial zoning of the
property being annexed at the same meeting as the action on the annexation
ordinance so long as final approval of the annexation ordinance occurs prior to
final approval of the ordinance to establish the zoning and provided further that
both the annexation of the property and the zoning of the property have been
properly noticed pursuant to SECTION 4C of this UDC. ...................................... 195
(4) Within an area classified as A-Agricultural: ................................................ 195
(a) No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be issued by the Building Official, other than a
permit which will allow the construction of a building or use permitted in the Agricultural District, unless and until
such territory has been classified in a zoning district other than the Agricultural District by the City Council in the
manner prescribed in this UDC, except as provided in paragraph (b). .......................................................................... 195
(b) If plans and preparations for developing a property for a use other than those specified in the Agricultural
District were already in progress prior to annexation of the property into the City, then the City Council may, at its
discretion, authorize construction of the project by a majority vote. Application of this subsection is contingent upon
the following: ................................................................................................................................................................ 195
1) An application for a building permit for the proposed building or use must be made to the Building Official
within ninety (90) days after annexation of the property into the City; and ............................................................. 195
2) The applicant must be able to demonstrate that plans and other preparations for developing the property
commenced prior to (i.e., were already in progress at the time of) annexation into the City. .................................. 196
(c) In its deliberations concerning authorization to proceed with construction of a project which meets the above
criteria, the City Council shall take into consideration the appropriate land use for the area as shown on the
Comprehensive Plan. Upon approval by the City Council, the City Manager shall notify the Building Official of such
approval. ....................................................................................................................................................................... 196
G. ZONING CHANGE/ZONING MAP AMENDMENT 196
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 196
(a) The City Council, from time to time, on its own motion, by request of the City Manager or by application from a
property owner, may establish or amend the boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City. A zoning
change or Zoning Map amendment is required to establish the use of land and the development associated with the
proposed zoning classification for the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable and desirable development
within the City. ............................................................................................................................................................. 196
(b) Approval of a zoning change or Zoning Map amendment authorizes a property owner to submit subsequent
development applications consistent with the amendment. ........................................................................................... 196
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 37
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 196
(a) Application Required .......................................................................................................................................... 196
(b) Accompanying Applications .............................................................................................................................. 196
(c) Tax Certificate Required .................................................................................................................................... 196
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 196
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 196
(b) Notification Requirements .................................................................................................................................. 197
1) Written notice prior to consideration by the Commission; and ..................................................................... 197
2) Published notice prior to consideration by the City Council. ........................................................................ 197
(c) Commission Recommendation ........................................................................................................................... 197
(d) Decision by City Council ................................................................................................................................... 197
(e) Consideration of Previously Denied Amendments ............................................................................................. 197
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 198
(a) Whether the proposed zoning change or Zoning Map amendment implements and conforms to the policies of the
City’s Comprehensive Plan; .......................................................................................................................................... 198
(b) Whether the proposed zoning change or Zoning Map amendment promotes the health, safety, or general welfare
of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City; ....................................................... 198
(c) Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change in zoning district classification and the standards applicable
to such uses will be appropriate in the immediate area of the land to be reclassified; .................................................. 198
(d) Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing public schools,
streets, water supply, sanitary sewers or other public services and utilities to the area; ................................................ 198
(e) Whether there have been environmental and/or economical changes which warrant the requested change; ...... 198
(f) Whether there is an error in the original zoning of the property for which a change is requested; ..................... 198
(g) Whether all of the applicant’s taxes owed to the City on the subject property have been paid in full (no
application will receive final approval until all taxes due and owing are paid in full); and .......................................... 198
(h) Whether other criteria are met, which, at the discretion of the Commission and the City Council, are deemed
relevant and important in the consideration of the amendment. .................................................................................... 198
(5) Protests ...................................................................................................... 198
(a) If a proposed zoning change or Zoning Map amendment is protested in accordance with this section, the
proposed change must receive, in order to take effect, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of all members
of the City Council according to LGC Section 211.006(d), as amended. The protest must be written and signed by the
owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of either: ........................................................................................................ 198
1) The area of the lots or land covered by the proposed zoning change or Zoning Map amendment; or ........... 198
2) The area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the proposed zoning change or Zoning
Map amendment and extending two hundred feet (200’) from that area. ................................................................ 198
(b) In computing the percentage of land area under SECTION 5G(5)(a) above, the area of streets and alleys shall be
included. ........................................................................................................................................................................ 199
H. PERMITTED USE TABLE 199
(1) Use of Land and Buildings .......................................................................... 199
(2) Permitted Principal Uses ............................................................................ 199
(3) Uses Not Listed .......................................................................................... 204
(4) New and Unlisted Uses .............................................................................. 204
(a) It is recognized that new or unlisted types of land use may seek to locate in the City. In order to provide for such
contingencies, a determination of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made in accordance with this section.
204
(b) It is recognized that the Permitted Use Table may require amendment, from time to time, to allow for uses that
are not permitted. In the event an amendment to the Permitted Use Table is required, the procedure for the amendment
shall be the same as required for an amendment to the text of the UDC in accordance with SECTION 4G of this UDC.
204
I. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT (SUP) 204
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 204
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 204
(a) Application Required .......................................................................................................................................... 204
(b) Accompanying Applications .............................................................................................................................. 204
(c) Tax Certificate Required .................................................................................................................................... 204
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 204
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 204
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 38
(b) Notification Requirements .................................................................................................................................. 205
1) Written notice prior to consideration by the Commission; and ..................................................................... 205
2) Published notice prior to consideration by the City Council. ........................................................................ 205
(c) Commission Recommendation ........................................................................................................................... 205
(d) Decision by City Council ................................................................................................................................... 205
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 205
(a) The proposed use at the specified location is consistent with and conforms to the policies embodied in the
adopted Comprehensive Plan; ....................................................................................................................................... 205
(b) The proposed use is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district regulations
and is allowed by such regulations with the approval of a SUP; ................................................................................... 205
(c) The proposed use is compatible with and preserves the character and integrity of adjacent developments and
neighborhoods, and includes improvements either on-site or within the public rights-of-way to mitigate developmentrelated
adverse impacts, such as traffic, noise, odors, visual nuisances, drainage or other similar adverse effects to
adjacent development and neighborhoods; ................................................................................................................... 205
(d) The proposed use does not generate pedestrian and vehicular traffic which will be hazardous or conflict with the
existing and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood; .................................................................................................... 206
(e) The proposed use incorporates roadway adjustments, traffic control devices or mechanisms, and access
restrictions to control traffic flow or divert traffic as may be needed to reduce or eliminate development-generated
traffic on neighborhood streets; .................................................................................................................................... 206
(f) The proposed use incorporates features to minimize adverse effects, including visual impacts, of the proposed
use on adjacent properties; ............................................................................................................................................ 206
(g) The proposed use meets the standards for the zoning district, or to the extent variations from such standards have
been requested, that such variations are allowed by the SUP process and are necessary to render the use compatible
with adjoining development and the neighborhood; ..................................................................................................... 206
(h) The proposed use and associated site plan promote the health, safety and general welfare of the City and the safe,
orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City; .............................................................................................. 206
(i) No application made under these provisions will receive final approval until all back taxes owed to the City have
been paid in full; and ..................................................................................................................................................... 206
(j) Other criteria which, at the discretion of the Commission and City Council are deemed relevant and important in
the consideration of the SUP. ........................................................................................................................................ 206
(5) Conditions .................................................................................................. 206
(6) Expiration of Specific Use Permit ............................................................... 206
(a) A building permit, if necessary, for the use has not been approved within two (2) years of the approval of the
SUP; 206
(b) A building permit approved as a result of the approval of the SUP expires within two (2) years of the approval of
the SUP; ........................................................................................................................................................................ 206
(c) The use has been abandoned or discontinued for a period of time exceeding six (6) months; or ....................... 207
(d) The SUP expires in accordance with its terms. ................................................................................................... 207
SECTION 6 - NONCONFORMING USES, LOTS AND STRUCTURES ................ 207
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT 207
(1) Within the districts established by this UDC, or amendments thereto, there
may exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use
which were lawfully in existence and operating before this UDC was enacted,
amended or otherwise made applicable to such lots, structures or uses, but which
do not now conform to the regulations of the district in which they are located. It is
the intent of this UDC to permit such nonconforming uses to continue, as long as
the conditions within this section and other applicable sections of this UDC are
met. 207
(2) It is further the intent of this UDC that nonconforming uses, lots and
structures shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, and shall not be
used as a basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the
same district. ........................................................................................................ 207
(3) Nonconforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible with the
permitted uses in the zoning districts involved. .................................................... 207
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 39
B. NONCONFORMING STATUS 207
(1) Except as provided in SECTION 6I, any use, platted lot or structure that
does not conform with the regulations of this UDC on the effective date hereof or
any amendment hereto, shall be deemed a nonconforming use, platted lot or
structure provided that: ........................................................................................ 207
(a) Such use, platted lot or structure was in existence under, and in compliance with, the provisions of the previous
City zoning code, and has been in regular and continuous use since such time; ........................................................... 207
(b) Such use, platted lot or structure was a lawful, nonconforming use, platted lot or structure under the previous
City zoning code, and has been in regular and continuous use since such time; or ....................................................... 207
(c) Such use, platted lot or structure was in existence at the time of annexation into the City, was a legal use of the
land at such time, and has been in regular and continuous use since such time. ........................................................... 207
(2) Except as provided in SECTION 6I below, any other use, platted lot or
structure which does not conform with the regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located on the effective date of this UDC or any amendment hereto,
shall be deemed to be in violation of this UDC, and the City shall be entitled to
enforce fully the terms of this UDC with respect to such use, platted lot or
structure. .............................................................................................................. 207
C. CONTINUING LAWFUL NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND AND
STRUCTURES 207
(1) A nonconforming use or structure may continue to be used, operated or
occupied in accordance with the terms of the zoning regulations by which it was
established, or in the case of annexed property, in accordance with the regulations
under which it was created, if any. ....................................................................... 208
(2) A nonconforming structure occupied by a nonconforming use may be reoccupied
by a conforming use, following abandonment of the nonconforming use.208
D. EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES 208
(1) A nonconforming use may not be extended. .............................................. 208
(2) A nonconforming use occupying a structure shall not be extended to occupy
land outside the structure. .................................................................................... 208
(3) A nonconforming use or structure shall not be enlarged, increased or
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the time the use
or structure became nonconforming, except to provide additional off-street parking
or loading areas required by this UDC. ................................................................ 208
E. ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES, AND
CESSATION OF USE OF STRUCTURES OR LAND 208
(1) If a nonconforming use or structure is abandoned, any future use of the
premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this UDC, as amended, and
with any other applicable City codes or ordinances that are in effect at the time the
use is resumed or the structure is re-occupied. ................................................... 208
(2) A nonconforming use or structure shall be deemed “abandoned” in the
following circumstances: ...................................................................................... 208
(a) The use ceases to operate for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) calendar days; ......................... 208
(b) The structure remains vacant for a continuous period of 180 calendar days; or ................................................. 208
(c) In the case of a temporary use, the use is moved from the premises for any length of time. .............................. 208
(3) Any lot, tract or property that does not have a building on it and that is used
for open/outside storage as of the effective date of this UDC is hereby made and
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 40
declared to be nonconforming by this UDC. Within one hundred eighty (180)
calendar days following the effective date of this UDC such open/outside storage
use shall cease. The lot, tract or property shall be cleaned up and all trash, debris,
stored items and vehicles, and other materials shall be removed from the premises
such that the property is not a physical or visual nuisance to the public or to
surrounding property owners. .............................................................................. 208
F. LIMITATIONS OF NONCONFORMING USES 208
(1) A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.208
(2) A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use; provided,
however, that, once such change is made, the use shall not be changed back to a
nonconforming use. ............................................................................................. 209
(3) A conforming use located in a nonconforming structure may be changed to
another conforming use, but shall not be changed to a nonconforming use,
provided the degree of nonconformity of such structure shall not be increased by
such change in conforming uses. ........................................................................ 209
G. RECONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE 209
(1) If more than fifty percent (50%) of the total appraised value of a
nonconforming structure, as such appraised value was determined by the
Kaufman County Appraisal District on the most recently approved tax roll, is
destroyed by fire, the elements, or some other cause, then the structure may be
rebuilt only in conformity with the standards of this UDC. .................................... 209
(2) If less than fifty percent (50%) of the total appraised value of a
nonconforming structure, as such appraised value was determined by the
Kaufman County Appraisal District on the most recently approved tax roll, is
destroyed by fire, the elements, or some other cause, then the structure may be
reconstructed as it was before the partial destruction but only to its original
dimensions and floor area, and provided that such reconstruction is completed
within 365 calendar days following the event that caused the partial destruction. If
reconstruction is delayed by contested insurance claims, litigation, or some other
similar cause, then the 365 calendar day reconstruction period may be extended
by the City Manager, at his/her sole discretion. ................................................... 209
(3) If a nonconforming structure that is totally or partially destroyed was
occupied by a nonconforming use at the time of such destruction, then the
nonconforming use may be re-established subject to the limitations on expansion
set forth in SECTION 6D and SECTION 6F above. . ........................................... 209
(4) Any conforming structure that is totally or partially destroyed shall be
reconstructed only in conformity with the standards of this UDC. ........................ 209
(5) Nothing in this UDC shall be construed to prohibit the upgrading,
strengthening, repair or maintenance of any part of any structure, conforming or
nonconforming, that is declared unsafe or uninhabitable by the proper authority,
unless such repairs or maintenance exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the structure’s
appraised value, as such appraised value was determined by the Kaufman County
Appraisal District on the most recently approved tax roll. .................................... 209
H. RELOCATION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE 209
I. NONCONFORMING LOTS 209
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 41
(1) The following types of platted lots shall be deemed in conformance with the
provisions of this UDC, notwithstanding the fact that such lot does not meet the
standards of this UDC in the zoning district in which it is located: ....................... 210
(a) Any vacant lot that conformed to the City’s zoning district regulations at the time that it was platted; or ......... 210
(b) Any lot occupied by a single-family dwelling authorized under the zoning district regulations in which the lot is
located. .......................................................................................................................................................................... 210
(2) Nothing in this UDC shall be construed to prohibit the use of a lot that does
not meet the minimum lot standards of the zoning district in which it is located,
provided that the lot is zoned for the land use(s) intended and the lot was platted
as a lot of record prior to the effective date of this UDC. ...................................... 210
(3) A lot of record located within the Agriculture (A) zoning district that is
nonconforming may be occupied by a single-family dwelling provided that all
applicable zoning standards with regard to building setbacks, building size and
design criteria are met. ........................................................................................ 210
J. NONCONFORMING MANUFACTURED HOUSING 210
(1) Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this SECTION 6, the owner of a
nonconforming manufactured home or mobile home may remove the
manufactured home or mobile home from its location and place another
manufactured home on the same property, provided that the replacement is a
newer manufactured home, and is at least as large in living space as the prior
structure. .............................................................................................................. 210
(2) Except in the case of a fire or natural disaster, the owner of the
manufactured home is limited to a single replacement of the manufactured home
on the same property. .......................................................................................... 210
(3) A property owner who has a manufactured home or mobile home which has
been placed on a lot in violation of the terms of this UDC shall not have the right to
replace the illegal use. ......................................................................................... 210
K. AMORTIZATION 210
(1) The BOA, on its own motion or at the direction of the City Council or an
interested property owner, may inquire into the existence of any nonconforming
use in the City, and after public hearing and investigation into the conditions
created by the use including fire or health hazards created by the use and any
other danger or nuisance to the public due to or created by any condition or use
existing on the property, require the discontinuance or termination of such
nonconforming use. The owner of the nonconforming use under investigation by
the BOA shall have no fewer than ten (10) days written notice prior to the day of
the public hearing. The BOA, after having heard from any affected parties and the
public, shall prescribe a reasonable time period for compliance, discontinuance
and termination of the nonconforming use that allows for amortization of the
owner's actual investment in the use that occurred before the time that the use
became nonconforming. ...................................................................................... 210
(2) In prescribing said time period, the BOA shall consider the following factors:211
(a) The capital investment in structures, fixed equipment and other assets (excluding inventory and other assets that
may be feasibly transferred to another site) on the property at the time the use became nonconforming; .................... 211
(b) Any costs that are directly attributable to the establishment of compliance date, including demolition expenses,
relocation expenses, termination of leases and discharge of mortgages; ....................................................................... 211
(c) Any return on investment since inception of the use, including net income and depreciation; and .................... 211
(d) The anticipated annual recovery of investment, including net income and depreciation. ................................... 211
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 42
(3) If the BOA establishes an amortization (or compliance) date for a
nonconforming use, the nonconforming use must cease operation on that date and
it may not operate thereafter unless it becomes a conforming use. ..................... 211
(4) For purposes of this SECTION 6K, "owner" means the owner of the
nonconforming use at the time of the BOA's determination of an amortization (or
compliance) date for the nonconforming use. ...................................................... 211
(5) The BOA shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, documents and
things; administer oaths; punish for contempt; and may require the production of
documents and other things, under such regulations as it may establish or deem
appropriate. .......................................................................................................... 211
(6) This SECTION 6K is subject in all events to the owner’s rights set forth in
LGC Chapter 245 and LGC Section 211.017. ...................................................... 211
SECTION 7 - SUPPLEMENTAL USES AND GENERAL REGULATIONS ............ 211
A. ANTI-MONOTONY REQUIREMENTS 211
(1) Purpose ...................................................................................................... 211
(a) The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the aesthetically pleasing character of Byron's residential districts by
promoting same; protect and enhance property values; and promote the easy identification of houses, by encouraging
new dwelling unit constuction of distinctive design and discouraging excessive similarity among adjacent dwellings.
Establishment of a Gated Community........................................................................................................................... 211
(2) Residential Construction – Design Variety ................................................. 211
(a) No building permit shall be issued for any new single-family detached dwelling unit which is similar in
appearance to any dwelling on the same street which is within two lots distance of it. However, those single-family
dwellings with a signed sales contract or application for building permit bearing a date prior to the adoption of this
ordinance shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. .................................................................................... 211
(b) A dwelling on a corner lot may be considered dissimilar to another if the two dwellings face different streets. On
cul-de-sac turnarounds, no dwelling shall be similar in appearance to another dwelling on the turnaround. ................ 212
(3) Similarity Standards ................................................................................... 212
(a) For the purpose of this chapter, "similar in appearance" means a dwelling which is identical, or nearly identical,
to another in any three of the following characteristics: ................................................................................................ 212
1) Roof type (gable, hip, mansard, gambrel, flat, combination); ....................................................................... 212
2) Roof height;................................................................................................................................................... 212
3) Approximate dimensions (height and length) of the front wall closest to the front lot line; .......................... 212
4) Shape of the front elevation silhouette; ......................................................................................................... 212
5) Relative locations and sizes of windows in the front elevation; .................................................................... 212
6) Relative location and dimensions of garage door(s), if included on the front elevation; ............................... 212
7) Type(s) of siding (e.g., brick veneer, lapped horizontal siding, half-timber, board and batten, shakes, etc.) on
the front elevation. ................................................................................................................................................... 212
(b) Housing Styles. If adjacent lots as defined in this chapter contain different housing styles as herein described, the
previously delineated similarity standards do not apply. Housing style is in and of itself a significant enough
characteristic to constitute dissimilarity. Housing styles shall consist of the following: ranch, bi-level, tri-level, 1 and ½
story, two-story, and three-story. .................................................................................................................................. 212
(4) Administration ............................................................................................. 212
(a) If the building and zoning officer, or person acting in that capacity, finds that the dwelling for which a building
permit is requested is similar in appearance to a dwelling for which a building permit has been issued within two lots
distance and facing the same street, the building and zoning officer shall deny the permit request for noncompliance
with this chapter. ........................................................................................................................................................... 212
1) Alter the dwelling plans so that the proposed dwelling is no longer similar to another adjacent dwelling,
according to the criteria specified herein; ................................................................................................................ 212
2) Appeal the decision of the building and zoning officer to the health and ordinance/public health committee of
the city council; ....................................................................................................................................................... 212
3) In appealing the interpretation of the code to the health and ordinance/public health committee, an applicant
for a building permit shall present evidence sufficient to demonstrate conformity with this chapter, such as
architectural drawings. Shape of the front elevation silhouette. ............................................................................... 212
(b) If the health and ordinance/public health committee finds in favor of the applicant, the building and zoning
officer shall issue a building permit, so long as such application has met all other appropriate requirements. If the health
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 43
and ordinance/public health committee finds against the applicant, the applicant may appeal to the city council. To
overturn the decision of the health and ordinance/public health committee requires a vote of three-fourth of the city
council. .......................................................................................................................................................................... 213
(5) Exceptions .................................................................................................. 213
(a) These regulations shall not apply to dwellings for which building permits have been approved before the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, including dwellings that are being remodeled, reconstructed, or
replaced after fire, windstorm or other catastrophe. ...................................................................................................... 213
(b) These regulations may be waived in cases where the applicant for a building permit could not be expected to
anticipate the design of a neighboring dwelling for which a building permit has already been issued but is not yet built.
In such instances, the builder shall request, and the health and ordinance/public health committee may grant, an
exception from this chapter. .......................................................................................................................................... 213
(c) These regulations may be waived for residential planned unit developments in which similarity of architectural
form and style among dwellings is integral to the success of a unified plan, in which the high quality of building
materials, building plans, and site plan details overcome the presumed deficiencies of similarity. In such cases, the
developer shall request, and the health and ordinance/public health committee may grant, an exception from this
chapter as a condition of a planned unit development. .................................................................................................. 213
B. GATED COMMUNITIES 213
(1) Purpose ...................................................................................................... 213
(2) Establishment of a Gated Community ........................................................ 213
(a) Minimum Size .................................................................................................................................................... 213
(b) Master Plan Required ......................................................................................................................................... 213
(c) Conflict with Thoroughfare Plan ........................................................................................................................ 214
1) A gated community shall not cross an existing or proposed thoroughfare as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan.
214
2) A gated community shall not disrupt or cross an existing or proposed public pedestrian pathway, hike and
bike trail, park or other public facility as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan. ........................................................... 214
(3) Homeowners Association (“HOA”) ............................................................. 214
(a) A HOA shall be established for a gated community and creation shall be so noted on the plat. The following
"Maintenance Agreement" statement shall appear on the final plat: ............................................................................. 214
(b) The HOA shall be directly responsible to, and controlled by, the property owners involved, to provide for
operation, repair and maintenance of all common areas, fences, walls and all common facilities including, but not
limited to, streets, sidewalks or other infrastructure that are part of the common facilities. ......................................... 214
(c) The HOA Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (“CCRs”) must establish a reserve fund for the maintenance
of private streets and other improvements such as common greenbelts, security station structures and equipment, and
other significant HOA infrastructure. This reserve fund shall not be commingled with any other HOA fund. The
balance of the fund shall be equal to the total replacement cost of the private streets and other improvements divided by
the average life expectancy of those improvements times the age of the improvements. The life expectancy for a gated
community with concrete streets shall be a minimum of twenty (20) years. ................................................................. 214
(d) All owners of property within the subdivision shall automatically be members of the HOA by virtue of their
ownership of property within the subdivision and any annexed areas. ......................................................................... 215
(e) The City shall be granted permission and practical access to enter the subdivision at any time without liability
when on official business. Further, the City shall be authorized to remove any obstructions including, but not limited
to, any gate and guard house, upon noncompliance by the HOA or if necessary for emergency vehicle access. The cost
of removal of any obstruction shall be assessed to the owner or, if a common facility, to the HOA. ........................... 215
(f) The HOA shall provide access for fire, ambulance, and police services, mail deliveries, school buses, garbage
pickup, and utilities. Access must not require drivers to exit their vehicles. ................................................................ 215
(g) Repair and maintenance of common facilities shall be conducted on a schedule acceptable to the City and shall
be undertaken promptly by the HOA. ........................................................................................................................... 215
(4) Controlled Access ...................................................................................... 215
(5) Private Streets ............................................................................................ 215
(a) All streets and sidewalks within a gated community shall be private streets, shall be maintained by the HOA, and
shall be constructed in accordance with City standards. ............................................................................................... 215
(b) If repairs and maintenance are not performed by the HOA, the City shall have the right, but not the obligation, to
undertake any necessary repairs or maintenance and shall be reimbursed by the HOA. A statement shall be added to
the plat which provides for maintenance of streets by the HOA and authorizes the City to perform such repairs or
maintenance at the expense of the HOA. ...................................................................................................................... 215
(6) Converting Private Streets to Public Streets ............................................... 215
(a) Subject to approval and acceptance of the City Council, the HOA for a gated community may dedicate private
streets to the City for public access and maintenance. .................................................................................................. 215
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 44
(b) The HOA shall submit a written request, signed by HOA officers, to the City Council requesting such
acceptance of the dedication. The written request shall be accompanied by a petition containing the signatures of the
owners of sixty-seven percent (67%) of the existing lots in the subdivision. ................................................................ 215
1) All of the infrastructure must be brought up to the City’s then-effective development standards, at the sole
cost and expense of the HOA and its members, and in a condition that is acceptable to the City............................ 216
2) All security stations, gates, and other structures not consistent with a public street development must be
removed at the sole cost and expense of the HOA and its members. ....................................................................... 216
3) All monies in the reserve fund must be delivered to the City. ....................................................................... 216
4) The subdivision plat shall be submitted to the City as a replat and upon review and approval, shall be filed
with the Kaufman County clerk to dedicate the streets, public utility easements, storm sewer easements and any
other public easements to the City. An ordinance converting the private streets to public streets must be approved
by the City Council prior to the filing of said subdivision replat. ............................................................................ 216
5) The CCRs must be modified and refiled to remove requirements specific to private street subdivisions. .... 216
(c) All repairs, maintenance, or reconstruction of private streets shall be approved and accepted by the City prior to
conversion. All conversion, dedication and replatting costs shall be paid by the HOA. .............................................. 216
C. ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES 216
(1) No accessory use or structure shall be permitted without a primary use or
structure. .............................................................................................................. 216
(2) Accessory buildings, as permitted herein, shall occupy more than forty
percent (40%) of the required rear yard. .............................................................. 216
(3) Accessory buildings shall be set back at least three feet (3’) from common
property lines and may not be located within an easement. ................................ 216
(4) No accessory building may be closer than ten feet (10’) to the main building.216
(5) No accessory use or structure shall be allowed in the front yard or in front of
the front building line. ........................................................................................... 216
(6) Attached accessory uses or structures shall comply with the front, side and
rear setbacks and height restrictions established for the primary structure in this
UDC. 216
(7) Accessory structures must be architecturally compatible with the primary
structure. .............................................................................................................. 216
(8) The wall height of the accessory building shall be limited to not more than
eight feet (8’) and total building height shall not exceed fifteen feet (15’). This
limitation is only applicable to platted subdivisions with a specific lot size, e.g.,
eighty feet (80’) by one hundred feet (100’), and is not intended to be applicable for
a one (1)-owner, multiple-acre residence. For a one (1)-owner, multiple-acre
residential lot a variance is not required; however, the total building height cannot
exceed thirty-five feet (35’). .................................................................................. 216
(9) Storage buildings that are accessory to a principal residential use on the
same lot shall require site plan approval prior to building permit issuance. ......... 217
(10) The minimum separation between a main structure and detached
accessory structure other than a carport shall be ten feet (10’). .......................... 217
(11) The minimum separation between the main building and an in-ground or
above-ground pool, spa, hot tub, playhouse, sauna or gazebo which does not
exceed one story in height may be less than ten feet (10’) if the structure is
contiguous with or an integral part of the primary structure, and/or the accessory
structure is engineered by a professional engineer to ensure the integrity of the
existing (primary structure) foundation. ................................................................ 217
(a) Such plans indicating the design for an accessory structure shall be submitted to the Building Official for review
in connection with the issuance of a building permit; and ............................................................................................ 217
(b) Setback distances for in-ground or aboveground pools, spas, hot tubs and saunas shall be measured to the outside
edge of the beam (structural edge) of the pool, spa, etc. ............................................................................................... 217
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 45
D. CARPORTS/PORTE-COCHERES 217
(1) Carports ...................................................................................................... 217
(a) Multi-family/Nonresidential Districts ................................................................................................................. 217
1) Carports shall be allowed in multi-family and nonresidential districts. ......................................................... 217
2) Carports shall be located within all building setbacks. .................................................................................. 217
3) Carports shall not be located within required landscaping areas. .................................................................. 217
4) The maximum height of the carport entry shall be ten feet (10’). ................................................................. 217
5) All parking spaces located under the carport shall be of concrete. ................................................................ 217
6) Carports shall be structurally sound, as determined by the Building Official. .............................................. 217
(b) Manufactured Home Districts ............................................................................................................................ 217
1) A carport may not be constructed in such a way that any part of the structure encroaches into a required
setback as provided in the underlying zoning district. ............................................................................................. 217
2) The maximum height of the carport entry shall be ten feet (10'). .................................................................. 217
3) Driveways to the carport and parking spaces under the carport shall be constructed of concrete. ................ 217
4) Parking spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') by twenty feet (20'). .................................................... 217
5) The carport shall be structurally sound as determined by the Building Official. ........................................... 217
6) The carport shall not drain directly or indirectly onto neighboring properties. ............................................. 218
(2) Porte-Cocheres .......................................................................................... 218
(a) Single-Family Districts ....................................................................................................................................... 218
1) Shall be attached to a residence and shall be an integral part of the primary structure; ................................ 218
2) Shall not encroach into a required setback as provided in the underlying zoning district; ............................ 218
3) Shall be erected over a driveway constructed of concrete; ............................................................................ 218
4) Shall not exceed one (1) story in height; ....................................................................................................... 218
5) Shall be open on two (2) or more sides; and ................................................................................................. 218
6) Shall be constructed of the same material as the primary structure. .............................................................. 218
E. HOME OCCUPATIONS 218
(1) Purpose and Intent ..................................................................................... 218
(a) Protect residential areas from adverse impact of activities associated with home occupations. ......................... 218
(b) Permit residents of the City a reasonable opportunity to use their homes as a place of livelihood and for the
production or supplement of personal and family income. ........................................................................................... 218
(c) Establish criteria and development standards for home occupations conducted in residential units. ................. 218
(2) Home Occupations--Required Conditions .................................................. 218
(a) The area set aside for home occupations shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total floor area of such
residence. ...................................................................................................................................................................... 218
(b) No interior or exterior business sign shall be permitted. .................................................................................... 218
(c) No mechanical equipment shall be used except equipment of a type that is similar in character to equipment
normally used for purely domestic or household purposes or for hobby purposes. ....................................................... 218
(d) Retail sales shall be prohibited on the premises. ................................................................................................ 218
(e) No more than one (1) person other than the immediate family permanently residing on the premises shall be
employed in the home occupation. ................................................................................................................................ 218
(f) No more than one home occupation shall be permitted within any single dwelling unit. ................................... 218
(g) A home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal building. No home occupation or any storage
of goods, materials, or products connected with a home occupation shall be allowed in accessory buildings or garages,
attached or detached, excluding paints and chemicals that may be used in the home occupation. ................................ 218
(h) There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the
principal building. ......................................................................................................................................................... 219
(i) There shall be no exterior storage of materials to be used in conjunction with a home occupation. .................. 219
(j) A home occupation shall produce no offensive noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interferences, dust, odors, or
heat detectable beyond the property limits or beyond the walls of the dwelling unit. The judgment of the City’s code
enforcement officer pertaining to a violation under this section shall be considered final, unless formally appealed to
the BOA within thirty (30) days of the code enforcement officer’s written determination. .......................................... 219
(3) Home Occupation Permit ........................................................................... 219
(a) Purpose ............................................................................................................................................................... 219
(b) Permit Required .................................................................................................................................................. 219
(c) Application for Home Occupation Permit .......................................................................................................... 219
1) Applicant shall apply to the City Manager for a home occupation permit. ................................................... 219
2) The City Manager may issue the permit if the home occupation meets all the requirements established in
SECTION 7D(2) of this UDC. ................................................................................................................................. 219
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 46
3) The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the BOA in accordance with SECTION 3D(3)(a) of
this UDC. ................................................................................................................................................................. 219
4) An appeal must be submitted to the BOA within thirty (30) days after disapproval of a permit by the Building
Official. .................................................................................................................................................................... 219
5) The decision of the BOA is final and non-appealable. .................................................................................. 219
(d) Conditions Applicable to Home Occupation Permits ......................................................................................... 219
1) Validation ...................................................................................................................................................... 219
2) Renewal ......................................................................................................................................................... 219
3) Inspection ...................................................................................................................................................... 219
4) Termination ................................................................................................................................................... 220
5) Renewal of terminated permits ...................................................................................................................... 220
F. USABLE OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS 220
(a) Areas provided as usable open space shall meet the following criteria: ............................................................. 220
1) All residential lots must be located within six hundred feet (600') of a usable open space area as measured
along a street. The Commission may recommend, and the City Council may allow, this distance to be increased to
up to one thousand two hundred feet (1,200’) if the shape of the subdivision is irregular or if existing trees or other
natural features on the site can be preserved by increasing the distance. ................................................................. 220
2) Individual usable open space areas shall be at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in size. Usable open
space must be a minimum of fifty feet (50') wide, and must have no slope greater than ten percent (10%). At the
time of site plan and subdivision plat approval, the Commission may recommend, and the City Council may allow,
full or partial credit for open areas that exceed the 10% maximum slope if it is determined that such areas are
environmentally or aesthetically significant and that their existence enhances the development and the surrounding
area. 220
3) Pools, tennis courts, walkways, patios and similar outdoor amenities may be located within areas designated
as usable open space. Areas occupied by enclosed buildings (except for gazebos and pavilions), driveways, parking
lots, overhead electrical transmission lines, drainage channels and antennas may not be included in calculating
usable open space. ................................................................................................................................................... 220
4) Within usable open space areas, there shall be at least one (1) large shade tree for every one thousand (1,000)
square feet of space. New trees planted to meet this requirement shall be a minimum three-inch (3") caliper, and at
least twenty-five percent (25%) of the trees shall be non-deciduous (for qualifying tree species, see SECTION
9G(9)(a) of this UDC for the City’s Approved Plant List). ..................................................................................... 220
5) A usable open space area must have street frontage on at least thirty-three percent (33%) of the area's
perimeter to ensure that the area is accessible to residents of the subdivision. ........................................................ 221
6) Usable open space areas must be easily viewed from adjacent streets and homes. Side or rear yard fences
along common open space areas shall be of open, decorative iron design, and shall not exceed six feet (6’) in height
adjacent to the open space and for a distance of ten feet (10’) perpendicular or radial to the open space area. ....... 221
(b) Credit for Off-Site Open Space - At the time of site plan and subdivision plat approval, the Commission may
recommend, and the City Council may allow, up to one-third (1/3) of the required open space to be credited for off-site
dedicated open space (e.g., park land) that meets the development's needs in terms of adjacency, accessibility, usability,
and design integration. The granting of any off-site credit for open space is a discretionary power of the City Council.
The guidelines below may assist in considering if credit is appropriate: ...................................................................... 221
1) Adjacency - Is at least fifteen percent (15%) of the patio home development's boundary adjacent to park
land? 221
2) Accessibility - Are there defined pedestrian connections between the development and the park land? ...... 221
3) Usability - Is the park land immediately adjacent to the development suitable for use and accessible by
residents? ................................................................................................................................................................. 221
4) Design Integration - Does the design of the development provide a significant visual and pedestrian
connection to the park or other open space land? .................................................................................................... 221
5) Landscaped Areas - Additional common open space and landscaped areas that do not qualify as usable open
space may be provided, but shall not be counted toward the usable open space requirement. ................................. 221
G. LIGHTING AND GLARE STANDARDS 221
(1) Purpose and Intent ..................................................................................... 221
(2) Applicability ................................................................................................ 221
(a) The regulations contained in this section are applicable only within the corporate limits of the City. ............... 222
(b) Compliance with the regulations in this section is strongly encouraged for improvements and developments
within the ETJ in order to prevent light pollution and preserve the rural and historic character of the City. ................ 222
(c) All outdoor lighting fixtures installed on private and public property within a new development or
redevelopment within the City limits shall be required to comply with this UDC. This UDC does not apply to interior
lighting; however, overly bright lighting emitted from a structure will be subject to this UDC if it is determined by the
City Manager that it creates a nuisance or a potential safety hazard. ............................................................................ 222
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 47
(d) All outdoor lighting fixtures existing and legally installed and operating before the effective date of this UDC
shall be exempt from this UDC unless they are determined to create a nuisance or a safety hazard. When existing
lighting fixtures become inoperable, their replacements shall be subject to the provisions of this UDC. ..................... 222
(e) Modifications to nonconforming lighting fixtures shall also comply with this section. ..................................... 222
(f) In the event of a conflict between this section and any other section of this UDC or any other regulation of the
City, the more stringent requirements shall apply. ........................................................................................................ 222
(3) Exemptions ................................................................................................. 222
(a) Publicly maintained traffic control devices; ....................................................................................................... 222
(b) Street lights installed prior to the effective date of this UDC; ............................................................................ 222
(c) Temporary emergency lighting (fire, police, repair crews); ............................................................................... 222
(d) Lighting fixtures and illumination requirements imposed by TxDOT within TxDOT right-of-way (“ROW”); . 222
(e) Moving vehicle lights; ........................................................................................................................................ 222
(f) Navigation lights (aircraft warning beacons on water towers and wireless transmission facilities) required by
state or federal law; ....................................................................................................................................................... 222
(g) Signs and associated lighting that conform to the sign regulations of this UDC; ............................................... 222
(h) Seasonal decorations with lights in place no longer than sixty (60) days; .......................................................... 222
(i) Other temporary uses approved by the City Council (festivals, carnivals, fairs, night-time construction); ........ 222
(j) Covered porch lighting on residences provided that each external light fixture does not exceed one-hundred fifty
(150) watts; and ............................................................................................................................................................ 222
(k) Security lights of any output that are controlled by a motion sensor switch provided they do not exceed 0.25
foot-candle at the property line and do not remain illuminated for a duration that exceeds ten to twelve (10-12) minutes
after activation. ............................................................................................................................................................. 222
(4) Submittals ................................................................................................... 223
(a) Plans indicating the location, type, and height of lighting fixtures including both building-mounted and groundmounted
fixtures; .......................................................................................................................................................... 223
(b) A description of the lighting fixtures, including lamps, poles or other supports and shielding devices, which may
be provided as catalog illustrations from the manufacturer;.......................................................................................... 223
(c) Photometric data, which may be furnished by the manufacturer, showing the angle of light emission; ............. 223
(d) Detailed site lighting plan illustrating the foot-candle power measured throughout the site; and....................... 223
(e) Additional information as may be required by the Commission in order to determine compliance with this UDC.
223
(5) General Standards ..................................................................................... 223
(a) Outdoor lighting shall be designed to provide the minimum lighting necessary to ensure adequate safety, night
vision, and comfort, and shall not create or cause excessive glare onto adjacent properties and public street rights-ofway.
223
(b) Outdoor lighting must be “full cut-off” and hooded, shielded, and/or aimed downward. .................................. 223
(c) The hood or shield must mask the direct horizontal surface of the light source. The light must be aimed so as to
ensure that the illumination is only pointing downward onto the ground surface or into the building. No illumination
may spill onto adjacent property. .................................................................................................................................. 223
(d) Any bright light shining onto an adjacent property or street that would result in a safety hazard is not permitted.
Light trespass beyond property boundaries or above the horizontal plane shall be considered non-compliant. ............ 223
(e) Existing fixtures may be adapted to comply with this UDC by adding a properly designed hood or shield, or by
redirecting any upward mounted fixture downward onto the ground surface, sign, or illuminated structure. ............... 223
(f) All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed, located, and maintained to minimize light trespass and all direct
illumination shall be kept within the boundaries of the property upon which the light fixture is positioned. ............... 223
(g) When approved, accent lighting shall be directed downward onto the structure or object and not toward the sky
or adjacent properties. Direct light emissions shall not be visible above the roofline or beyond the building edge. ..... 224
(h) Spotlights on landscaping and foliage shall be limited to one hundred fifty (150) watts output. The light shall be
shielded and so as not to create a nuisance or safety hazard. ........................................................................................ 224
(i) No light source shall exceed thirty-five feet (35') in height. Street lights and other traffic safety lighting are
exempt from this standard. ............................................................................................................................................ 224
(j) Minimum lighting intensities shall be measured parallel with the ground with the photo sensor surface pointed to
the zenith. Maximum lighting intensities shall be measured perpendicular to the line of sight between the observer and
the lighting fixture measured six feet above ground level with the photo sensor surface pointed directly at the light
fixture. ........................................................................................................................................................................... 224
(6) Specific Nonresidential Lighting Requirements .......................................... 224
(a) The maximum allowable intensity of lighting for any nonresidential use shall be 0.25 foot-candles measured at
the property line or at the street ROW line.................................................................................................................... 224
(b) Light poles shall have a maximum height equal to the maximum height allowed for the main building in each
zoning district or shall be equal in height to the tallest building located on the property on which the light is placed,
whichever height is less. ............................................................................................................................................... 224
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 48
(7) Special or Temporary Lighting -- Low Wattage .......................................... 224
(a) Bare bulbs or strings of lamps are prohibited; provided, however, from November 20 until January 10 of the
following year, special lighting shall be permitted in conformity with this UDC. ........................................................ 224
H. TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS 224
(1) Purpose ...................................................................................................... 224
(a) Ensure that the location and use of antenna facilities and antennas do not compromise the aesthetic quality of the
community; ................................................................................................................................................................... 224
(b) Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the residents and businesses of the City; .... 224
(c) Encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to locate them in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal; ................................................................................................................................................. 224
(d) Encourage co-location on both new and existing antenna facilities; .................................................................. 224
(e) Encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse
visual impact through careful design, landscape screening, and innovative stealth techniques; and ............................. 225
(f) Enhance the ability of wireless telecommunication providers to provide services to the community effectively
and efficiently. .............................................................................................................................................................. 225
(2) Applicability ................................................................................................ 225
(3) General Regulations ................................................................................... 225
(a) Telecommunications Antennas ........................................................................................................................... 225
(b) Equipment Storage Building .............................................................................................................................. 226
(c) Driveway Surfaces ............................................................................................................................................. 226
(d) Lights .................................................................................................................................................................. 226
(e) Antenna Facility Capacity .................................................................................................................................. 226
(f) Tower Types ....................................................................................................................................................... 226
(g) Prohibited in Easements ..................................................................................................................................... 226
(h) Construction Standards ....................................................................................................................................... 226
(i) Building Codes / Safety Standards ..................................................................................................................... 227
(j) Contained on Property ........................................................................................................................................ 227
(k) State or Federal Requirements ............................................................................................................................ 227
(l) Variance Requirement ........................................................................................................................................ 227
(4) Amateur Radio Antennas and TV Antennas ............................................... 227
(a) Antenna Location ............................................................................................................................................... 228
(b) Number of Facilities Per Lot .............................................................................................................................. 228
(c) Height Limitations .............................................................................................................................................. 228
(d) Setbacks .............................................................................................................................................................. 228
(5) Satellite Receive-Only Antennas, One (1) Meter or Less in Diameter ........ 228
(a) Antenna Location ............................................................................................................................................... 228
(b) Number of Facilities Per Lot .............................................................................................................................. 228
(c) Height Limitations .............................................................................................................................................. 228
(d) Setbacks .............................................................................................................................................................. 228
(6) Satellite Antennas Greater Than One Meter in Diameter ........................... 228
(a) Nonresidential Zoning Districts .......................................................................................................................... 229
(b) Residential Zoning Districts ............................................................................................................................... 229
(c) Height ................................................................................................................................................................. 229
(d) Location .............................................................................................................................................................. 229
(e) Screening ............................................................................................................................................................ 229
(7) Placement of Antenna Facilities ................................................................. 229
(a) Full Commercial ("FC") ..................................................................................................................................... 229
(b) Undeveloped Residential ("UR")........................................................................................................................ 229
1) Is not a part of a recorded subdivision; or ..................................................................................................... 229
2) Is a part of a recorded subdivision but has not had a building permit issued for a residential structure; and 229
3) Is not located within the calculated limits of the Developed Residential threshold, set forth below. ............ 229
(c) Wireless Corridors ("WC") ................................................................................................................................ 229
(d) Developed Residential ("DR") ........................................................................................................................... 229
1) A recorded subdivision that has had at least one (1) building permit for a residential structure; or .............. 230
2) Within six hundred feet (600’) of areas described in this SECTION 7F(7)(d). ............................................. 230
(8) Antenna Facility Impact Levels ................................................................... 230
(a) Monopole: A monopole tower requires a SUP. The antenna equipment may not extend more than five feet (5’)
above the highest point on the monopole. ..................................................................................................................... 230
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 49
(b) Level 4 Stealth Facility: The antenna on a Level 4 Stealth Facility is located on an existing structure (other than a
telecommunications tower) including, but not limited to, a building, water tower, utility tower, steeple, or light pole.
The antenna is neither screened nor hidden. For the purpose of this type of facility, a pole or tower may be
reconstructed to structurally hold the antenna but the height of the structure cannot be increased. .............................. 230
(c) Level 3 Stealth Facility: The antenna on a Level 3 Stealth Facility is located on an existing structure (other than a
telecommunications tower) including, but not limited to, a building, water tower, utility tower, steeple, or light pole.
The antenna shall be aesthetically painted, constructed, or applied with material so that it is incorporated into the
pattern, style, and material of the structure to effectively render the antenna unnoticeable. A new structure may be
constructed to hold or house the antenna or equipment; however, the structure must be consistent with the overall
architectural features of the primary buildings. ............................................................................................................. 230
(d) Level 2 Stealth Facility: The antenna on a Level 2 Stealth Facility is attached to the structure in such a manner
that if it is seen it appears unrecognizable as an antenna, and the structure in which or on which the antenna is attached
is an integral part of an overall development. ............................................................................................................... 230
(e) Level 1 Stealth Facility: The antenna on a Level 1 Stealth Facility is attached to the structure in such a manner
that the antenna is completely unseen and the structure in which or on which the antenna is attached is an integral part
of an overall development. ............................................................................................................................................ 231
(9) Antenna Facility Siting Matrix ..................................................................... 231
(10) SUP ........................................................................................................ 231
(a) Application ......................................................................................................................................................... 231
1) A SUP application and appropriate application fee; ...................................................................................... 231
2) A narrative detailing the proposed Antenna Facility. The narrative shall describe or reflect the following: 231
a) Whether the proposed structure is a co-location, a new monopole tower or a new alternate mounting
structure; ............................................................................................................................................................. 231
b) The height of the proposed tower; ........................................................................................................... 231
c) Why the Antenna Facility is necessary at the proposed location; ............................................................ 232
d) The name(s) of the telecommunications providers or other users of the antenna or tower and a description
of the intended use of each user; ......................................................................................................................... 232
e) Whether the applicant has made an effort to co-locate the facilities proposed for this Antenna Facility on
existing antenna facilities in the same general area, identifying the location of these existing sites, a detailed
description of these efforts and why these existing sites were not feasible; ....................................................... 232
f) All studies or tests performed which demonstrate why the existing sites will not provide sufficient signal
coverage; ............................................................................................................................................................ 232
g) Written documentation from existing sites' owners and/or operators which confirm the statements
provided; ............................................................................................................................................................ 232
h) Whether the existing sites allow/promote co-location and, if not, a description why not; ....................... 232
i) Whether co-location will be allowed to other telecommunications providers at the requested site. If they
are not allowed, a statement identifying each reason and the basis of each reason; and ..................................... 232
j) All state or federal agency approval letters. ............................................................................................. 232
3) A site plan of the proposed Antenna Facility at a scale of 1” = 30’. The site plan should be on a single 24” X
36” sheet and shall include: ..................................................................................................................................... 232
a) A survey and legal description of the proposed Antenna Facility; ........................................................... 232
b) A detail on how access to the site is to be achieved; ................................................................................ 232
c) A plan view layout of the proposed Antenna Facility clearly showing: ................................................... 232
i) The location of the facility; ................................................................................................................. 232
ii) All equipment and structures in the proposed Antenna Facility; ........................................................ 232
iii) The required off-street parking space; ................................................................................................ 232
iv) Distances to property lines;................................................................................................................. 232
v) Required setbacks; .............................................................................................................................. 232
vi) Adjacent land uses and zoning designations; ...................................................................................... 232
vii) Existing structures on the site; ............................................................................................................ 232
viii) Required landscaping or screening of the base of the tower; ............................................................. 232
ix) All recorded and proposed easements; and ......................................................................................... 232
x) Natural features, such as water courses and trees. .............................................................................. 233
4) Elevation drawings showing: ........................................................................................................................ 233
a) The design and height of the proposed Antenna Facility; ........................................................................ 233
b) Detailed drawings of all structures and equipment; and ........................................................................... 233
c) Screening requirements. ........................................................................................................................... 233
5) If the requested location is in a residential district, evidence that an effort has been made to locate the facility
in a nonresidential district, identifying the location of these nonresidential district sites, and describing these efforts
and why these nonresidential sites were not feasible. Attach all studies or tests performed which demonstrate why
the nonresidential sites will not provide sufficient signal coverage. ........................................................................ 233
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 50
6) A map showing the proposed provider's current coverage area for the City. The map must show the roadway
network and be labeled. The applicant must also provide propagation analysis showing the areas the proposed
provider's existing antenna currently covers, and the areas the applicant's existing sites and the requested site would
cover. The propagation analysis must be labeled and have a legend. ...................................................................... 233
7) A description of the applicant's master antenna facilities plan for the City. Attach maps and other related
documents and provide information indicating each phase of the plan. ................................................................... 233
(b) Consideration of Application .............................................................................................................................. 233
1) The appropriateness of the location and design of the Antenna Facility; ...................................................... 233
2) The potential for interference with the enjoyment of the use surrounding properties; .................................. 233
3) Aesthetics; ..................................................................................................................................................... 233
4) Impact, including but not limited to, the surrounding topography, surrounding tree coverage and foliage;.. 233
5) Proposed buffering; ....................................................................................................................................... 233
6) The design of the Antenna Facility, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of
reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; .......................................................................................................... 233
7) The proposed height of the Antenna Facility relative to surrounding structures; .......................................... 233
8) The zoning district and the adjoining zoning districts of the property for which the SUP is sought; ............ 233
9) Compliance with the City’s regulations; and................................................................................................. 233
10) The availability of suitable alternative sites. Suitable alternative site(s) shall mean a location or locations that
would provide the same or better signal coverage than the proposed site for which a SUP is requested. The
applicant shall provide documentation supporting his contention that alternative site(s) are not suitable and/or
available. .................................................................................................................................................................. 234
(c) Procedures for Consideration of a SUP .............................................................................................................. 234
(d) Written Report .................................................................................................................................................... 234
I. TEMPORARY STRUCTURES 234
(1) A temporary structure may not be brought on-site until a building permit for
the construction or refurbishing of the permanent structure has been issued by the
Building Official. All temporary manufactured structures shall be required to comply
with the following: ................................................................................................ 234
(a) Time Limit: Permits issued for temporary manufactured structures shall be valid for two (2) years or when the
permanent structure is completed and occupied, whichever is sooner. Any further extension shall require City Council
approval. ....................................................................................................................................................................... 234
(b) Dimensions: Minimum dimensional requirements for temporary uses or structures shall be those established in
the district in which the temporary use or structure is located. ..................................................................................... 234
(c) Parking: Minimum parking requirements for temporary manufactured structures shall be the number according
to the proposed use for the building. ............................................................................................................................. 234
(2) Temporary Construction Buildings: Temporary building and material storage
areas to be used for construction purposes may be permitted for a specified period
of time in accordance with a permit issued by the Building Official for cause shown.
Upon completion or abandonment of construction or expiration of permit, such field
offices and buildings shall be removed at the direction of the Building Official. ... 234
J. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 234
(1) All Uses Must Conform ............................................................................... 234
(2) Must Comply With Federal and State Regulations ..................................... 235
(3) Noise .......................................................................................................... 235
(a) Maximum Permissible Daytime* Octave Band: ................................................................................................. 235
(b) The following corrections shall be made to the Table of octave band-decibel limits above in determining
compliance with the noise level standards: ................................................................................................................... 235
1) When noise is present at nighttime, subtract (-7db). ..................................................................................... 235
2) When noise contains strong pure-tone components or is impulsive (i.e., when meter changes at 10 decibels or
more per second), subtract (-7db). ........................................................................................................................... 235
3) When noise is present for not more than the following, add (+10db): .......................................................... 235
a) ½ minute in any ½-hour period; ............................................................................................................... 235
b) 1 minute in any 1-hour period; ................................................................................................................. 235
c) 10 minutes in any 2-hour period; or ......................................................................................................... 235
d) 20 minutes in any 4-hour period. ............................................................................................................. 235
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 51
(c) Measurement of noise shall be made with a sound level meter on octave band analyzer meeting the standards
prescribed by the American National Standards Institute. ........................................................................................... 236
(d) Exemptions - The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise level regulations herein specified.
236
1) Noises not directly under control of the property owner or user. .................................................................. 236
2) Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(i.e., during daylight hours). .................................................................................................................................... 236
3) Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure relief valves. ......................................... 236
4) Transient noise of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, and airplanes. ............................................ 236
5) Events sanctioned by the City of Crandall. ................................................................................................... 236
(4) Smoke and Particulate Matter .................................................................... 236
(a) No operation or use shall cause, create, or allow the emission, for more than three minutes in any one hour, of air
contaminants that at the emission point or within the bounds of the property are of such opacity as to obscure an
observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or contaminants in the standard prescribed by the
American Society for Testing and Materials (“ASTM”) except for when the presence of uncombined water is the only
reason for failure to comply, or when such contaminants are emitted inside a building which prevents their escape into
the atmosphere. ............................................................................................................................................................. 236
(b) The emission of particulate matter from all sources shall not exceed 0.5 pounds per acre of property within the
operation’s site per any one (1) hour. ............................................................................................................................ 236
(c) Open storage and open processing operations, including on-site transportation movements which are the source
of wind or air borne dust or other particulate matter; or which involves dust or other particulate air contaminants,
generating equipment such as used in paint spraying, grain handling, sand or gravel processing or storage or sand
blasting, shall be so conducted that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not transported across the
boundary line of the tract on which the use is located in concentrations exceeding four grains per one thousand (1000)
cubic feet of air. ............................................................................................................................................................ 236
(5) Odorous Matter .......................................................................................... 236
(a) No use shall be located or operated which involves the emission of odorous matter from a source of operation
where the odorous matter exceeds the odor threshold at the bounding property line or any point beyond the tract on
which such use or operation is located. ......................................................................................................................... 236
(b) The odor threshold as herein set forth shall be determined by observation by a person or persons. In any case,
where uncertainty may arise or where the operator or owner of an odor-emitting use may disagree with the enforcing
officer or where specific measurement of odor concentration is required, the method and procedures specified by
ASTM shall be followed. .............................................................................................................................................. 236
(6) Fire or Explosive Hazard Material .............................................................. 237
(a) No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products which decompose by detonation shall be
permitted except that chlorates, nitrates, perchlorates, phosphorus, and similar substances and compounds in small
quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the
City of Crandall............................................................................................................................................................. 237
(b) The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film,
solvents, and petroleum products shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the standards and
regulations of the City of Crandall Fire Code. .............................................................................................................. 237
(7) Toxic and Noxious Matter ........................................................................... 237
(8) Vibration ..................................................................................................... 237
K. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS 237
(1) Measurement ............................................................................................. 237
(a) Measuring Setbacks - All setback measurements shall be made from the property line. .................................... 237
(b) Configuration of Lots - Flag lots (i.e., lots with minimal, or panhandle-type, frontage) are prohibited. Through
(i.e., double-frontage) lots (particularly within residential zoning districts) shall also be avoided wherever possible (see
SECTION 9C for regulations pertaining to the configuration of lots). ......................................................................... 237
(c) Building Setbacks – All setbacks established on a recorded plat shall be enforced, even if they are less than or
they exceed the required setbacks in this UDC. Setbacks established on a recorded plat shall only be changed through
replat proceedings (see SECTION 8M). ....................................................................................................................... 238
(2) Front Yard .................................................................................................. 238
(a) On all corner lots, the front-yard setback shall be observed along the frontage of both intersecting streets, unless
approved specifically otherwise on a final plat. Where single-family and duplex lots have double frontage, extending
from one street to another, or are on a corner, a required front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a side- or
rear-yard building line has been established along one frontage on the plat, in which event only one required front yard
need be observed. The side and/or rear yards in the case of single-family and townhome uses shall be identified and the
front of the structure shall not face the side or rear yard. .............................................................................................. 238
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 52
(b) Where the frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting streets is divided by two (2) or more
zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire frontage.
238
(c) The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, to the nearest
supporting member of a covered porch or terrace, or to any attached accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions or a
porch without posts or columns may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four feet (4'), and
subsurface structures, platforms or slabs may not project into the front yard to a height greater than thirty inches (30")
above the average grade of the yard. Open porches extending into the front yard shall not be enclosed. .................... 238
(d) Minimum lot widths for lots with predominate frontage on the curved radius of a street (e.g., cul-de-sac or
"eyebrow" portion of a street) shall be measured as the linear distance of the curved front building line, and shall be
shown on the subdivision plat. Lot widths for all lots shall be as set forth in the respective zoning district for each lot.
238
(e) Gasoline service station pump islands that parallel a public street may be located a minimum of eighteen feet
(18') to the property line adjacent to a public street. For pump islands that are perpendicular or diagonal to a public
street, the setback shall be thirty feet (30') in order to prevent vehicles stacking out into the street while waiting for a
pump position. Pump islands may extend beyond the front building line as described above (provided that all other
requirements of this UDC are met), but shall not be closer than fifteen feet (15') to any property line that is not adjacent
to a public street. An unenclosed canopy for a gasoline service station pump island may extend beyond the front
building line, but shall not be closer than ten feet (10’) to any property line or street right-of-way line. ..................... 238
(f) Where a future right-of-way line has been established for future widening or opening of a street or thoroughfare,
upon which a lot abuts, then the front, side, or rear yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line. ........... 239
(g) If a street block face has existing buildings already constructed along it for fifty percent (50%) or more of its
length, and if the front-yard setback for these existing buildings is greater than the front yard required for that zoning
district in this UDC, then the front-yard setback of the existing buildings shall supersede the front yard required for that
zoning district. New buildings shall conform with the already established front-yard setback along the remainder of the
block face unless a variance for a lesser front-yard setback is applied for and granted by the BOA in accordance with
this UDC. ...................................................................................................................................................................... 239
(3) Side and Rear Yards .................................................................................. 239
(a) On a corner lot used for one- or two-family dwellings, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards on all
lots platted after the effective date of this UDC, except that where one street exposure is designated as a side yard for
both adjacent lots or where the two lots are separated by an alley, street right-of-way, creek/flood plain area, or other
similar phenomenon. In such case, a building line may be designated by the City Manager with a minimum side yard
of fifteen feet (15') or more (as determined by the applicable zoning district standards). On lots which were official lots
of record prior to the effective date of this UDC, the minimum side yard adjacent to a side street shall comply with the
minimum required side yard for the respective district unless otherwise established on the filed plat (in which case
replatting is necessary to change the setback lines, per SECTION 8M). ...................................................................... 239
(b) Every part of a required side and rear yard shall be open and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of
window sills, belt courses, cornices, and other architectural features not to exceed twelve inches (12") into the required
side or rear yard, and roof eaves projecting not to exceed thirty-six inches (36") into the required side or rear yard. Air
conditioning compressors and similar equipment are permitted in the side or rear yard. Open porches and patios (on
ground floor only) extending into a side or rear yard shall not be enclosed, but upper story balconies may not encroach
into a side or rear yard setback. A canopy may project into a required side or rear yard provided that it is not enclosed,
and provided that it is at least five feet (5’) from the property line. .............................................................................. 239
(c) Where a future right-of-way line has been established for future widening or opening of a street or thoroughfare,
upon which a lot abuts, then the front, side, or rear yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line. ........... 239
(4) Special Height Regulations ........................................................................ 239
(5) Minimum Dwelling Unit Area ...................................................................... 240
(6) Open Storage Areas ................................................................................... 240
(7) Sight Visibility ............................................................................................. 240
(a) Visual clearance shall be provided in all zoning districts so that no fence, wall, architectural screen, earth
mounding, landscaping or other feature obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any street, alley, or
driveway intersection. Whenever an intersection of a street(s), alley, and/or driveway occurs, a triangular visibility area
shall be created. Landscaping, fences, signs, walls, earthen berms and other features within the triangular visibility area
shall be designed so as to provide unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between thirty inches (30") and eight feet (8')
above the ground. The triangular areas are defined as follows: ................................................................................... 240
1) Alley intersects a public street right-of-way - The areas on both sides of the intersection of an alley and a
public street shall have a triangular visibility area with two (2) sides of each triangle being a minimum of ten feet
(10') in length from the point of intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two (2)
sides. 240
2) Street intersection or intersection of private driveway onto a public street - These areas shall have a triangular
visibility area with two (2) sides of each triangle being a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') in length along the
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 53
right-of-way lines (or along the driveway curb line and the street right-of-way line) from the point of the
intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two (2) sides. .................................... 240
(b) Shrubs and plant materials that are typically less than thirty inches (30") in height at maturity may be located
within sight visibility areas provided that they are kept maintained at a maximum height of thirty inches (30"). ........ 240
(c) A limited number of single-trunked trees having a clear trunk (i.e., branching) height of at least eight feet (8')
may be located within sight visibility areas provided that they are trimmed in such a manner that no limbs or foliage
extend into the cross-visibility area defined above and they are spaced and positioned such that their trunks will not
produce a visibility-inhibiting, “picket-fence” effect when they attain mature size. ..................................................... 240
(8) Nonresidential Structures in Residential Districts ....................................... 241
L. MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 241
(1) Mobile food vendors are subject to the following regulations: .................... 241
(a) Mobile food vendors shall be located on private property where an existing, permanent business operates in a
building with a certificate of occupancy; ...................................................................................................................... 241
(b) Mobile food vendors shall be located on private property where an existing, permanent business operates in a
building with a certificate of occupancy; ...................................................................................................................... 241
(c) Mobile food vendors shall provide the City with a copy of written permission from the property owner on an
annual basis to allow the operation of a mobile vendor; ............................................................................................... 241
(d) A mobile food vendor shall submit a site plan depicting the location of the mobile food vendor on the property;
241
(e) A mobile food vendor must secure a health permit from the State of Texas, and an annual permit from Building
Inspections prior to the operation of such use; .............................................................................................................. 241
(f) All mobile food venders must make arrangements to properly dispose of trash; ............................................... 241
(g) Mobile food vendors cannot cook food on site; .................................................................................................. 241
(h) Signage for mobile food venders must comply with the City of Crandall sign regulations; ............................... 241
(i) Temporary connections to potable water are prohibited. Water shall be from an internal tank, and electricity shall
be from a generator or an electrical outlet via a portable cord that is in conformance with the Electrical Code as adopted
by the City of Crandall; ................................................................................................................................................. 241
(j) Mobile food vendors shall not be located within 25 feet of an entrance of a primary building that holds the
Certificate of Occupancy; ............................................................................................................................................. 241
(k) Mobile food vendors shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet from major thoroughfares, as designated on the
City's Thoroughfare Plan; ............................................................................................................................................. 241
(l) Mobile food vendors may operate only during the business hours of the primary business on the property; ..... 242
(m) A drive through is not permitted in conjunction with the mobile food vendor; and ...................................... 242
(n) Mobile food vendors shall not operate in required parking spaces, driveways, fire lanes or public roads.......... 242
SECTION 8 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS ....................................................... 242
A. PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 242
(1) The purpose of this SECTION 8, Development Standards, is to promote
sound planning in the subdivision of land, and to provide consistent rules, which
protect the public health, safety, and welfare while allowing the legal platting of
land. The regulations herein have been made after careful study of existing local
conditions and the desirable future development of the City. It is not the City’s
desire or intent to regiment the design of subdivisions of property and their
environs, but rather to recommend the utilization, to the fullest extent possible, of
good, sound, modern subdivision planning principles. ......................................... 242
(2) It is intended that as much freedom as possible be allowed the individual
owners and subdividers in the design and ultimate development of new
subdivisions so that they will contribute innovation, individuality, and character to
the community's new residential neighborhoods, commercial developments, and
industrial districts. At the same time, these rules are intended to assure that such
development provides for: .................................................................................... 242
(a) Sufficient, adequate major and secondary traffic thoroughfares and public facilities; ....................................... 242
(b) Minimum standards for facilities; ....................................................................................................................... 242
(c) A consistent and equitable pattern of development among neighboring parcels of land; and ............................ 242
(d) Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, and other adopted plans.................................. 242
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 54
(3) The regulations contained within this section are adopted under the authority
of the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including particularly LGC
Chapters 42, 212, and 242. Pursuant to the authority herein granted, the City
Council extends, to all areas within Crandall’s city limits and ETJ, the application of
all of the terms and provisions in this section establishing rules and regulations
governing plats and subdivisions of land. ............................................................ 242
B. GENERAL PROVISIONS 242
(1) The owner of a tract of land located within the city limits or in the ETJ of the
City who divides the tract into two (2) or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the
tract, including an addition to the City, to lay out suburban, building, or other lots,
or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to
be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting
on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares parks or other parts, must prepare a
plat of the subdivision. A division of a tract under this section includes a division
regardless of whether it is made by using a metes-and-bounds description in a
deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other
executory contract to convey, or by using any other method. .............................. 242
(2) No person shall create a subdivision of land within the City or within its ETJ
without complying with the provisions of this section, and all plats and subdivisions
of any such land shall conform to the rules and regulations set forth in this section.243
(3) In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the City and its officers
shall have the right to enjoin any violation of this Code by injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction. ............................................................................ 243
(4) All land subdivided or platted into lots, blocks and streets within the City or
within its ETJ, as provided by state law, shall comply in full with the requirements
of this UDC. No plat shall be filed in the office of the county clerk for a tract within
the City or its ETJ unless it is recommended by the Commission and approved by
the Council. .......................................................................................................... 243
(5) The City has requested Kaufman County not to issue a permit for the
installation of septic tanks on any lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not
been approved and filed for record, or any lot in a subdivision in which the
standards contained or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. ... 243
(6) No permit shall be issued for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which
a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a
lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained herein have not been
complied with in full, unless otherwise provided by law or herein. ....................... 243
(7) The City shall not authorize any person nor shall the City itself repair,
maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any subdivision
for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor in which the
standards contained or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. ... 243
(8) The City shall not authorize any person nor shall the City itself sell or supply
any water or sewer service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been
approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained or referred to
herein have not been complied with in full. .......................................................... 243
(9) Disapproval of a plat by the Commission shall be deemed a refusal by the
City to accept the offered dedications shown thereon. Approval of a plat shall not
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 55
impose any duty upon the City concerning the maintenance or improvement of any
such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of the City have actually
appropriated the same by entry, use, or improvement. Any such dedication,
before or after actual appropriation, may be vacated by the City in any manner
provided by law. ................................................................................................... 243
(10) On behalf of the City, the City Attorney shall, when directed by the City
Council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce
the provisions of this UDC or the standards referred to herein with respect to any
violation thereof which occurs within any area subject to all or part of the
provisions of this UDC. ........................................................................................ 244
(11) In addition thereto, any abutting owner or lessee or other person
prejudicially affected by the violation of the terms of this UDC may resort to any
court of competent jurisdiction for any writ or writs, or to obtain such relief, either at
law or in equity, as may be deemed advisable in these premises. ...................... 244
(12) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the
issuance of permits for any lots upon which a residential building exists and was in
existence prior to passage of this UDC, nor to prohibit the repair, maintenance, or
installation of any street or public utility services for, to or abutting any lot, the last
recorded conveyance of which prior to passage of this UDC was by metes and
bounds, and/or any subdivision, or lot therein, recorded or unrecorded, which
subdivision was in existence prior to the passage of this UDC. ........................... 244
C. PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE 244
D. APPLICATION REQUIRED 244
E. SUBDIVISION MASTER PLAN 244
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 244
(2) Submittal Requirements for Subdivision Master Plan ................................. 244
(a) Completeness Requirements ............................................................................................................................... 244
1) Appropriate fees; ........................................................................................................................................... 244
2) Application signed and notarized by owner; ................................................................................................. 245
3) Agent authorization letter; ............................................................................................................................. 245
4) Legal metes-and-bounds description; ............................................................................................................ 245
5) Subdivision master plan checklist; ................................................................................................................ 245
6) Traffic Impact Analysis Determination form; ............................................................................................... 245
7) 15 folded black-line or blue-line copies at 18”X24” or 24”X36”; ................................................................. 245
8) One (1) folded 11”X17” reduction of each exhibit; ...................................................................................... 245
9) One (1) CD containing a digital copy of the plan in PDF format; ................................................................. 245
10) Completed application for street name approval; and ................................................................................... 245
11) Certified copy of a tax certificate for the subject property. ........................................................................... 245
(b) Technical Requirements ..................................................................................................................................... 245
1) Location/Vicinity map with north arrow; ...................................................................................................... 245
2) Title Block located in lower right corner, including subdivision name, acreage, complete legal description
including survey name and abstract number, City, county and preparation date; .................................................... 245
3) County recording block; ................................................................................................................................ 245
4) Legend, if abbreviations or symbols are used; .............................................................................................. 245
5) Name, address and phone number of owner, developer, applicant, and surveyor; ........................................ 245
6) North arrow; .................................................................................................................................................. 245
7) Graphic and written scale (minimum 1”=100’); ............................................................................................ 245
8) Surveyed property boundaries with bearings and distances; ......................................................................... 245
9) Legal metes-and-bounds description with calls matching boundary dimensions and distances; ................... 245
10) Lot dimensions; ............................................................................................................................................. 245
11) Location of significant natural features, including floodplains, water courses and wooded areas; ............... 245
12) Location of significant man-made features, including railroads, buildings, utilities, or physical features; ... 245
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 56
13) For residential subdivisions, a minimum of two (2) points of public access to existing public streets;......... 245
14) Right-of-way dedications or reservations; ..................................................................................................... 245
15) Location of existing and proposed Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 100-year floodplain
limits with elevations; .............................................................................................................................................. 245
16) Existing and proposed topography at five foot (5’) contour intervals including drainage channels and creeks;
245
17) Outline of all property offered to be dedicated to the City for park land dedication; .................................... 246
18) Outline of all property to be maintained as private park land; ....................................................................... 246
19) Land use, zoning, subdivision name, owner name and address, and recording information for all adjacent
properties; ................................................................................................................................................................ 246
20) Schematic layout of tract to be subdivided, any remainder tract, and relationship of proposed subdivision to
adjacent properties and existing adjoining development; ........................................................................................ 246
21) Designation of each phase of development, the order of development, and a schedule for the development of
each phase; ............................................................................................................................................................... 246
22) Table indicating the phasing, acreage, land uses, zoning, and anticipated number and type of dwelling units
for each phase; ......................................................................................................................................................... 246
23) Arterial, collector, and local street layout; .................................................................................................... 246
24) Provision for water, wastewater and storm drainage facilities to serve the development; ............................. 246
25) Any additional information as requested to clarify the proposed development; ............................................ 246
26) Provide the following notes:.......................................................................................................................... 246
a) The thoroughfare alignments shown on this exhibit are for illustration purposes and do not set the
alignment. Alignment is determined at time of final plat; ................................................................................. 246
b) According to Flood Insurance Rate Map, Panel __________, dated _________, a 100-year floodplain
{does or does not} exist on this site; .................................................................................................................. 246
c) All private open space, common areas, greenbelts, drainage easements, etc. are the responsibility of the
developer or its successors and/or assigns; and .................................................................................................. 246
d) State any and all waivers requested for the master plan; and ................................................................... 246
27) Provide the following acknowledgements and certificates: ........................................................................... 246
a) Approval of City Planning and Zoning Commission ............................................................................... 246
b) Certificate of Surveyor ............................................................................................................................. 246
c) Certificate of Engineer ............................................................................................................................. 247
F. SUBDIVISION MASTER PLAN PROCESS 247
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 247
(a) The provisions of this SECTION 8F are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and shall be applicable to all areas
within the City’s limits and throughout the City’s ETJ. A subdivision master plan is required to provide for review of
certain developments for compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, this UDC, any additional adopted plans (i.e., water,
wastewater, transportation, drainage), the compatibility of land uses and the coordination of improvements within and
among individual parcels of land or phases of development prior to approval of a preliminary or final plat. .............. 247
(b) A subdivision master plan is required for any development meeting the following criteria: .............................. 247
1) The property is undeveloped, is under one (1) ownership, and is greater than fifty (50) acres in size; ......... 247
2) The proposed subdivision of land is to occur in phases; ............................................................................... 247
3) The proposed subdivision will require off-site road, drainage or utility connections or improvements that will
have a substantial impact or effect on other properties or developments; or............................................................ 247
4) The property is part of a development agreement. ........................................................................................ 247
(c) If a preliminary plat encompasses the entire development, a subdivision master plan will not be required. ...... 247
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 247
(a) Application Required .......................................................................................................................................... 247
(b) Accompanying Applications .............................................................................................................................. 248
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 248
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 248
(b) Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission ............................................................................................ 248
(c) Acceptance of Subdivision Master Plan ............................................................................................................. 248
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 248
(a) The subdivision master plan is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property or any development
regulations approved as part of a development agreement; ........................................................................................... 248
(b) The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities are adequate
to serve each phase of the subdivision; ......................................................................................................................... 248
(c) The schedule of development is feasible and prudent, and assures that the proposed development will progress to
completion within the time limits proposed; ................................................................................................................. 249
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 57
(d) If the land lies within a PD or is part of an approved development agreement, the proposed subdivision master
plan conforms to the PD regulations and is consistent with the incorporated conceptual plan or any development
regulations contained in the approved development agreement; ................................................................................... 249
(e) The location, size and sequence of the phases of development proposed assure orderly and efficient development
of the land subject to the plan; and ................................................................................................................................ 249
(f) No application made under these provisions will receive final approval until all taxes owed to the City of
Crandall on the subject property have been paid in full. ............................................................................................... 249
(5) Expiration and Extension ............................................................................ 249
(a) Expiration ........................................................................................................................................................... 249
(b) Extension ............................................................................................................................................................ 249
(6) Revisions Following Approval of Subdivision Master Plan ......................... 249
(a) Minor Changes ................................................................................................................................................... 249
(b) Amendments ....................................................................................................................................................... 249
G. PRELIMINARY PLAT 250
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 250
(2) Submittal Requirements for Preliminary Plat .............................................. 250
(a) Completeness Requirements ............................................................................................................................... 250
1) Appropriate fees; ........................................................................................................................................... 250
2) Application signed and notarized by owner; ................................................................................................. 250
3) Agent authorization letter; ............................................................................................................................. 250
4) Legal metes-and-bounds description; ............................................................................................................ 250
5) Preliminary plat checklist; ............................................................................................................................. 250
6) Traffic Impact Analysis Determination form; ............................................................................................... 250
7) Tree survey;................................................................................................................................................... 250
8) 15 folded black-line or blue-line copies at 18”X24” or 24”X36”; ................................................................. 250
9) One (1) folded 11”X17” reduction of each exhibit; ...................................................................................... 250
10) One (1) CD containing a digital copy of the plat in PDF format; .................................................................. 250
11) Completed application for street name approval; .......................................................................................... 250
12) Preliminary drainage plan; and ...................................................................................................................... 250
13) Certified copy of a tax certificate for the subject property. ........................................................................... 250
(b) Technical Requirements ..................................................................................................................................... 250
1) Location/Vicinity map with north arrow; ...................................................................................................... 250
2) Title block located in lower right corner, including subdivision name, acreage, complete legal description
including survey name and abstract number, City, county and preparation date; .................................................... 250
3) Legend, if abbreviations or symbols are used; .............................................................................................. 250
4) Name, address and phone number of owner, developer, applicant, and surveyor; ........................................ 250
5) North arrow; .................................................................................................................................................. 250
6) Graphic and written scale (minimum 1”=100’); ............................................................................................ 250
7) Surveyed property boundaries with bearings and distances; ......................................................................... 250
8) Legal metes-and-bounds description with calls matching boundary bearings and distances; ........................ 251
9) Lot dimensions including bearing and distances; .......................................................................................... 251
10) Provide lot and block numbers for every lot (numbers only); ....................................................................... 251
11) List the total number of buildable lots; .......................................................................................................... 251
12) Front building setback lines along roadways (provide typical detail of setbacks, including corner lots); ..... 251
13) Provide existing zoning; ................................................................................................................................ 251
14) Location of significant natural features, including floodplains, water courses and wooded areas; ............... 251
15) Location of significant man-made features, including railroads, buildings, utilities, or physical features; ... 251
16) For residential subdivisions, a minimum of two (2) points of public access to existing public streets;......... 251
17) Areas to be dedicated or reserved for right-of-way including dimensions, area and providing bearings and
distances of centerline; ............................................................................................................................................ 251
18) Recording information for any existing easements (water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, electric, telephone,
gas, cable television, fire lanes, etc.) and rights-of-way and all bearing and distance information on proposed
easements including easements filed by separate instrument;.................................................................................. 251
19) Location of existing and proposed FEMA 100-year floodplain limits with elevations; ................................ 251
20) Existing and proposed topography at five foot (5’) contour intervals including drainage channels and creeks;
251
21) Identify all boundary survey monumentation on the plat. Tie proposed tract to the parent tract
monumentation with bearings and distances;........................................................................................................... 251
22) Boundary lines and acreage of the land to be dedicated to the City for public park land; ............................. 251
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 58
23) Boundary lines and acreage of land proposed for private parks including note indicating ownership and
maintenance responsibility; ..................................................................................................................................... 251
24) Land use, zoning, subdivision name, owner name and address, and recording information for all adjacent
properties; ................................................................................................................................................................ 251
25) For residential subdivisions, a one-foot (1’) non-access easement where the rear, front, or side of the property
abuts a major or minor arterial; ................................................................................................................................ 251
26) Location of City limits boundary and/or county boundary if they traverse the subdivision, form part of the
boundary of the subdivision or are contiguous to such boundary; ........................................................................... 251
27) For preliminary plats exempt from requirements for subdivision master plan, designation of each phase of
development and the proposed order of development; ............................................................................................ 252
28) Provide the location of proposed water, wastewater and storm drainage facilities to serve the development
including sizes; ........................................................................................................................................................ 252
29) Show proposed street names; ........................................................................................................................ 252
30) Any additional information as requested to clarify the proposed development; ............................................ 252
31) Provide the following notes:.......................................................................................................................... 252
a) The thoroughfare alignments shown on this exhibit are for illustration purposes and do not set the
alignment. Alignment is determined at time of final plat; ................................................................................. 252
b) Notice: Selling a portion of this addition by metes and bounds is a violation of City ordinances and State
law and is subject to fines and withholding of utilities and permits; .................................................................. 252
c) According to Flood Insurance Rate Map, Panel __________, dated __________, a 100-year floodplain
{does or does not} exist on this site; .................................................................................................................. 252
d) If floodplain exists on the property, provide a note stating that the finished floor elevation (FFE) of any
structures shall be one foot (1’) above the 100-year flood elevation; ................................................................. 252
e) All private open space, common areas, greenbelts, drainage easements, etc., are the responsibility of the
developer or its successors and/or assigns; ......................................................................................................... 252
f) Utility note (where applicable); ............................................................................................................... 252
g) Any applicable notes required by TxDOT; .............................................................................................. 252
h) State any and all waivers requested for the plat; and ............................................................................... 252
i) State any and all approved or requested waivers; and .............................................................................. 252
32) Provide the following acknowledgements and certificates: ........................................................................... 252
a) Owner’s Acknowledgement; .................................................................................................................... 252
b) Certification by City Engineer ................................................................................................................. 253
c) Approval of City Planning and Zoning Commission ............................................................................... 253
d) Certificate of Platting Surveyor ............................................................................................................... 253
e) Certificate of Platting Engineer ................................................................................................................ 253
f) Utility Provider Certification ................................................................................................................... 254
H. PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCESS 254
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 254
(a) The provisions of this section are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and shall be applicable to all areas within
the City’s limits and throughout the City’s ETJ. A preliminary plat is required to determine the general layout of the
subdivision, the adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the intended development and the overall compliance of
the land division with applicable requirements of this UDC. ........................................................................................ 254
(b) A preliminary plat may be submitted for any phase of development consistent with an approved subdivision
master plan. Where a subdivision master plan is not required and the area to be platted is part of a larger tract of land,
the preliminary plat must encompass the entire tract of land under ownership of the subdivider and shall provide a
preliminary layout of streets, lots, blocks, utilities and drainage for the larger tract. A final plat may be submitted for
individual lots to be platted out of the larger parcel. ..................................................................................................... 254
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 254
(a) Application Required .......................................................................................................................................... 254
(b) Accompanying Applications .............................................................................................................................. 254
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 255
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 255
(b) Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission ............................................................................................ 255
(c) Acceptance of Preliminary Plat .......................................................................................................................... 255
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 255
(a) The plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property or any approved development agreement; 255
(b) The plat conforms to the general layout of the subdivision master plan (if applicable) and is consistent with the
phasing plan approved therein; ..................................................................................................................................... 255
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 59
(c) The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities conform to
the master facilities plans for the facilities, including without limitation the water facilities, wastewater facilities,
transportation, drainage and other master facilities plans; ............................................................................................ 255
(d) The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater, drainage and park facilities, and
easements and rights-of-way are adequate to serve the subdivision; and ...................................................................... 256
(e) No application made under these provisions will receive final approval until all taxes owed to the City of
Crandall on the subject property have been paid in full. ............................................................................................... 256
(5) Expiration and Extension ............................................................................ 256
(a) Expiration ........................................................................................................................................................... 256
(b) Extension ............................................................................................................................................................ 256
(6) Revisions Following Approval of Preliminary Plat ....................................... 256
(a) Minor Changes ................................................................................................................................................... 256
(b) Amendments ....................................................................................................................................................... 256
I. FINAL PLAT 256
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 256
(2) Submittal Requirements for Final Plat ........................................................ 257
(a) Completeness Requirements ............................................................................................................................... 257
1) Appropriate fees; ........................................................................................................................................... 257
2) Application signed and notarized by owner; ................................................................................................. 257
3) Agent authorization letter; ............................................................................................................................. 257
4) Letter of approval from the City Engineer approving all public infrastructure construction plans; .............. 257
5) Legal metes-and-bounds description; ............................................................................................................ 257
6) Final plat checklist; ....................................................................................................................................... 257
7) Traffic Impact Analysis Determination form; ............................................................................................... 257
8) Tree survey;................................................................................................................................................... 257
9) 15 folded black-line or blue-line copies at 18”X24” or 24”X36”; ................................................................. 257
10) One (1) folded 11”X17” reduction of each exhibit; ...................................................................................... 257
11) One (1) CD containing a digital copies of the plat in CAD .dxf or dwg and .pdf format; ............................. 257
12) Completed application for street name approval; and ................................................................................... 257
13) Certified copy of a tax certificate for the subject property. ........................................................................... 257
(b) Technical Requirements ..................................................................................................................................... 257
1) Location/Vicinity map with north arrow; ...................................................................................................... 257
2) Title block located in lower right corner including subdivision name, acreage, complete legal description
including survey name and abstract number, City, county and preparation date; .................................................... 257
3) County recording block; ................................................................................................................................ 257
4) Legend, if abbreviations or symbols are used; .............................................................................................. 257
5) Name, address and phone number of owner, developer, applicant, and surveyor; ........................................ 257
6) North arrow; .................................................................................................................................................. 257
7) Graphic and written scale (minimum 1”=100’); ............................................................................................ 257
8) Surveyed property boundaries with bearings and distances; ......................................................................... 257
9) Legal metes-and-bounds description with calls matching boundary bearings and distances; ........................ 257
10) Lot dimensions including bearing and distances; .......................................................................................... 257
11) Provide lot and block numbers for every lot (numbers only); ....................................................................... 258
12) List the total number of buildable lots; .......................................................................................................... 258
13) Front building setback lines along roadways (provide typical detail of setbacks, including corner lots); ..... 258
14) Show proposed street names; ........................................................................................................................ 258
15) Location of significant natural features, including floodplains, water courses and wooded areas; ............... 258
16) Provide recording information for any existing easements (water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, electric,
telephone, gas, cable television, fire lanes, etc.) and rights-of-way. Provide all bearing and distance information on
proposed easements including easements filed by separate instrument; .................................................................. 258
17) For residential subdivisions, a minimum of two (2) points of public access to existing public streets;......... 258
18) Areas to be dedicated or reserved for right-of-way including dimensions, area and providing bearings and
distances of centerline; ............................................................................................................................................ 258
19) Location of existing and proposed FEMA 100-year floodplain limits with elevations; ................................ 258
20) Identify all boundary survey monumentation on the plat. Tie proposed tract to the parent tract
monumentation with bearings and distances;........................................................................................................... 258
21) Boundary lines and acreage of the land to be dedicated to the City for public park land; ............................. 258
22) Boundary lines and acreage of land proposed for private park including note indicating ownership and
maintenance responsibility; ..................................................................................................................................... 258
23) Subdivision name, owner name and address, and recording information for all adjacent properties; ........... 258
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 60
24) For residential subdivisions, a one-foot (1’) non-access easement where the rear, front, or side of the property
abuts a major or minor arterial; ................................................................................................................................ 258
25) Location of City limits boundary and/or County boundary if they traverse the subdivision, form part of the
boundary of the subdivision or are contiguous to such boundary; ........................................................................... 258
26) Provide letter from TxDOT regarding drainage and access adjacent to TxDOT right-of-way; ..................... 258
27) Any additional information as requested to clarify the proposed development; ............................................ 258
28) Provide the following notes:.......................................................................................................................... 258
a) Notice: Selling a portion of this addition by metes and bounds is a violation of City ordinances and State
law and is subject to fines and withholding of utilities and permits; .................................................................. 258
b) According to Flood Insurance Rate Map, Panel __________, dated __________, a 100-year floodplain
{does or does not} exists on this site; ................................................................................................................. 259
c) If floodplain exists on the property, provide a note stating that the finished floor elevation (FFE) of any
structures shall be one foot (1’) above the 100-year flood elevation; ................................................................. 259
d) All private open space, common areas, greenbelts, drainage easement, etc., are the responsibility of the
developer or its successors and/or assigns; ......................................................................................................... 259
e) Utility note (where applicable); ............................................................................................................... 259
f) Any applicable notes required by TxDOT; .............................................................................................. 259
g) Note stating that proposed park land to be dedicated to the City will be dedicated by a general warranty
deed upon acceptance of the subdivision by the City; ........................................................................................ 259
h) State any and all waivers requested for the plat; and ............................................................................... 259
i) State any and all approved or requested waivers; and .............................................................................. 259
29) Provide the following acknowledgements and certificates: ........................................................................... 259
a) Owner’s Acknowledgement ..................................................................................................................... 259
b) Certification by City Engineer ................................................................................................................. 260
c) Approval of City Planning and Zoning Commission ............................................................................... 260
d) Certificate of Platting Surveyor ............................................................................................................... 260
e) Certificate of Platting Engineer ................................................................................................................ 260
f) County Recording Block .......................................................................................................................... 260
g) Utility Provider Certification ................................................................................................................... 261
J. FINAL PLAT PROCESS 261
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 261
(a) The provisions of this section are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and shall be applicable to all areas within
the City’s limits and throughout the City’s ETJ. A final plat is required to assure that the division or development of
the land subject to the plat is consistent with all standards of this UDC pertaining to the adequacy of public facilities,
that public improvements to serve the subdivision or development have been installed and accepted by the City or that
provision for such installation has been made, that all other requirements and conditions have been satisfied or provided
for to allow the plat to be recorded, and to assure that the subdivision or development meets all other standards of this
UDC to enable initiation of site preparation activities for any lot or tract subject to the plat. Approval of a final plat
shall be required prior to any non-exempt division of land and prior to any site preparation activities for a lot or tract of
land that requires installation of public improvements on or adjacent thereto. ............................................................. 261
(b) A final plat may be submitted for any phase of development consistent with an approved preliminary plat. .... 261
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 261
(a) Application Required .......................................................................................................................................... 261
(b) Accompanying Applications .............................................................................................................................. 262
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 262
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 262
(b) Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission ............................................................................................ 262
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 262
(a) The final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat, except for minor changes that may be approved
without the necessity of revising the approved preliminary plat; .................................................................................. 262
(b) The plat is consistent with the phasing plan approved with the preliminary plat (where applicable); and ......... 263
(c) The final layout of the subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained
in this UDC. .................................................................................................................................................................. 263
(5) Expiration and Extension ............................................................................ 263
(a) Expiration ........................................................................................................................................................... 263
(b) Extension ............................................................................................................................................................ 263
(6) Revisions to Final Plat ................................................................................ 263
(a) Approved Final Plat ............................................................................................................................................ 263
(b) Conditionally Approved or Denied Plat ............................................................................................................. 263
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 61
1) Filing of security in lieu of completing construction shall be in accordance with this UDC. Where public
infrastructure improvements have been installed prior to recording of the plat, the property owner shall submit a
maintenance bond from each contractor, three (3) sealed sets of “as built” plans or record drawings, and one (1) CD
containing a digital copy of all plans (in a format as determined by the Department of Public Works), together with
a letter stating the contractors' compliance with this UDC, and bearing sealed certification by the design engineer
that all public improvements have been constructed in compliance with all City construction standards. The
property owner also shall submit copies of the approved final plat with any required revisions on mylars and in the
format and number required by the Building Official. Where public improvements have yet to be completed in
connection with an approved final plat, the property owner shall submit in the format and number required by the
City Manager, copies of the approved final plat with any required revisions on mylars and in the format and number
required by the City Manager for signing and recording. ........................................................................................ 263
(c) Upon notification of acceptance of required public improvements or filing of security in lieu of infrastructure
construction, the City Manager shall procure the signature of the chair of the Commission on the plat and shall
promptly cause the plat to be recorded. ......................................................................................................................... 264
K. MINOR PLAT PROCESS 264
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 264
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 264
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 264
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 264
(b) Minor Plat Approval ........................................................................................................................................... 264
(c) Contents of Minor Plat ....................................................................................................................................... 265
(4) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 265
(a) The minor plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, all other requirements of this UDC
that apply to the plat, and any regulations contained in an approved development agreement; .................................... 265
(b) All lots to be created by the plat already are adequately served by all required City utilities and infrastructure;
and 265
(c) The plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision;...... 265
(5) Expiration and Extension ............................................................................ 265
(a) Expiration ........................................................................................................................................................... 265
(b) Extension ............................................................................................................................................................ 265
(6) Plat Recordation ......................................................................................... 265
L. AMENDING PLAT PROCESS 265
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 265
(a) To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat; ........................................................... 266
(b) To add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat; .................................................................. 266
(c) To correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat; ................................................. 266
(d) To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor
responsible for setting monuments; ............................................................................................................................... 266
(e) To show the location or character of a monument which has been changed in location or character or that is
shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat; ............................................................................. 266
(f) To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal
authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent
recorded plats; ............................................................................................................................................................... 266
(g) To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two (2) adjacent lots if: ................................. 266
1) Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat; ...................................................................... 266
2) Neither lot is abolished; ................................................................................................................................. 266
3) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and ................................... 266
4) The amendment does not have a materially adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the
plat; 266
(h) To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line
or easement; .................................................................................................................................................................. 266
(i) To relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if: ............................................................. 266
1) The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; ................................................... 266
2) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and ................................... 266
3) The amendment does not increase the number of lots; .................................................................................. 266
(j) To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the subdivision or a part of the
subdivision covered by the preceding plat if: ................................................................................................................ 266
1) The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the municipality; .............................. 266
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 62
2) The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and .................................... 267
3) The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the Commission or City Council has approved,
after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area; or ................................................................................... 267
(k) To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if: ................................................................................ 267
1) The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat; ................................................... 267
2) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; ......................................... 267
3) The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and ........................................................................... 267
4) The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of
municipal facilities. .................................................................................................................................................. 267
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 267
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 267
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 267
(b) Amending Plat Approval .................................................................................................................................... 267
(c) Commission Review of Administratively Approved Plats ................................................................................. 267
(4) Contents of Amending Plat ......................................................................... 267
(5) Expiration and Extension ............................................................................ 268
(a) Expiration ........................................................................................................................................................... 268
(b) Extension ............................................................................................................................................................ 268
(6) Plat Recordation ......................................................................................... 268
M. REPLAT PROCESS 268
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 268
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 268
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 268
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 268
(b) Notification Requirements .................................................................................................................................. 269
(c) Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission ............................................................................................ 269
(4) Contents of Replat ...................................................................................... 269
(5) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 269
(a) The replat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, all other requirements of this UDC that
apply to the plat, and any regulations contained in an approved development agreement; ........................................... 269
(b) The replat is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted; ............................. 269
(c) A public hearing was held and parties in interest and citizens have had an opportunity to be heard; and .......... 269
(d) The replat does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions. ................................................. 269
(6) Protests ...................................................................................................... 269
(7) Expiration and Extension ............................................................................ 270
(a) Expiration ........................................................................................................................................................... 270
(b) Extension ............................................................................................................................................................ 270
(8) Plat Recordation ......................................................................................... 270
N. SITE PLAN PROCESS 270
(1) Purpose and Applicability ........................................................................... 270
(a) Purpose ............................................................................................................................................................... 270
1) To ensure compliance with the requirements of this UDC; ........................................................................... 270
2) To promote better site design; ....................................................................................................................... 270
3) To integrate projects more effectively into their surrounding environment; ................................................. 270
4) To prevent the impairment or depreciation of property values; ..................................................................... 270
5) To improve internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation; ............................................................................ 270
6) To encourage quality and innovative site-planning techniques; .................................................................... 270
7) To project and enhance the overall general public health, safety and welfare; .............................................. 270
8) To ensure efficient and safe land development; ............................................................................................ 271
9) To ensure harmonious use of land; ................................................................................................................ 271
10) To ensure compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and other appropriate design standards; and .............. 271
11) To ensure adequate parking and loading, water supply, drainage and storm water management, sanitary sewer
facilities, and other utilities and services. ................................................................................................................ 271
(b) Applicability ....................................................................................................................................................... 271
1) For any development that contains two (2) or more residential dwelling units on a single tract, lot, or parcel
of land; ..................................................................................................................................................................... 271
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 63
2) For any development that contains single-family attached dwelling units; ................................................... 271
3) For any nonresidential development; ............................................................................................................ 271
4) Any increase in an existing nonresidential structure or a residential structure that contains two (2) or more
residential dwelling units that is greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing building square footage; . 271
5) For any PD or SUP; ....................................................................................................................................... 271
6) For any single-family residential development that includes a private amenity or facility or a golf course; and
271
7) No building permit shall be issued for any of the above developments until a site plan and all other required
engineering/construction plans are first approved by the City. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all
construction and development conforms to the approved site plan and associated engineering/construction plans.
The site plan review process shall include, but not be limited to, the following steps: ............................................ 271
a) Pre-application conference; ...................................................................................................................... 271
b) Site plan review and approval; and .......................................................................................................... 271
c) Construction of project (after City approval of required site plan and other associated plans, including
platting and engineering plans). .......................................................................................................................... 271
(c) Exempted Uses ................................................................................................................................................... 271
1) Construction of one- or two-family dwellings, ordinary accessory structures and related land use activities;
271
2) Ordinary repair and maintenance of existing structures or uses; ................................................................... 271
3) Agricultural land use; .................................................................................................................................... 272
4) Incidental landscaping or grading; ................................................................................................................ 272
5) Individual manufactured homes; and ............................................................................................................ 272
6) Interior alterations that do not substantially change the nature or use of the structure. ................................. 272
(2) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 272
(3) Processing of Application and Decision...................................................... 272
(a) Submittal ............................................................................................................................................................ 272
(b) Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission ............................................................................................ 272
(4) Contents of a Site Plan ............................................................................... 272
(a) Completeness Requirements ............................................................................................................................... 272
1) Appropriate fees; ........................................................................................................................................... 272
2) Application signed and notarized by owner; ................................................................................................. 272
3) Agent authorization letter, as required; ......................................................................................................... 272
4) Legal metes-and-bounds description; ............................................................................................................ 272
5) Site plan checklist; ........................................................................................................................................ 272
6) Traffic Impact Analysis Determination form; ............................................................................................... 272
7) Tree survey;................................................................................................................................................... 272
8) 15 folded black-line or blue-line copies at 18”X24” or 24”X36” as required in the development application;
272
9) One (1) folded 11”X17” reduction of each exhibit; ...................................................................................... 273
10) One (1) CD containing a digital copy of the plan in PDF format; and .......................................................... 273
11) Completed application for street name approval. .......................................................................................... 273
(b) Technical Requirements ..................................................................................................................................... 273
1) Location/Vicinity map with north arrow; ...................................................................................................... 273
2) North arrow; .................................................................................................................................................. 273
3) Graphic and written scale (minimum 1”=20’); .............................................................................................. 273
4) Approximate distance to the nearest cross street; .......................................................................................... 273
5) Site boundaries, bearings and dimensions, lot lines, site acreage and square footage; .................................. 273
6) Title block located in lower right corner including subdivision name with lot and block number, acreage,
complete legal description including survey name and abstract number, City, county and preparation date; .......... 273
7) Legend, if abbreviations or symbols are used; .............................................................................................. 273
8) Name, address and phone number of owner, developer, applicant, and surveyor; ........................................ 273
9) Parking areas and structures with typical parking detail; .............................................................................. 273
10) Site data summary table providing the following information: ..................................................................... 273
a) Zoning; ..................................................................................................................................................... 273
b) Proposed use; ........................................................................................................................................... 273
c) Building area (gross square footage); ....................................................................................................... 273
d) Building height (feet and number of stories); .......................................................................................... 273
e) Square footage of impervious surface; ..................................................................................................... 273
f) Total parking: required/provided (e.g., 44 required/45 provided); ........................................................... 273
g) Number of handicap spaces: required/provided (per ADA standards); and ............................................. 273
h) Number of dwelling units and number of bedrooms for multi-family development (if applicable); ........ 273
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 64
(c) Existing improvements within seventy-five feet (75’) of the subject property; .................................................. 273
(d) Land use, zoning, subdivision name, recording information and owner of adjacent unplatted property; ........... 273
(e) Building locations, size and dimensions, dimensions between buildings on the same lot, building lines and
setbacks and use; ........................................................................................................................................................... 273
(f) Dimensions of all drive lanes; ............................................................................................................................ 273
(g) FEMA 100-year floodplain with elevation including finished floor elevation. Include floodplain note provided
as part of plat; ............................................................................................................................................................... 274
(h) Public streets, private drives and fire lanes with pavement widths, rights-of-way, median openings, turn lanes,
existing driveways of adjacent property and driveways shown on approved plans for adjacent property with
dimensions, radii and surface type; ............................................................................................................................... 274
(i) Distances between existing and proposed driveways; ........................................................................................ 274
(j) Loading and unloading areas, the location of ramps, crosswalks, sidewalks and barrier free ramps with typical
dimensions; ................................................................................................................................................................... 274
(k) Location of off-street loading areas, dumpsters and trash compactors with height and material of screening; .. 274
(l) Size, location, dimensions and details of all signs and exterior lighting of signs, including type of standards,
locations and radius of light and intensity of foot-candles, subject to approval by the Building Official; .................... 274
(m) Location of existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer mains and service lines with sizes, valves, fire
hydrants, manholes and other structures on site and adjacent to the site; ...................................................................... 274
(n) Show traffic flow arrows and dimensions of drive isles; .................................................................................... 274
(o) Inlets, culverts and other drainage structures on-site and adjacent to the site; .................................................... 274
(p) Existing and proposed easements (utility, floodway and drainage, access, visibility and maintenance, fire lane,
etc.); 274
(q) Provide an elevation of all four (4) sides of the building including building materials, colors and dimensions at
an architectural scale of ¼” = 1’ 0”; and ....................................................................................................................... 274
(r) Landscape plan provided on separate sheet and including the following: .......................................................... 274
1) Natural features including tree masses and anticipated tree loss, floodplains, drainage ways and creeks; .... 274
2) Screening walls, fences, living screens, retaining walls, headlight screens and service area screens, including
height and type of construction and/or planting specification;................................................................................. 274
3) Existing/preserved trees including location, size and species; ...................................................................... 274
4) Landscaping materials including location, size, etc.; .................................................................................... 274
5) Proposed plant materials including locations, species, spacing (if applicable) and size (at time of planting and
at maturity); and ....................................................................................................................................................... 274
6) Note irrigation, sprinkler or water systems, including placement of water sources, including the following
note: “All green space and landscaping will be maintained by (type) watering system”; and ................................ 274
(s) Any additional information as requested to clarify the proposed development. ................................................. 274
(5) Criteria for Approval ................................................................................... 274
(a) The site plan is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district regulations; .... 275
(b) The site plan is compatible with adjacent developments and neighborhoods and includes improvements to
mitigate development-related adverse impacts; ............................................................................................................ 275
(c) The site plan does not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic, which will be hazardous or conflict with the
existing traffic patterns in the area; ............................................................................................................................... 275
(d) The site plan incorporates features to minimize adverse effects on adjacent properties; .................................... 275
(e) Adequate capacity of public or private facilities for water, sewer, electricity and transportation to and through the
development are provided to the site;............................................................................................................................ 275
(f) The proposed use and associated site plan promote the health, safety and general welfare of the City and the safe,
orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City. .............................................................................................. 275
(6) Revisions to Approved Site Plan ................................................................ 275
(7) Expiration of Site Plan ................................................................................ 275
(a) A building permit, if any, for the use has not been approved within two (2) years of the approval of a SUP; ... 275
(b) A building permit has not been approved within two (2) years of the approval of a site plan as part of a PD; .. 275
(c) A building permit has not been approved within two (2) years of the approval for the construction of any
building on the property for which the site plan was approved; or ............................................................................... 275
(d) A building permit that was approved as a result of an approved site plan expires within two (2) years of approval
of the site plan. .............................................................................................................................................................. 275
O. WAIVERS 275
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 275
(a) The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to other
property in the area; and ................................................................................................................................................ 276
(b) The granting of the waiver will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area
in accordance with the provisions of this UDC. Such findings of the City Council, together with the specified facts
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 65
upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the City Council meeting at
which such waiver is granted. Waivers may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this UDC so that the public health, safety, and welfare may be secured and justice done. ........................................... 276
(2) The City Council may establish a time period for execution of each granted
waiver. ................................................................................................................. 276
(3) Such findings together with the specific facts on which such findings are
based shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the City Council meeting at
which such exception is granted. ......................................................................... 276
(4) The City Council shall not authorize a waiver that would constitute a violation
of a valid code or ordinance of the City. ............................................................... 276
SECTION 9 - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS ........................................................... 276
A. GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS 276
(1) Conformity with Comprehensive Plan ........................................................ 276
(2) Provision for Future Subdivision ................................................................. 277
(3) Standards for Site Improvements ............................................................... 277
B. BLOCKS 277
(1) The length, width and shape of blocks will be determined with due regard to:277
(a) Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated (note that the
Commission may require that the block and lot size bear reasonable relation to the planned use of the land); ............ 277
(b) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; and ................................................................................... 277
(c) Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. ...................................................... 277
(2) In general, intersecting streets shall be used to determine the block lengths
and widths, and shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross traffic
adequately, and to meet existing streets or customary subdivision practices. ..... 277
(3) In general, block lengths along minor or secondary streets shall not exceed
one thousand feet (1,000’) or be less than five hundred feet (500’) and along major
streets shall not exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200’) or be less than
nine hundred feet (900’). ...................................................................................... 277
(4) A waiver of the standards of this section may be allowed in cases where
physical barriers, property ownership or adjacent existing subdivisions create
conditions where a waiver is appropriate. The length of a block may be increased
or decreased to meet the existing conditions having due regard for connecting
streets, circulation of traffic and public safety. ..................................................... 277
C. LOTS 277
(1) Lot sizes and dimensions shall conform to the minimum requirements of the
appropriate zoning district. The lot area shall be computed including all
easements. Changes in the required lot sizes and dimensions may only be allowed
through rezoning or through the granting of a variance by the BOA. No lot shall be
approved which does not meet the minimum requirements of the appropriate
zoning district. ...................................................................................................... 277
(2) In residential subdivisions not served by public sewer, the Commission shall
require the developer to cause a percolation test to be made. In no case will the
lot size in such subdivision be less than one acre (43,560 square feet). ............. 278
(3) Depth and width of properties laid out for commercial or industrial purposes
shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required
by the type of use and development contemplated. ............................................. 278
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 66
(4) Corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit the required building setback
and proper orientation to both streets. ................................................................. 278
(5) Where a residential lot backs up to a railroad right-of-way, high-pressure gas
line, industrial area or any other land use which may create a dangerous condition,
and where no marginal access street or other street is provided at the rear of such
lot, an additional depth of twenty-five feet (25’) shall be required. Where a lot
sides to any of the above, an additional width of fifteen feet (15’) shall be required.
A planting screen or non-access easement of at least ten feet (10’) shall be
provided along the line of lots abutting a railroad right-of-way, high-pressure gas
line, industrial area or any other land use which may have a dangerous effect on
residential property. ............................................................................................. 278
(6) Residential lots located on a cul-de-sac shall be at least fifty feet (50’) wide
at the building line. ............................................................................................... 278
(7) Residential lots shall be oriented to take advantage of topography; the best
relationship to the overall design of the neighborhood; and to minimize the effects
of any surrounding depreciating land uses. ......................................................... 278
(8) There shall be no residential lots facing directly upon a major thoroughfare
as depicted on the Thoroughfare Plan. ................................................................ 278
(9) All side lines of lots shall be perpendicular to straight street lines and radial
to curved street lines except where a waiver to this rule will provide a better street
and lot layout. ...................................................................................................... 278
(10) Every lot shall be provided with adequate access to a public street, either
by direct frontage on such street. Rear and/or side driveway access to major
streets shall be prohibited. ................................................................................... 278
(11) Minimum front and side building setback lines at streets and crosswalks
shall be shown on all plats and shall conform to the restrictions, if any, imposed on
the subdivision by the subdivider, but in no event shall such setback lines be less
than those required by the applicable zoning district. The front-line setback shall
be measured from the point where the public right-of-way ends to the front face to
the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building. ..... 278
D. MONUMENTS AND LOT MARKERS 278
(1) Permanent Survey Reference Monuments ................................................. 278
(2) Other Markers ............................................................................................ 279
(3) Benchmarks ............................................................................................... 279
(4) Monument Placement and Verification ....................................................... 279
E. EXTERIOR CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS 279
(1) Intent .......................................................................................................... 279
(2) Applicability ................................................................................................ 279
(3) Multi-family and Nonresidential Exterior Material Requirements ................ 279
(a) At least thirty percent (30%) of the front façade shall provide, on the ground level floor, windows and doors that
allow for visibility into the commercial building or store. Industrial buildings located within the M-1 and M-2 zoning
districts may have fifteen percent (15%) of the front façade as windows and doors. .................................................... 279
(b) All structures shall have a minimum of one-hundred percent (100%) masonry, excluding doors and windows on
all facades. .................................................................................................................................................................... 279
(c) Masonry material shall be defined as that form of exterior construction material consisting of brick, stone,
stucco, cemetatious fiberboard, split face concrete masonry units and faux stone or brick. .......................................... 280
(4) Multi-family and Nonresidential Façade Articulation ................................... 280
(a) Horizontal Articulation ....................................................................................................................................... 280
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 67
(b) Vertical Articulation ........................................................................................................................................... 280
(5) Residential Exterior Material Requirements ............................................... 280
F. PROTECTION OF NATURAL FEATURES 280
G. LANDSCAPING 280
(1) Purpose ...................................................................................................... 280
(2) Enforcement ............................................................................................... 280
(3) Installation and Maintenance ...................................................................... 281
(a) Prior to issuance of a CO for any building or structure, all screening and landscaping shall be in place in
accordance with the landscape plan approved as part of the site plan. .......................................................................... 281
(b) The property owner, HOA or property owners association shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
landscape areas. The areas shall be maintained so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at all times. . 281
(c) Should any of the plant material used in any landscaping required under this section die, the owner of the
property shall have ninety (90) days after notification from the City to obtain and install suitable replacement plant
material. Synthetic or artificial lawn or plant material shall not be used to satisfy the requirements of this UDC. ...... 281
(d) In any case in which a CO is sought at a season of the year in which the City determines that it would be
impractical to plant trees, shrubs or grass, or to lay turf, a CO may be issued notwithstanding the fact that the
landscaping required by the landscape plan has not been completed, provided the applicant posts fiscal surety in a form
acceptable to the City in the amount of the estimated cost of such landscaping. Such surety shall be conditioned upon
the installation of all landscaping required by the landscape plan within six (6) months of the date of the application and
shall give the City the right to draw upon the surety to install or complete the landscaping if the applicant fails to do so.
281
(e) Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds, and other material or plants not a part of the
landscaping. .................................................................................................................................................................. 281
(f) All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the
year. 281
(g) All landscape materials shall be installed according to American Association of Nurserymen (“AAN”) standards.
281
(h) All landscaped areas shall be irrigated with an approved automatic underground irrigation system, designed by
an irrigation contractor licensed by the State of Texas, unless the landscaped area has been designed utilizing
xeriscaping methods. All irrigation systems shall be designed and sealed in accordance with the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (“TCEQ”), or as may be applicable, its successor entity, and shall be professionally installed.
No irrigation shall be required for undisturbed natural areas or undisturbed existing trees. ......................................... 281
(4) General Landscaping Requirements .......................................................... 282
(a) Trees planted shall be a minimum of three inches (3”) measured at 10 inches (10”) above ground level at the
time of planting. ............................................................................................................................................................ 282
(b) All trees planted to meet the minimum landscaping, mitigation or preservation requirements of this section shall
be planted so as to provide for no impervious material within the drip line of the tree. For the purposes of determining
the drip line to meet the requirements of this section, the drip line radius shall be measured as being ten (10) times the
caliper of the tree. For example, a six inch (6”) tree will have a sixty inch (60”) or five foot (5’) radius or a ten foot
(10’) diameter. Tree wells or tree grates may be utilized to meet the requirements of this section. The City, at its
option, may require certification by a registered arborist that adequate space has been provided for pervious cover
beneath the drip line of a tree. ....................................................................................................................................... 282
(c) Shrubs, vines and ground cover planted pursuant to this section should be good, healthy nursery stock. Shrubs
shall be a minimum of one-gallon container size at the time of planting. ..................................................................... 282
(d) Grass areas are encouraged to be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in the City, including
Bermuda, Buffalo Grass, Zoysia, or other drought-tolerant grass. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or
seeded, except in swales or othr areas subject to erosion, which shall require installation of solid sod. ....................... 282
(e) New landscaped areas shall be prepared so as to achieve a soil depth of at least six inches (6”). The six-inch (6”)
soil depth shall consist of seventy-five percent (75%) topsoil blended with twenty-five percent (25%) compost. ....... 282
(f) The use of architectural planters in nonresidential districts may be permitted in fulfillment of landscape
requirements subject to recommendation from the Commission and approval of the City Council at the time of site plan
approval. ....................................................................................................................................................................... 282
(g) Developers and homebuilders are encouraged to use xeriscape plant materials on model homes to promote use of
water-wise landscaping. ................................................................................................................................................ 282
(h) Landscape planting shall not be erected or installed in such a manner as to interfere with traffic view or to
impose a safety hazard. ................................................................................................................................................. 282
(i) Not less than forty percent (40%) of the total required landscaping shall be located in the designated front yard.
282
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 68
(5) Landscape Installation Required ................................................................ 282
(a) A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total land area of any proposed multi-family or nonresidential
development shall be landscaped and shall be comprised of trees, shrubs, sod or other ground cover. In the event of the
construction of a phased development, the minimum twenty percent (20%) requirement shall apply to each phase as it
is developed. ................................................................................................................................................................. 282
(b) All properties shall provide shade trees at a ratio of nine (9) trees per acre (43,560 square feet) of gross lot area.
Industrial property shall provide shade trees at a ratio of nine (9) trees per acre, calculated at sixty percent (60%) of the
gross lot area or by exclusion of the main enclosure structure ground floor area from the gross lot area, whichever is
less. Existing trees may be counted toward meeting the requirements of this section. ................................................. 282
1) Every single family residential lot shall provide a minimum of three (3) shade trees which shall include a
minimum of one (1) tree in the front yard and one (1) tree in the rear yard. Existing trees that comply with this
regulation can be counted towards the required tree planting, provided these trees were adequately protected during
construction. ............................................................................................................................................................ 283
2) Any property that is unable to satisfy the tree requirements of this section shall be required to pay tree
mitigation fees in accordance with SECTION 9I(4) of this UDC. ........................................................................... 283
(c) The use of native and adapted, drought-tolerant plants is encouraged to meet the requirements of this section. 283
(d) Artificial plants or turf shall not be counted towards meeting the requirements of this SECTION 9G. ............. 283
(6) Landscape Plan Required .......................................................................... 283
(a) Location of all existing trees with indication as to those to be preserved; .......................................................... 283
(b) Location of all plants and landscaping material to be used including paving, benches, screens, fountains, statues,
or other landscaping features; ....................................................................................................................................... 283
(c) Species of all plant material to be used; ............................................................................................................. 283
(d) Size of all plant material to be used; ................................................................................................................... 283
(e) Spacing of plant material where appropriate; ..................................................................................................... 283
(f) Layout and description of irrigation, sprinkler, or water system, including placement of water sources; .......... 283
(g) Description of maintenance provisions of the landscaping plan; and ................................................................. 283
(h) Persons responsible for the preparation of the landscape plan. ........................................................................... 283
(7) Nonresidential and Multi-Family Landscape Buffer Requirements ............. 283
(8) Parking Area Landscaping ......................................................................... 284
(a) Interior Landscaping ........................................................................................................................................... 284
1) Interior landscape areas shall be protected from vehicular encroachment of overhang through appropriate
wheel stops or curbs. ................................................................................................................................................ 284
2) There shall be a minimum of one (1) shade tree and five (5) shrubs planted for each four hundred (400)
square feet, or fraction thereof of required interior landscape area. ......................................................................... 284
3) Interior areas of parking lots shall contain planting islands located so as to best relieve the expanse of paving.
Planter islands must be located no farther apart than every twelve (12) parking spaces and at the terminus of all rows
of parking. Such islands shall be a minimum of 200 square feet (ten feet (10’) by twenty feet (20’)) in size. ....... 284
4) Planter islands shall contain a combination of trees, shrubs, lawn, ground cover and other appropriate
materials provided such landscaping does not cause visual interference within the parking area. ........................... 284
(b) Perimeter Landscaping ....................................................................................................................................... 284
1) Whenever an off-street parking or vehicular use area abuts a public right-of-way, except a public alley, a
perimeter landscape area of at least fifteen feet (15’) in width shall be maintained between the abutting right-of-way
and the off-street parking or vehicular area. An appropriate landscape screen or barrier shall be installed in this area
and the remaining area shall be landscaped with at least grass or other ground cover. Necessary access ways from
the public right-of-way shall be permitted through all such landscaping. ................................................................ 284
2) Whenever an off-street parking or vehicular use area abuts an adjacent residential property line, a perimeter
landscape area of at least ten feet (10’) in width shall be maintained between the edge of the parking area and the
adjacent property line. Access ways between lots may be permitted through all perimeter landscape areas.
Landscaping shall be designed to visually screen the parking area. Whenever such property is zoned or used for
single-family residential purposes, a landscape buffer shall include a masonry wall and hedge, or berm. The
screening mechanism shall be a minimum of three feet (3’) in height and a maximum of eight feet (8’) in height.
285
3) Perimeter landscape areas shall contain at least one (1) shade tree for each fifty (50) linear feet, or fraction
thereof, of perimeter area. ........................................................................................................................................ 285
(9) Approved Landscaping Plant List ............................................................... 285
(a) Approved Trees .................................................................................................................................................. 285
(b) Approved Shrubs, Vines, Perennials & Ground Cover ....................................................................................... 287
(c) Approved Ornamental Grasses ........................................................................................................................... 290
(d) Approved Turf Grasses ....................................................................................................................................... 290
(e) Undesirable Trees ............................................................................................................................................... 291
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 69
H. SCREENING 291
(1) Fences and Screening in Residential Areas ............................................... 291
(a) Height ................................................................................................................................................................. 291
(b) Permitted Materials ............................................................................................................................................ 291
1) Fences may be constructed of pressure-treated wood, decorative metal, poly-coated chain link or similar
woven wire mesh, stone, brick, or other materials traditionally used in private fence construction. ....................... 291
2) Decorative fences shall be constructed of pressure-treated wood picket, decorative metal, stone or brick, or a
combination thereof. Solid surface area of any decorative fence shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total
surface area. ............................................................................................................................................................. 291
(c) Prohibited Materials ........................................................................................................................................... 292
(d) Fences within Public Easements ......................................................................................................................... 292
(2) Fences and Screening in Nonresidential and Multi-Family Areas .............. 292
(a) Height ................................................................................................................................................................. 292
(b) Permitted Materials ............................................................................................................................................ 292
(c) Prohibited Materials ........................................................................................................................................... 292
(d) Fences Adjacent to Residential Property ............................................................................................................ 292
(e) Screening of Trash Receptacles .......................................................................................................................... 293
(f) Fences within Public Easements ......................................................................................................................... 293
(g) Gates for Vehicular Access ................................................................................................................................ 293
(3) Screening Along Arterial Roadways ........................................................... 293
(a) Requirement Criteria .......................................................................................................................................... 293
(b) Parcels or lots one (1) acre or greater in size located in the A zoning district and used in conjunction with the
containment of livestock or farm animals are exempt from the screening wall requirements of this SECTION 9H. ... 293
(c) Screening Alternatives ........................................................................................................................................ 293
1) A living/landscaped screen in conjunction with decorative metal (e.g., decorative iron) fence sections with
masonry columns; .................................................................................................................................................... 294
2) A combination of berms and living/landscaped screening; ........................................................................... 294
3) A combination of berms, decorative masonry walls and living/landscaped screening, either with or without a
decorative metal or “FenceCrete” type of fence with masonry columns; or ............................................................ 294
4) Some other creative screening alternative if it meets the spirit and intent of this section, if it is demonstrated
to be long-lasting and generally maintenance-free, and if the Commission finds it to be in the public interest to
approve the alternative screening device. ................................................................................................................ 294
(d) Time Required for Opacity ................................................................................................................................. 294
(e) Maintenance Easement ....................................................................................................................................... 294
(f) Installation .......................................................................................................................................................... 294
(g) Design of Walls .................................................................................................................................................. 294
(h) Height of Screening ............................................................................................................................................ 294
(i) Other Easements ................................................................................................................................................. 295
I. TREE PRESERVATION AND MITIGATION 295
(1) Purpose and Intent ..................................................................................... 295
(a) The purpose of this SECTION 9I is to conserve, protect and enhance existing healthy trees and natural
landscape. It is recognized that the preservation of existing trees contributes to the overall quality and environment of
the City. Trees can and do contribute to the processes of purification, oxygenation, regeneration, groundwater
recharge, reduction of pollution and contaminants in aquifers, erosion and dust control, abatement of noise, provision of
wildlife habitat and enhancement of property values. Indiscriminate clearing or stripping of natural vegetation on any
parcel is prohibited. ....................................................................................................................................................... 295
(b) It is hereby declared that the intent of the City is to encourage the preservation of all trees within the City limits.
While the layout of a property with respect to the placement of buildings, parking facilities and other site requirements
is at the discretion of the developer of the property, it is the policy of the City to promote site layout and design in a
manner which preserves the maximum amount of Protected and Heritage Trees, as defined in paragraph (2)(b) of this
section, possible. ........................................................................................................................................................... 295
(2) Applicability and Exemptions ...................................................................... 295
(a) The provisions of this section are applicable to the following: ........................................................................... 295
1) All new residential and nonresidential development within the City; ........................................................... 295
2) Redevelopment of any residential or nonresidential property within the City that results in an increase in the
building footprint or the total destruction and reconstruction; ................................................................................. 295
3) Any grading, filling or clearing of land in the City limits; and ..................................................................... 295
4) Any selective or individual removal of any Protected or Heritage Tree in the City limits. ........................... 295
(b) The following definitions shall be applicable to the provisions of this section: ................................................. 295
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 70
1) Protected Trees .............................................................................................................................................. 295
2) Heritage Trees ............................................................................................................................................... 295
3) Damage ......................................................................................................................................................... 296
a) Uprooting; ................................................................................................................................................ 296
b) Severance of the root system or main trunk; ............................................................................................ 296
c) Storage of topsoil, construction materials, debris or chemicals within the drip line area; ........................ 296
d) Compaction of soil within the drip line area; ........................................................................................... 296
e) A grade change that exceeds six inches (6”) over more than twenty-five percent (25%) of a drip line area
in the natural grade above a root system or within the drip line area; ................................................................. 296
f) Pruning or removal of more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the living tissue; or ............................... 296
g) Paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious material within the drip line area. Tree grates or tree
wells may be provided to preserve pervious surface within the drip line area. ................................................... 296
(c) The following are exempt from the preservation, mitigation and permitting requirements of this section: ........ 296
1) Trees located on a platted single-family lot; .................................................................................................. 296
2) Protected Trees located within ten feet (10’) of and inside of the building footprint; ................................... 296
3) Protected Trees located within the area of a proposed on-site sewage facility (“OSSF”); ............................ 296
4) Protected Trees located within a right-of-way to be dedicated to and maintained by the City and shown on the
City’s Thoroughfare Master Plan; ........................................................................................................................... 296
5) Protected Trees located within any utility easement; .................................................................................... 296
6) Trees damaged or destroyed by floods, fire, wind or other natural causes; ................................................... 296
7) Trees that have been determined by a registered arborist to be dead or dying; and ....................................... 296
8) The following tree species:............................................................................................................................ 296
(d) All Heritage Trees to be removed shall be mitigated in accordance with the provisions of this SECTION 9I. .. 297
(3) Tree Preservation ....................................................................................... 297
(a) Protected Trees ................................................................................................................................................... 297
(b) Heritage Trees .................................................................................................................................................... 297
(4) Tree Mitigation ............................................................................................ 297
(a) Protected Trees ................................................................................................................................................... 298
(b) Heritage Trees .................................................................................................................................................... 298
(c) Damaged Trees ................................................................................................................................................... 298
(d) Mitigated Trees................................................................................................................................................... 298
(5) Tree Protection Standards .......................................................................... 298
(a) All trees to be preserved on site shall be protected from damage caused by site excavation or construction in
accordance with the following: ..................................................................................................................................... 298
1) All trees shall be protected by a fence, frame or box constructed around the drip line of the preserved tree.
Protection measures may not be removed until construction is complete. ............................................................... 298
2) A minimum of three inches (3”) of mulch or compost shall be spread beneath the drip line of the preserved
tree. 298
3) No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, or trenches, place any paving material or place any drive or
parking area within the drip line of any Protected or Heritage Tree without prior written approval of the City
Manager at the time of site plan approval. ............................................................................................................... 298
4) No person shall attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other apparatus to any Protected or
Heritage Tree. .......................................................................................................................................................... 298
(b) The Building Official shall determine the health of oak trees within the City to determine if a tree is threatened
by fatal diseases including, but not limited to, Oak Wilt. It is further declared that the loss of oak trees growing on
private and public property substantially depreciates the value of property within the City and impairs the safety, good
order, general welfare and convenience of the public. It is the intent of the City to control and prevent the spread of
Oak Wilt. ....................................................................................................................................................................... 298
1) If any oak tree is wounded by intentional damage or pruning or as a result of natural causes, the damaged
area shall be immediately treated with tree wound dressing. ................................................................................... 299
2) All necessary and reasonable efforts shall be given during the permitted removal of any trees to utilize best
known practices to prevent the spread of Oak Wilt disease to any other surrounding trees. .................................... 299
(6) Tree Preservation Credits – Nonresidential and Multi-Family Developments299
(7) To encourage the preservation of existing Protected or Heritage Trees
contained within a proposed development, the following minimum tree
preservation credits may be provided. Caliper is the diameter of the tree in inches
measured at ten inches (10”) above the ground. ................................................. 299
(a) Protected Trees shall receive a credit against the minimum required landscaping or mitigation standards at a oneto-
one (1:1), caliper-inch ratio; ..................................................................................................................................... 299
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 71
(b) Heritage Trees shall receive a credit against the minimum required landscaping or mitigation standards at a
three-to-one (3:1), caliper-inch ratio; or ........................................................................................................................ 299
(c) Protected and Heritage Trees located within a required buffer area shall receive a credit against the minimum
buffer requirements at a one-to-one (1:1), DBH-inch ratio. .......................................................................................... 299
(8) Tree Survey Required ................................................................................ 299
(a) Total number of caliper inches on the site; ......................................................................................................... 299
(b) Total number of caliper inches to be removed; and ............................................................................................ 299
(c) Total number of caliper inches to be preserved. ................................................................................................. 299
(9) Tree Removal Permit ................................................................................. 299
(a) Existing/proposed topography; ........................................................................................................................... 299
(b) Location of property lines, easement, rights-of-ways, setbacks, parking areas and sidewalks; .......................... 299
(c) Location, species and size (in DBH) of each Protected and Heritage Tree, except those trees exempted by
SECTION 9I(2)(c) above; ............................................................................................................................................. 299
(d) A tree inventory that summarizes the following: ................................................................................................ 299
1) Total number of caliper inches on the site; .................................................................................................... 300
2) Total number of caliper inches to be removed; ............................................................................................. 300
3) Total number of caliper inches to be preserved; ............................................................................................ 300
4) Location of any proposed tree mitigation; and .............................................................................................. 300
5) Any proposed tree preservation credits; and ................................................................................................. 300
(e) A summary of the tree protection methods to be utilized. .................................................................................. 300
(10) Criteria for Tree Removal Permit ............................................................ 300
(a) The condition of the tree with respect to disease, danger of falling, proximity to existing or proposed structures,
interference with existing or proposed private or public facilities or services, or if the tree presents a clear public safety
hazard. ........................................................................................................................................................................... 300
(b) The tree is dead or is physically damaged to the degree that it is clear it is likely to fall and injure persons or
property. ........................................................................................................................................................................ 300
(c) The tree is located within, or within proximity to, existing or proposed public rights-of-way and is causing
damage to existing public or private facilities or services or may cause damage to proposed public or private facilities,
and such facilities or services cannot reasonably be relocated or the damage alleviated. ............................................. 300
(d) The condition or location of the tree presents a clear public safety hazard or the foreseeable danger of property
damage to an existing or proposed structure, and such hazard or danger cannot reasonably be alleviated by treatment or
pruning. ......................................................................................................................................................................... 300
(e) The tree is proposed for removal in order for the property to achieve compliance with other applicable City
requirements and standards (i.e., site design or use standards) or the property is the location for future construction. 300
(f) Removal of the tree will not have a significant negative impact on erosion, soil stability, flow of surface waters,
protection of adjacent trees, or windbreaks. .................................................................................................................. 300
(g) Removal of the tree will not have a significant negative impact on the tree densities, sizes, canopies and the
diversity of the species of existing trees in the area; provided, however, consideration shall be given when alternatives
to tree removal have been considered and no reasonable alternative exists to allow the property to be used as permitted
in the zoning district. ..................................................................................................................................................... 300
J. PARK AND OPEN SPACE DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS 301
(1) Purpose ...................................................................................................... 301
(a) The purpose of this section is to provide for the adequate provision of park land and open space to meet the
needs of a growing citizen population; improvements to existing park land; the establishment, maintenance and
operation of a park land dedication fund; the establishment of requirements and procedures for governing required
dedications of park land or improvements to existing park land by subdividers of land; and the provision of cash
payments-in-lieu of park land dedication by subdividers of land in certain cases. ........................................................ 301
(b) It is hereby declared by the City Council that recreational areas in the form of parks and open spaces are
necessary and in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare, and that the only adequate procedure to
provide for park land and park improvements is to integrate such a requirement into the procedure for planning and
developing property or subdivisions in the City, whether such development consists of new residential construction on
vacant land or the addition of new dwelling units on existing residential land. It is the City’s policy to require
subdividers of residential subdivisions and lots to provide for park land and park facilities at the time of development
approval in proportion to the need for such improvements created by the developments and in proportion to the benefits
received from contribution of such facilities. ................................................................................................................ 301
(2) Applicability ................................................................................................ 301
(3) Submittal Requirements ............................................................................. 301
(a) Prior to submittal of a subdivision master plan or preliminary plat, a general parks plan shall be submitted and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: .............................................................................................. 301
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 72
1) Location and size of any proposed parks to be dedicated to the public or to be retained as private park land;
301
2) A statement of the suitability of the park land in meeting the criteria in SECTION 9J(9) of this UDC; ....... 301
3) A general park development plan including any proposed improvements; and ............................................ 301
4) A phasing plan. ............................................................................................................................................. 301
(b) Prior to submittal of a final plat, a detailed parks plan shall be submitted and shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information: .................................................................................................................................................. 302
1) Location and size of proposed park(s); .......................................................................................................... 302
2) A statement of the suitability of the park land in meeting the criteria in SECTION 9J(9) of this UDC; and 302
3) A detailed plan of any proposed improvements, including cost. ................................................................... 302
(c) The Commission shall review the general parks plan prior to approval of a subdivision master plan or
preliminary plat. Review should be based upon the Comprehensive Plan, as adopted by the City, and the standards and
provisions contained herein regarding the amount and location of park land and payments-in-lieu of park land
dedication. ..................................................................................................................................................................... 302
(d) All park land to be dedicated to the City shall meet the suitability requirements of SECTION 9J(9). ............... 302
(4) Park Land Dedication Requirements .......................................................... 302
(a) Land Dedication ................................................................................................................................................. 302
1) Show the location and dimensions of the area proposed to be dedicated for park land; ................................ 302
2) Show the number of dwelling units to be located within the proposed subdivision (whether single- or multifamily
units);............................................................................................................................................................ 302
3) Tell whether all or any part of the property to be dedicated as a park is located in a special flood hazard area,
as such areas are defined in this UDC; and .............................................................................................................. 302
4) Show the proposed streets and utilities to serve the parcel to be dedicated as park land. .............................. 302
(b) Development of Areas Smaller Than Five (5) Acres .......................................................................................... 302
(c) Dedication Procedures ........................................................................................................................................ 303
(d) Development of Subdivision in Phases .............................................................................................................. 303
(e) Right to Accept/Reject Land .............................................................................................................................. 303
(5) Payment-in-Lieu of Park Land Dedication Requirements ........................... 303
(a) Right to Request Waiver of Dedication Requirements ....................................................................................... 303
(b) Required Payment-in-Lieu of Park Land Dedication.......................................................................................... 303
(6) Park Land Development Agreements ......................................................... 303
(7) Park Development ...................................................................................... 304
(a) A subdivider who elects to dedicate park land in accordance with SECTION 9J(4) above shall improve all
dedicated public park land with improvements approved by the City Manager. Design, specification, and construction
of the improvements shall be subject to review and approval by the City. Construction of the improvements must be
completed within one (1) year of the approval of the final plat of the subdivision. No final plat shall be recorded for any
subdivision in which completion of the required park land improvements has not been accepted by the City; however,
in the event a subdivider requests that a final plat be approved prior to completion of the required improvements, surety
for construction of improvements may be provided in the same manner as required of other subdivision and site-related
construction in accordance with SECTION 4N(7) of this UDC.................................................................................... 304
(b) In lieu of constructing the improvements required in SECTION 9J(7)(a) above, the subdivider may elect to make
a cash payment-in-lieu of construction to the City to meet the City’s current or future recreational needs. If a developer
who has dedicated land in accordance with SECTION 9J(4) above elects to make a payment-in-lieu of park
development, the City shall utilize those funds for improvement of park land within the subdivision in which the funds
are collected. In the event there are remaining funds after development of said park land, the City may utilize the
remaining funds to complete improvements in any public park within the City. .......................................................... 304
(c) If the subdivider elects payment-in-lieu of park land dedication in accordance with SECTION 9J(5) above, then
the subdivider shall make a cash payment-in-lieu of construction to the City for the required improvements in addition
to the payment-in-lieu of park land dedication. Cash payments made in accordance with this paragraph may be utilized
to complete improvements in any public park within the City. ..................................................................................... 304
(d) Cash payments-in-lieu of required improvements shall be calculated by multiplying the number of dwelling units
times the price per dwelling unit as established by the fee schedule set from time to time by resolution of the City
Council. ......................................................................................................................................................................... 304
(8) Park Land Dedication Fund ........................................................................ 304
(a) Special Fund ....................................................................................................................................................... 304
(b) Deposit/Expenditure of Park Land Dedication Fund .......................................................................................... 305
(c) Records and Method of Expenditure .................................................................................................................. 305
(9) Park Land Design Criteria .......................................................................... 305
(a) Location .............................................................................................................................................................. 305
(b) Land Suitability .................................................................................................................................................. 305
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 73
(c) Usable Land ........................................................................................................................................................ 305
(d) Access ................................................................................................................................................................ 305
(e) Utilities ............................................................................................................................................................... 306
(f) Drainage Improvements ..................................................................................................................................... 306
(g) Floodplain........................................................................................................................................................... 306
1) Amount of Credit .......................................................................................................................................... 306
(h) Criteria for Park Land ......................................................................................................................................... 306
1) The floodplain area is easily accessible and has adequate street frontage. .................................................... 306
2) There has been minimal alteration of the natural character of the waterway, the floodplain area and the
associated riparian habitat; however, some improvements may be necessary for City access and maintenance. .... 306
3) In no case will floodplain areas be accepted which are less than one hundred feet (100’) in width. ............. 306
4) The configuration and topography of the area is suitable for the placement of low-impact facilities such as
playgrounds, picnic facilities and open play fields. ................................................................................................. 306
(i) Disturbed Area ................................................................................................................................................... 306
(j) Disclosures ......................................................................................................................................................... 306
(k) Trash and Debris ................................................................................................................................................ 307
(l) Areas Not Meeting the Minimum Requirements ................................................................................................ 307
1) provide recreational or educational opportunities for the surrounding community in lieu of park land
dedication; ............................................................................................................................................................... 307
2) be given a partial credit against the requirement of park land dedication and/or payment of fees; and ......... 307
3) meet any additional standards deemed necessary by the Commission pertaining to the dedication of park land
containing sensitive environmental features. ........................................................................................................... 307
(10) Private Parks .......................................................................................... 307
(a) Private Park Land Required ................................................................................................................................ 307
(b) Credit for Private Park Land ............................................................................................................................... 308
(c) Maintenance of Private Parks ............................................................................................................................. 308
(d) Requirement of Continued Use .......................................................................................................................... 308
(e) Security for Performance .................................................................................................................................... 308
SECTION 10 - PARKING STANDARDS ................................................................. 308
A. PURPOSE 308
B. GENERAL PROVISIONS 309
(1) Required off-street parking in residential districts shall be provided on the
same site, lot or tract as the main use for which the parking is provided. ............ 309
(2) Required off-street parking in nonresidential districts may be located on the
same site, lot or tract as the main use for which the parking is provided or on a
site, lot or tract located within the same zoning district and within one hundred fifty
feet (150’) of the main use. .................................................................................. 309
(3) If specific requirements for off-street parking result in a fraction of a parking
space, the next larger whole number of spaces is required. ................................ 309
(4) Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective
date of this UDC is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of dwelling units,
seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase in the minimum
number of required parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided to
accommodate the enlargement or change. .......................................................... 309
(5) All driveways and all required off-street parking spaces shall be on a paved
concrete surface. All drive approaches shall be of paved concrete. If an existing
drive on a residentially zoned lot is constructed of asphalt, the drive may continue
to be asphalt. Parking on an unpaved surface is strictly prohibited. .................... 309
(6) Parking spaces provided within a public right-of-way shall not be counted as
meeting the minimum requirements of this section. ............................................. 309
(7) In the event of the construction of a phased development, the minimum
number of parking spaces provided shall apply to each phase as it is developed.309
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 74
(8) Recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes, boats, semi-trailers,
trailers, or truck-tractors may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes, and shall
be parked and stored behind the front building façade of the main structure (i.e.,
the house). Parking on an unpaved surface is strictly prohibited. ........................ 309
(9) In computing the parking requirements for any building or development with
multiple uses, the total parking requirements shall be the sum of the specific
parking requirements for each individual use included in the building or
development. ....................................................................................................... 309
C. SIZE OF SPACE 309
(1) Each standard off-street surface parking space shall measure not less than
ten feet (10’) by twenty feet (20’), exclusive of access drives and aisles, and shall
be of usable shape and condition. ....................................................................... 309
(2) Wheel Stops ............................................................................................... 309
(3) Each parking space designed for parallel parking shall have a minimum
dimension of eight feet (8’) by twenty-two feet (22’). ............................................ 310
(4) Handicap Accessible Parking ..................................................................... 310
(a) The number and size of the handicap parking spaces required must follow the federal Americans with
Disabilities Act (“ADA”) and Texas Accessibility Standards (“TAS”). The number of handicap parking spaces
required is based on the total number of spaces provided. Accessible spaces for cars must have at least a sixty-inch
(60”)-wide access aisle located adjacent to the designated parking space. Van parking spaces need to have a wider
access aisle of ninety-six inches (96”) to accommodate a wheelchair lift and vertical clearance to accommodate van
height. ........................................................................................................................................................................... 310
(b) Location. Accessible parking spaces must be located on the shortest accessible route of travel to an accessible
facility entrance. Where buildings have multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking, the accessible parking
spaces must be dispersed and located closest to the accessible entrances and at the most level ground close to the
accessible entrance. ....................................................................................................................................................... 310
(c) An accessible route must always be provided from the accessible parking to the accessible entrance. An
accessible route never has curbs or stairs, must be at least three feet (3’) wide, and must have a firm, stable, slipresistant
surface. The slope along the accessible route should not be greater than 1:12 in the direction of travel. ..... 310
(d) Accessible parking spaces may be clustered in one (1) or more lots if equivalent or greater accessibility is
provided in terms of distance from the accessible entrance, parking fees, and convenience. Van-accessible parking
spaces located in parking garages may be clustered on one floor (to accommodate the ninety-eight inch (98”), minimum
vertical height requirement). ......................................................................................................................................... 311
(e) Signage ............................................................................................................................................................... 311
D. SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 311
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided in sufficient quantities to provide the
following ratio of vehicle spaces for the uses specified in the districts designated:311
(2) New and Unlisted Uses .............................................................................. 313
(3) Mixed Uses ................................................................................................. 313
(4) Joint Use of Facilities ................................................................................. 313
E. STRIPING 313
(1) All parking lots shall be striped in a manner that clearly delineates parking
spaces, fire lanes and pedestrian crosswalks. ..................................................... 313
(2) Directional arrows shall be provided in all drive lanes and driveways. ....... 313
F. SHARED ACCESS AND CROSS-LOT ACCESS EASEMENTS 313
G. STACKING REQUIREMENT FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES 313
(1) A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring eight feet (8’) by
twenty feet (20’) with direct forward access to a service window or station of a
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 75
drive-through facility which does not constitute space for any other circulation
driveway, parking space, or maneuvering area. .................................................. 314
(2) All stacking spaces shall be located entirely within the lot and shall be
outside of any right-of-way, fire lane or similar access......................................... 314
(3) For financial institutions with drive-through facilities, each teller window or
station, human or mechanical, shall be provided with a minimum of five (5)
stacking spaces. .................................................................................................. 314
(4) For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of seven
(7) stacking spaces shall be provided. ................................................................. 314
(5) For kiosks, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces for each service window
shall be provided. ................................................................................................. 314
H. OFF-STREET LOADING/UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS 314
I. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS AND ILLUSTRATIONS 314
(1) Handicapped Ramps .................................................................................. 314
(2) Handicap Parking Space Dispersal ............................................................ 315
(3) 90° Parking Dimensions ............................................................................. 315
(4) Angle Parking Dimensions ......................................................................... 316
(5) Drive Aisle Dimensions............................................................................... 316
(6) Separation of Right-of-Way and Parking Areas .......................................... 317
(7) Landscaping and Fencing .......................................................................... 317
SECTION 11 - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES .......................................... 318
A. PURPOSE 318
B. APPLICABILITY 318
(1) Other Laws: The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to nullify any
other provisions of federal or state law. ............................................................... 318
(2) Partial Invalidity: In the event any part or provision of this section is held to
be illegal or void by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not have
the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions. ............... 318
(3) Existing Signs: All signs legally existing on or before the effective day of this
UDC shall be permitted to continue without change. ........................................... 318
C. ADMINISTRATION 318
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 318
(2) Applications ................................................................................................ 319
(3) Inspection ................................................................................................... 319
(4) Notices and Orders .................................................................................... 319
(5) Right of Entry .............................................................................................. 319
(6) Department Records .................................................................................. 319
(7) Liability ....................................................................................................... 319
D. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 320
(1) Permit Required ......................................................................................... 320
(a) No person shall erect, alter or display any sign or allow the erection, alteration, or display of any sign upon any
property within the City or its ETJ owned or controlled by them without first obtaining a sign permit to do so from the
Building Official, except as hereinafter provided. No sign permit shall be released by the Building Official until after
the building permit for the principal building on the site has been issued. .................................................................... 320
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 76
(b) No person shall install and connect electrical systems for a sign within the City or its ETJ without first obtaining
an electrical permit to do so from the Building Official, except as hereinafter provided. The Building Official shall not
issue an electrical permit for a sign until after the principal sign permit for such work has been issued. ..................... 320
(2) Application .................................................................................................. 320
(a) Completed building permit application obtained from the Building Official. .................................................... 320
(b) A site plan which includes or reflects: ................................................................................................................ 320
1) The location of all buildings, structures or tracts to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected.
320
2) The position of the sign in relation to rights-of-way, easements, buildings or structures and other existing
signs. 320
3) Plans that illustrate height, length, width and all other dimensions associated with the sign. Plans shall
include all electrical elements of the sign. ............................................................................................................... 320
4) Letter or copy of a contract signed by the owner of the property stating that the applicant has permission to
erect such sign. ........................................................................................................................................................ 320
(3) Fees ........................................................................................................... 320
(a) A permit shall not be valid until such fee has been paid. An amendment to a permit shall not be released until
the additional fees, if any, have been paid..................................................................................................................... 320
(b) Where work for which a permit is required by this section has been started prior to obtaining a permit, the fees
established by City Council shall be doubled. Payment of such double fees shall not relieve any person(s) from any
other penalties prescribed under SECTION 1K, of this UDC, or any other applicable law or ordinance. .................... 320
(4) Action on Application .................................................................................. 320
(5) Time Limitation of Application ..................................................................... 321
(6) Condition of Permit ..................................................................................... 321
(7) Suspension or Revocation .......................................................................... 321
(8) Public Rights-of-Way, Alleys and Easements ............................................. 321
(9) Placement of Permit ................................................................................... 321
(10) Appeal ..................................................................................................... 321
E. EXEMPTED SIGNS 321
(1) Official Government Signs .......................................................................... 322
(2) Political Signs ............................................................................................. 322
(a) Political signs may be erected in accordance with this section upon private premises. Political signs are not
allowed on utility poles, in public easements, on public fences or buildings, or on any City property or City right-ofway.
A political sign located on private property, which is not the property of the owner of the sign, may only be
placed on the property with permission from the property owner. ................................................................................ 322
(b) Political signs may not: ...................................................................................................................................... 322
1) have an effective area greater than thirty-six (36) square feet; ...................................................................... 322
2) be more than eight feet (8’) high; .................................................................................................................. 322
3) be illuminated; or .......................................................................................................................................... 322
4) have any moving elements. ........................................................................................................................... 322
(3) Railway Signs ............................................................................................. 322
(4) Utility Signs ................................................................................................. 322
(5) Vehicle Signs .............................................................................................. 322
(6) Flags .......................................................................................................... 322
(7) Warning Signs ............................................................................................ 322
(8) Street Address Signs .................................................................................. 322
(9) Holiday Signs ............................................................................................. 323
(10) Plaques ................................................................................................... 323
F. PROHIBITED SIGNS 323
(1) Obscene Signs ........................................................................................... 323
(2) Obstructing Doors, Windows or Fire Escapes ............................................ 323
(3) Obstructing Vision/Sight Triangle ............................................................... 323
(4) Interference with Traffic .............................................................................. 323
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 77
(5) Over Public Property or Public Right-of-Way .............................................. 323
(6) Signs on Utility Poles .................................................................................. 323
(7) Private Property .......................................................................................... 324
(8) Dilapidated Signs ....................................................................................... 324
(9) Signs In Violation ........................................................................................ 324
(10) Home Occupation Signs ......................................................................... 324
(11) Non-Motorized or Portable Signs ............................................................ 324
(12) Off Premise Signs ................................................................................... 324
(13) Signs in the Right-of-Way ....................................................................... 324
(a) Official Government Signs ................................................................................................................................. 324
(b) Historical Markers and Plaques .......................................................................................................................... 324
(c) Traffic Signs ....................................................................................................................................................... 324
(14) Bandit Signs ............................................................................................ 324
(15) Painted Signs .......................................................................................... 324
(16) Other Signs ............................................................................................. 324
G. REMOVAL OF SIGNS 324
(1) Damaged Signs .......................................................................................... 324
(2) Abandoned Signs ....................................................................................... 325
(3) Extensions .................................................................................................. 325
(4) Signs in Right-of-Way and/or Public Property ............................................ 325
(5) Relocation of Certain Detached On-Premise Signs .................................... 325
(a) Legal or non-conforming, detached on-premise signs located on or overhanging a parcel of land acquired by a
governmental entity may be relocated subject to the restrictions in this section. The owner of the sign and the
governmental entity must sign an application requesting the relocation. The relocation must be completed within one
(1) year of the date the governmental entity becomes the owner of the property. All relocated signs must fully comply
with spacing, setbacks, and other restrictions in this section. All signs must be relocated on the remainder of the tract
from which the parcel of land was acquired unless: ...................................................................................................... 325
1) There is no remainder; or .............................................................................................................................. 325
2) The remainder is not of sufficient size or suitable configuration to allow the relocated sign to fully comply
with the spacing, setback, and other restrictions in this section. .............................................................................. 325
(b) No relocated, detached on-premise sign may have a greater effective area or increased height than it had at its
original location, or contain new materials that are more than five feet (5’) above grade. ............................................ 325
(c) No detached on-premise sign may be relocated until demolition and other required permits have been applied for
and approved by the City. ............................................................................................................................................. 325
(d) No new electrical or mechanical properties may be added to a relocated, detached on-premise sign, e.g., a nonilluminated
sign may not be converted to an illuminated sign. ..................................................................................... 325
(6) Illegally Erected Temporary Sign ................................................................ 325
(7) Illegally Erected Permanent Sign ............................................................... 326
(8) Filing of Liens against the Property ............................................................ 326
(9) Appeal ........................................................................................................ 326
H. GENERAL SIGN PROVISIONS 326
(1) Height of Signs ........................................................................................... 326
(2) Wind Load and Dead Load Requirements.................................................. 326
(3) Location of Business/Residential ................................................................ 326
(4) Illumination of Signs ................................................................................... 326
(5) Building and Electrical Codes Applicable ................................................... 327
(6) Maintenance of Signs ................................................................................. 327
(7) Structural Sign Elements ............................................................................ 327
(8) Sign Clearance ........................................................................................... 327
I. SIGNS IN OLD TOWN CRANDALL 327
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 78
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 327
(2) Maximum Area ........................................................................................... 327
(3) Maximum Number of Signs ........................................................................ 327
(4) Location ...................................................................................................... 327
(5) Roofline Limitations .................................................................................... 328
(6) Illumination ................................................................................................. 328
(7) Projection ................................................................................................... 328
J. WALL SIGNS 328
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 328
(2) Maximum Area ........................................................................................... 328
(3) Maximum Number of Signs ........................................................................ 328
(4) Roofline Limitations .................................................................................... 329
(5) Illumination ................................................................................................. 329
(6) Projection ................................................................................................... 329
(7) Adjacent Residential ................................................................................... 329
K. FREESTANDING GROUND SIGNS 329
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 329
(2) Minimum Setback ....................................................................................... 329
(3) Maximum Height ........................................................................................ 329
(4) Maximum Area ........................................................................................... 330
(5) Number of Signs ......................................................................................... 330
L. MONUMENT SIGNS 330
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 330
(2) Maximum Height ........................................................................................ 330
(3) Maximum Area ........................................................................................... 330
(4) Number of Signs ......................................................................................... 331
(5) Minimum Setback ....................................................................................... 331
(6) Material Requirements ............................................................................... 331
(7) Illumination ................................................................................................. 331
M. MULTI-TENANT SIGNS 331
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 331
(2) Maximum Height ........................................................................................ 331
(3) Maximum Area ........................................................................................... 332
(4) Maximum Number ...................................................................................... 332
(5) Monument Sign Design .............................................................................. 332
(6) Minimum Setback ....................................................................................... 332
(7) Material Requirements ............................................................................... 332
(8) Illumination ................................................................................................. 332
N. ELECTRONIC SIGNS 332
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 332
(2) Maximum Height ........................................................................................ 332
(3) Maximum Area ........................................................................................... 332
(4) Number of Signs ......................................................................................... 333
(5) Minimum Setback ....................................................................................... 333
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 79
(6) Material Requirements ............................................................................... 333
(7) Illumination ................................................................................................. 333
(8) Location Restrictions .................................................................................. 333
(9) Additional Restrictions ................................................................................ 333
(a) Any change of pictures or information on the electronic sign shall not produce the illusion of moving objects,
expanding or contracting shapes, rotation or any similar effect of animation. .............................................................. 333
(b) Any change of pictures or information on the message board sign shall not change more often than once every
four (4) seconds............................................................................................................................................................. 333
(c) Any sign picture or information shall not have a solid white background between the time period of thirty (30)
minutes after sunset and thirty (30) minutes before sunrise. ......................................................................................... 333
O. DIRECTIONAL SIGNS 333
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 333
(2) Maximum Height ........................................................................................ 333
(3) Maximum Area ........................................................................................... 333
(4) Maximum Number ...................................................................................... 333
(5) Location Restrictions .................................................................................. 334
P. SUBDIVISION ENTRY SIGNS 334
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 334
(2) Maximum Height ........................................................................................ 334
(3) Maximum Area ........................................................................................... 334
(4) Maximum Number of Signs ........................................................................ 334
(5) Placement of Sign ...................................................................................... 334
(6) Subdivision Entry Feature .......................................................................... 334
Q. PRICE-PER-GALLON DISPLAY 334
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 334
(2) Minimum Letter Height ............................................................................... 334
(3) Maximum Area ........................................................................................... 335
(4) Number of Signs ......................................................................................... 335
(5) Illumination ................................................................................................. 335
R. TEMPORARY SIGNS 335
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 335
(2) Maximum Area ........................................................................................... 335
(3) Maximum Height ........................................................................................ 335
(4) Minimum Setback ....................................................................................... 335
(5) Time Limitations ......................................................................................... 336
(6) Number of Signs ......................................................................................... 336
S. DEVELOPMENT SIGNS 336
(1) Maximum Area ........................................................................................... 336
(2) Maximum Height ........................................................................................ 336
(3) Number of Signs ......................................................................................... 336
(4) Duration ...................................................................................................... 336
T. REAL ESTATE SIGNS 336
(1) Applicability ................................................................................................ 336
(2) Maximum Height ........................................................................................ 336
(3) Maximum Area ........................................................................................... 336
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 80
(4) Maximum Number of Signs ........................................................................ 337
U. BANNERS OVER PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 337
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 337
(2) Restrictions ................................................................................................. 337
(3) Responsibility ............................................................................................. 337
(4) Maximum Banner Size ............................................................................... 337
V. NONCONFORMING SIGNS 337
(1) General ....................................................................................................... 337
(a) Was in existence and lawfully located prior to the adoption of this section; ...................................................... 337
(b) Was in existence and lawfully located and used in accordance with the provisions of the prior ordinance
applicable thereto or which was considered legally nonconforming thereunder and has since been in continuous or
regular use; .................................................................................................................................................................... 337
(c) Was in existence, located and used on the premises at the time it was annexed into the city and has since been in
continuous use; or ......................................................................................................................................................... 338
(d) Was in existence and lawfully located and used as an off-premise sign prior to or on the date this UDC was
adopted. . ....................................................................................................................................................................... 338
W. LICENSES 338
(1) Licenses Required ...................................................................................... 338
(a) Required ............................................................................................................................................................. 338
(b) License ............................................................................................................................................................... 338
1) It is unlawful for any person to perform construction work subject to this section unless the person is licensed
as a sign contractor or is exempt under the following: ............................................................................................. 338
a) A maintenance person who performs maintenance work only upon property owned by the person’s
employer. ............................................................................................................................................................ 338
b) A maintenance person who performs work upon a property with more than one property owner is deemed
to be performing work for the general public and shall be licensed as a sign contractor. ................................... 338
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to: ......................................................... 338
(a) Display a permit, cause a permit to be displayed, or to have in one’s possession any license to conduct
construction work, knowing it to be fictitious or to have been canceled, suspended or altered; ................................... 338
(b) Lend or permit the use of any license for doing any construction work to any person not entitled to it; ............ 338
(c) Fail or refuse to surrender to the City Manager any license for any construction work that has been suspended or
canceled; ....................................................................................................................................................................... 338
(d) Apply for or have in one’s possession more than one current City construction license of the same type; ........ 338
(e) Use a false or fictitious name or address in any application for any license provided for in this section or for any
renewal or duplicate of any such license, or to make a false statement or conceal a material fact or otherwise commit
fraud in the making and submission of any application; ............................................................................................... 338
(f) Perform any construction work in the City or its ETJ, for which a license is required without having a valid,
current license or while a license is suspended, expired or canceled; ........................................................................... 338
(g) Perform any construction work for which a permit is required without having a valid, current permit or after the
permit has been suspended, canceled or expired; .......................................................................................................... 338
(h) Fail or refuse to make the necessary repairs or changes as provided in a written notice issued by the City
Manager. A separate offense is deemed to be committed each day after the expiration of the time for correction
provided in the notice until the work is corrected; or .................................................................................................... 339
(i) Place or leave a property in such condition that it injures or endangers persons or property. ............................ 339
(3) Insurance Required .................................................................................... 339
(a) It is the duty of all sign contractors who practice their craft within the City to show proof of general commercial
liability insurance. A current copy of the insurance policy must be maintained on file with the Building Official of the
City or the sign contractor’s license may be revoked. The insurance coverage shall include: ..................................... 339
1) A minimum of $300,000 per occurrence (combined for property damage and bodily injury); ..................... 339
2) A minimum of $600,000 aggregated (total amount the policy will pay for property damage and bodily injury
coverage); and .......................................................................................................................................................... 339
3) A minimum of $300,000 aggregate for products and completed operation. .................................................. 339
(b) A licensed applicant or licensee shall file with the Building Official a completed certificate of insurance when
applying for an initial license, when changing a business name, or upon request by the City Manager. ...................... 339
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 81
(4) The Building Official, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the completed
application, shall issue the license or give a written refusal setting out the
reason(s) for refusal. ............................................................................................ 339
(a) Application ......................................................................................................................................................... 339
1) Required initial fee (as established by City Council); ................................................................................... 339
2) Renewal fee (as established by City Council); .............................................................................................. 339
3) Completed application; ................................................................................................................................. 339
4) Reference from one (1) financial institution; ................................................................................................. 339
5) Reference from two (2) suppliers; and .......................................................................................................... 339
6) Reference from three (3) customers regarding work performed within the last two (2) years. ..................... 339
(b) Renewal .............................................................................................................................................................. 339
(c) Suspension/Revocation ....................................................................................................................................... 340
1) The license of a person convicted two (2) times within a one-year (1) period of any violation of this section,
or other applicable laws and ordinances, may be suspended by the City Manager. ................................................. 340
2) If the City Manager decides to suspend a sign contractor’s license, the City Manager shall notify the licensee
of the suspension by first class mail to the licensee’s last address on record, or by hand delivery to the licensee.
Notice by mail will be deemed received three (3) days after posting. ..................................................................... 340
3) The licensee may appeal a suspension decision to the BOA by filing a written request within ten (10) days of
receiving notice of the suspension. Within 30 days of receiving an appeal, the BOA shall hold a hearing to
determine whether the suspension decision should be sustained or reversed. .......................................................... 340
4) If a licensee’s license has been suspended twice in a three (3)-year period, and the licensee then commits
another violation under this section or other laws and ordinances applicable hereto, the City Manager shall notify
the BOA. The BOA shall then hold a hearing to consider cancellation of the license. ............................................ 340
5) Enforcement actions taken under this section are not exclusive and do not affect any other remedies for
violations of this section or other applicable laws and ordinances. .......................................................................... 340
(d) Appeal ................................................................................................................................................................ 340
(e) Electrical License ............................................................................................................................................... 340
(f) Electrical License Registration ........................................................................................................................... 340
1) Registration of Company – Each company providing electrical work shall register with the Building Official
and shall provide a copy of general liability insurance in the amount established by the TDLR for electrical
contractors. .............................................................................................................................................................. 340
2) Application – A written application to register a company providing electrical work, along with the
established filing fee, shall be submitted to the Building Official on a form prescribed by the City. ...................... 341
3) Renewal – All registered electrical companies shall renew their registrations annually. All renewal
applications shall be due March 1st of each year. ..................................................................................................... 341
X. VIOLATIONS 341
(1) Unlawful Acts .............................................................................................. 341
(2) Notice of Violation ...................................................................................... 341
SECTION 12 - LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITIES AND DRAINAGE ....................... 341
A. CLEARING AND GRADING 341
(1) No removal of trees, land clearing or grading shall occur without the required
approvals and permits. Clearing and grading activity shall be limited to the limits of
grading area identified on the approved grading plan. A clearing and grading
permit is required by the City and can be applied for once the final plat has been
recommended by the Commission and approved by the Council. ....................... 341
(2) All clearing and grading permits shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and
Public Works Department and approved by the City Manager. ........................... 341
(3) The following shall be exempt from the requirement for a clearing and
grading permit: ..................................................................................................... 341
(a) Grading and clearing in emergency situations involving immediate danger to life and property or substantial fire
hazards; ......................................................................................................................................................................... 341
(b) The removal of underbrush, dead trees or diseased or damaged trees which constitute a hazard to life and
property based upon field inspection verification; and ................................................................................................. 341
(c) Grading and clearing practices associated with normal agricultural crop operations, excluding timber cutting. 342
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 82
B. DRAINAGE 342
(1) Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to any capital
improvement project, application for subdivision plat, master development plan, or
building permit approval except as otherwise provided by this chapter. A
stormwater management plan shall be provided as set forth in SECTION 12C. .. 342
(2) Stormwater Management Program ............................................................ 342
(a) System Criteria ................................................................................................................................................... 342
1) All stormwater management facilities, or combination of facilities, shall be designed for ultimate
development. Drainage facilities for all enclosed pipe systems, streets, and rights-of-way shall be designed for the
one hundred-year (100-yr) storm frequency. Channels and creeks, culverts, small bridges, large bridges and
floodways between building lines shall also be designed for the 100-year (100-yr) storm frequency. A minimum of
one foot of freeboard shall be used when the structure is designed to pass a design storm frequency of 100 years
calculated by the City’s criteria. Detention facilities and streets are exceptions to the frequency criteria cited above.
Detention facility outflows will be designed for five-year (5-yr), twenty five-year (25-yr) and one hundred-year
(100-yr) frequency storms. ...................................................................................................................................... 342
2) Three (3) development conditions shall be analyzed for each development: ................................................ 342
a) Existing Conditions. This refers to current development conditions in the watershed and on-site. Use as
the baseline analysis for determining the impact of development. ..................................................................... 342
b) Proposed Conditions. This refers to existing conditions with the proposed development added. Use to
determine if the increased runoff from the proposed development results in an adverse impact to other properties.
342
c) Ultimate Conditions. This refers to ultimate development conditions within the watershed used to design
the drainage facilities. This condition may be used in lieu of subparagraph b), above, to determine if the
increased runoff from the ultimate watershed development results in an adverse impact to other properties. ... 342
3) Responsibility to Accept Stormwater. The owner or developer of property to be developed shall be
responsible for the conveyance of all stormwater flowing through the property. This responsibility includes the
stormwater flowing onto the property by any other developed property as well as the drainage naturally flowing
through the property by reason of topography. Future upstream development shall be accounted for by assuming
ultimate development when sizing drainage systems as specified in this section. ................................................... 342
4) Positive Overflow Pathways. Stormwater management facilities for local drainage systems will be designed
to ensure that a positive overflow pathway is provided to the nearest one hundred-year (100-yr) conveyance facility.
Positive overflow is based on a 100% failure of an enclosed storm system. Downstream structures or proposed lot
pads should not be flooded in this event. ................................................................................................................. 343
a) Maintenance of publicly owned facilities will be the responsibility of the City. Maintenance of private
facilities is the responsibility of the property owner or the community association and must be specified in the
maintenance schedule submitted to the City. A maintenance schedule for both publicly owned and privately
owned facilities must be approved by the City Engineer prior to the approval of construction drawings. ......... 343
b) Authorized personnel from the City shall conduct periodic inspections of these facilities and structures.
Any required repairs will be consistent with current construction standards. Maintenance issues identified by the
City or state during inspections shall be the responsibility of the current owner. ............................................... 343
5) New Development. Peak stormwater runoff rates from all new development shall be less than or equal to the
peak runoff rates from the site's predevelopment conditions for the five-year (5-yr), twenty five-year (25-yr) and one
hundred-year (100-yr) design storm events, except as provided in this SECTION 12B. ......................................... 343
6) Redevelopment. Peak stormwater runoff rates from an area of redevelopment due to zoning or replatting shall
be less than or equal to the peak runoff rates produced by existing development conditions for the five-year (5-yr),
twenty five-year (25-yr) and one hundred-year (100-yr) design storm events, except as provided in this SECTION
12B. 343
(3) Method of Computing Runoff ...................................................................... 343
(a) Calculation Methods ........................................................................................................................................... 343
1) For drainage areas less than six hundred forty (640) acres, the basis for computing runoff shall be the rational
formula or some other method provided it is acceptable to the City Engineer. Hydraulic calculations shall be
performed by using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers HEC-2 "Water Surface Profiles" or HEC-RAS "River
Analysis System" computer models. Normal depth channel calculations are permissible for constructed open
channels with a uniform geometric cross section where 1) there is no potential for the water surface elevations to be
controlled by backwater, and 2) the channel is not in a FEMA floodplain. ............................................................. 343
2) For drainage areas six hundred forty (640) acres or greater, the basis for computing runoff shall be a unit
hydrograph method, preferably the Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Dimensionless Unitgraph method as contained
in the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Hydrologic Engineering Center HEC-1 "Flood Hydrograph Package," which
document shall be maintained on file with the City Manager and is incorporated herein by reference for all
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 83
purposes. For the SCS method, antecedent moisture condition II shall be used in the runoff model. Design rainfall
values listed in Table 12-4 shall be used for hydrograph calculations. .................................................................... 344
3) Open channel hydraulic calculations shall be performed by using the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers HEC-2
"Water Surface Profiles" or HEC-RAS "River Analysis System" computer models, as they may be amended, which
documents shall be maintained on file with the City Manager and are incorporated herein by reference for all
purposes. .................................................................................................................................................................. 344
4) Certain watersheds have hydrologic and hydraulic models that are available through and maintained by the
City. Developments proposed within the limits of these watersheds must have the models updated by the consultant
to reflect changes in flow, channel configuration (including alterations to vegetation) and channel structures. The
consultants' models must use the same computer program that was used in the existing model, e.g., HEC-RAS
models will not be accepted where the original model used HEC-2. The updated models shall be submitted to the
City Engineer for incorporation into the master models. The City will periodically update the master models to
reflect current watershed development conditions. The updated models will be made available for use and
distribution as the latest existing condition models for the watershed. .................................................................... 344
(b) Time of Concentration ........................................................................................................................................ 344
Overland (sheet) flow, shallow concentrated flow and channel flows are components that need to be considered in
the calculation of time of concentration. The following methods are recommended for time of concentration
calculation: .............................................................................................................................................................. 344
1) Overland flow - flow over plane surfaces: Maximum allowable time is twenty (20) minutes, minimum is five
(5) minutes. The overland flow time chart from "Design" by Elwyn E. Seelye may be used to calculate overland
flow times. Note that the minimum time has been reduced to five (5) minutes. ..................................................... 344
2) Shallow concentrated flow - overland flow usually becomes shallow concentrated flow after a maximum of
three hundred (300) feet: Use Manning's Roughness Coefficient equation (“Manning’s equation”) to estimate travel
time for defined swales, bar ditches and street sections, etc. Figure 3-1 from TR-55 "Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds," SCS 1986, may be used where a geometric section has not been defined. ........................................ 344
3) Channel flow: Use existing computer models where available or Manning's equation if data is not available.
Non-floodplain channel velocities for ultimate watershed development should not be less than six (6) fps when
estimating time of concentration. ............................................................................................................................. 345
(c) Runoff Coefficients. Runoff coefficients (C value) for use in the rational formula shall not be less than the values
shown in Table 12-1 or Table 12-2, as appropriate. ...................................................................................................... 345
(d) Rainfall Intensity. Use Table 12.2 to determine rainfall intensity. ..................................................................... 345
(e) SCS Curve Numbers. The hydrologic soil groups are listed in the latest version of the United States Natural
Resources Conservation Service [formerly the Soil Conservation Service], "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,"
Technical Release No. 55 (TR 55), which document is incorporated herein by reference. Soil types may also be based
on a Geotechnical Engineering Report. SCS Curve 77 will be used unless evidence is presented to the contrary. ...... 345
(f) Percent Impervious Cover. The percent impervious cover for typical land use types in the City is presented in
Table 12-3. .................................................................................................................................................................... 346
(g) Design Rainfall. A twenty four-hour (24-hr) rainfall distribution shall be applied for runoff calculations. Rainfall
intensities as adopted for the City appear in Table 12-4 and should be used for HEC-1 input. The lag value for a
subarea shall be calculated as 0.6 times the time of concentration. ............................................................................... 346
(h) Routing of Runoff. Routing of the runoff hydrograph through the channel from one subarea calculation point to
the next in the HEC-1 shall be computed using one of the following methods: ............................................................ 346
1) Overbank/channel storage not significant: Use normal depth channel routing. ............................................. 346
2) Overbank/channel storage is significant: Use the Muskingum method where a hydraulic model is not
available. Use Modified Puls storage method where a hydraulic model is available to develop storage/out flow
relationship. ............................................................................................................................................................. 346
3) Kinematic wave method for channel reaches where inflow from overbank runoff or multiple point sources
(example: storm sewer outfalls) is significant and where hydrograph attenuation is insignificant. Channel routing
methodologies currently being applied in the existing HEC-1 model of the watershed shall not be replaced with a
different methodology without approval or direction from the City Engineer. ........................................................ 347
(i) Manning's Roughness Coefficient. Manning's roughness coefficients ("N" values) for use in routing methods or
in hydraulic calculations shall be consistent with the values listed in Table 12-5. ........................................................ 347
1) Earth channels--0.035.................................................................................................................................... 347
2) Concrete-lined channels--0.015 ..................................................................................................................... 347
3) Reinforced concrete pipe--0.013 ................................................................................................................... 347
4) Concrete box culverts--0.013 ........................................................................................................................ 347
5) Corrugated metal pipe: .................................................................................................................................. 347
a) Unpaved 1/2" corrugated--0.024 .............................................................................................................. 347
b) Unpaved one (1)-inch corrugated--0.027 ................................................................................................. 347
c) Any other "N" value shall be based on generally accepted engineering principles. ................................. 347
(4) Drainage Easements/Rights-of-Way .......................................................... 347
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 84
(a) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, natural channel or stream, there shall be
provided an easement or right-of-way conforming substantially to the limit of such watercourse, plus additional width
as outlined below. ......................................................................................................................................................... 348
(b) Easements for natural watercourses shall be the one hundred-year (100-yr) floodplain or the twenty five-year
(25-yr) plus freeboard, whichever is greater. In floodplain areas where ongoing maintenance is required or the
floodplain will be reserved for use by the public, the drainage easements shall be maintained by a public entity and the
property will be dedicated to the City as a multi-use drainage easement. A drivable access way shall be provided in
floodplain easements for the length of the easement when regular maintenance of the floodplain is required. Diversion
of stormwater away from the natural watercourse will not be allowed except within the boundaries of the property
controlled by the developer, provided that the diverted water is returned to the watercourse within which it would
naturally have been flowing prior to leaving the developer's property. An analysis of the timing of the diverted
hydrograph on watersheds greater than twenty (20) acres, as it reenters the receiving watercourse, must be performed to
show that the peak flow rate in the receiving watercourse has not been increased as a result of the diversion. ............ 348
(c) An unobstructed access right-of-way connecting the drainage easement with an alley or roadway parallel to or
near the easement shall be provided at a minimum spacing of one (1) access right-of-way at approximately one
thousand-foot (1,000’) intervals. The access right-of-way shall be a minimum of fifteen feet (15’) in width and shall be
maintained clear of obstructions that would limit maintenance vehicular access. If the flow line of the designed
channel incorporates grade control structures or vehicular bridges that would prevent maintenance equipment from
accessing that portion of the channel, additional access points may be required. Channel design, earthen or concrete,
shall have ramps in the side slopes near the access points that allow maintenance equipment to descend to the floor
level of the channel. The maximum allowable ramp slope for vehicular access is seven to one (7:1). Access points
adjacent to roadways or alleys shall be provided with a post and cable feature with padlock to prevent unauthorized use.
348
(d) In those cases where drainage easements cross lot and property lines, a statement shall be added to the plat that
no fencing or structures that will interfere with adequate drainage flow will be allowed on or across such lines. Fencing
may be allowed across drainage easements only in accordance with the following restrictions: .................................. 348
1) Bottom of fence shall be a minimum of the flow depth, plus freeboard above design flow line of channel or
drain. 348
2) A hinged gate will be placed across the entire width of the drainage easement. ........................................... 348
3) Fence posts located within the easement must be structurally designed to resist damage from the stormwater
flows and impact from debris. ................................................................................................................................. 349
4) A floodplain development permit shall be required to construct a fence within an easement that is within the
one hundred-year (100-yr) floodplain. ..................................................................................................................... 349
(e) Interceptor drains shall be constructed prior to the issuance of building permits on any lot that would be affected
by natural drainage being intercepted. .......................................................................................................................... 349
(f) All developments shall provide for adequate drainage outfall at the lower end of the site into an existing street,
alley, drainage, easement or right-of-way, or to the centerline of an existing natural drain. Where a proposed street,
storm sewer, or open channel does not discharge into a natural low or into an existing adequate drainage easement,
facilities and drainage easements of adequate width to contain the design discharge shall be constructed and dedicated
to the centerline of an existing natural low within the same watershed. However, where the natural low lies within the
developer's property, the developer will be required only to plat an easement to the centerline of the natural low,
provided that the easement is adequate to accommodate the facilities that will be built in conjunction with the future
development of that property. ....................................................................................................................................... 349
(5) Site Design and Grading ............................................................................ 349
(a) All land-disturbing or land-filling activities or soil storage shall be undertaken in a manner designed to minimize
surface runoff, erosion and sedimentation, and to safeguard life, limb, property and the public welfare in accordance
with the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“TPDES”) General Permit TXR150000, as amended, which
documents are incorporated herein by reference for all purposes. ................................................................................ 349
(b) Erosion and sedimentation controls, in accordance with the specifications established by the City Engineer in
compliance with the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”) permitting requirements for the
City, are required. ......................................................................................................................................................... 349
(c) Projects shall not be considered complete until restoration has been made in accordance with NPDES
requirements. ................................................................................................................................................................. 349
(d) Where possible, multiple uses of drainage facilities and open space shall be incorporated by the owner or
developer into a new subdivision. Alternative uses such as public recreation, horse/bike/hiking trails, walking paths,
nature preserves, wildlife habitat areas, etc., are encouraged subject to the approval of the City Manager. ................. 349
(e) A note must be placed on the plat for residential lots, which states that finished floor elevations must be a
minimum of eight inches (8”) above final adjacent grade. A grading plan shall be prepared and submitted to the City,
which indicates typical lot grading for all lots in the subdivision using typical FHA lot grading types (A, B and C). A
more detailed grading plan is also acceptable. .............................................................................................................. 349
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 85
(6) For projects with an increased impervious area of greater than 0.1 acres,
stormwater detention shall be required for all new developments or redevelopment
of individual parcels of property to mitigate peak flow rates to predevelopment or
existing development conditions as stated in this UDC........................................ 350
(a) The maximum allowable outflow rate from the detention facility must be restricted to the flow rate from the
undeveloped or existing development tract for the five-year (5-yr), twenty five-year (25-yr) and one hundred-year (100-
yr) frequency. Best management practices shall be used in the design of detention facilities in accordance with this
section. The timing of the hydrograph released from the detention facility must be checked against the timing of the
flow rate in the first open watercourse to prevent any increase in the peak flow rate in the receiving watercourse. For
detention basins constructed in-line on an existing watercourse, the creation of the basin shall not increase flood
elevations in the channel upstream of the new development boundaries. ..................................................................... 350
(b) On-site detention facilities must be privately owned and shall be maintained by the community association or
property owner. A maintenance schedule shall be submitted to the City and approved by the City Engineer prior to
approval of construction plans. The City will have the right to do periodic inspections of privately owned and
maintained detention facilities to ensure that the maintenance schedule is being implemented. Where a detention
facility accepts flows from public facilities such as City rights-of-way, the detention facility will be considered a
detention facility serving a public purpose and will be dedicated to the City upon completion, and a drainage easement
will be dedicated to provide for access to the facility. When a regional detention facility accepts flow from an area
exceeding three hundred (300) acres, the facility shall be considered serving a public purpose and shall be dedicated to
the City. ......................................................................................................................................................................... 350
(c) Multi-use facilities are encouraged, but not required (multi-use facilities allow for water quality, satisfy NPDES
requirements, enhance around water recharge, provide open space, provide recreation or other amenities, and/or
provide habitat) and may be utilized so long as each facility meets the standards set forth in subsection (a) of this
section and does not increase the rate or volume of erosion above that which would result from the use of a facility
without multiple uses. The use of multi-use detention facilities to alleviate existing flooding problems, enhance and
provide amenities for older neighborhoods, and support the revitalization of economically depressed areas is
encouraged in public and private redevelopment initiatives. ........................................................................................ 350
(d) Stormwater retention with permanent wet pool or pumped detention systems will not be acceptable methods of
stormwater mitigation unless the facility will remain privately owned, operated, and maintained. The City will approve
the use of a pumped facilit for private use under the following conditions: .................................................................. 350
1) A gravity system is not feasible from an engineering and economic standpoint; .......................................... 351
2) At least two (2) pumps are provided, each of which is sized to pump the design flow rate; ......................... 351
3) The selected design outflow rate does not aggravate downstream flooding; ................................................. 351
4) Controls and pumps are designed to prevent unauthorized operation and vandalism; and ............................ 351
5) Adequate assurance is provided so that the system will be operated and maintained on a continuous basis. 351
(e) Stormwater detention facilities shall be located in topographically depressed areas where possible. When
necessary, dams may be constructed to detain flows. All proposed dams shall conform to the following items: ......... 351
1) All dams over six feet (6’) above existing natural ground shall be approved for safety by the Dam Safety
Team of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (“TCEQ”), or its successor agency. All other new dams
shall be designed in accordance with acceptable design criteria as approved by the City Engineer. ....................... 351
2) All hydrology and hydraulic properties of a dam will be reviewed by the City Engineer with regard to
spillway design, freeboard hydraulics, backwater curves and downstream effects due to the dam site. .................. 351
3) The spillway section of any earthen dam with a height greater than six feet (6’) shall be large enough to pass
a probable maximum precipitation (“PMP”) flood, as defined by the National Resources Conservation Service
(“NRCS”), without overtopping the crest of the dam in accordance with TCEQ regulations. ................................. 351
4) A one hundred-year (100-yr) frequency flood shall be routed through the proposed dam and all land subject
to flooding shall be dedicated as drainage easement or right-of-way. An unobstructed fifteen-foot (15’) access
easement around the periphery of the flooded area shall be dedicated as drainage easement for facilities that require
regular mowing or other ongoing maintenance, at the discretion of the City Engineer. An unobstructed fifteen-foot
(15’) access right-of-way shall be established which connects the drainage easement adjacent to the dam structure to
a road or alley. ......................................................................................................................................................... 351
5) Development below existing dams will take into account the original design conditions of the existing dam.
Dam breach analysis checks will be required, dependent upon location of development with respect to dam site. 351
6) All spillway discharges shall be adequately routed to the centerline of the natural low below the dam site.
The adequate routing of spillway discharges pertains to the hydraulic routing of the one hundred-year (100-yr)
frequency flood for dedication of drainage easement limits. PMP on flood routing or breaches will only be
considered for safety considerations (that is, the placement of building and the setting of minimum floor slab
elevations below the dams). Any proposed concrete dam structure need not have spillway capable of routing a PMP
flood; however, it shall be shown to be structurally capable of withstanding any range of flood conditions with
regard to possible failure due to sliding, overturning, and structural integrity, up to and including the PMP flood. 352
(7) Streets ........................................................................................................ 352
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 86
(a) Generally ............................................................................................................................................................ 352
1) Design of streets shall consider public safety and limit potential conflicts between stormwater conveyance,
traffic, parking, pedestrian access, ADA requirements, and bicycle traffic. ............................................................ 352
2) Streets draining a watershed greater than one hundred (100) acres must be designed for the one hundred-year
(100-yr) frequency storm. ........................................................................................................................................ 352
3) Streets may be used for stormwater drainage only if the calculated stormwater flow does not exceed the flows
outlined in this UDC’s Table 3-7 or the velocity does not exceed ten feet (10’) per second. .................................. 352
4) Where streets are not capable of carrying stormwater, as outlined above, inlets or curb openings discharging
to drainage channels or storm sewers shall be provided. Partial flow past the inlet will be allowed when the capacity
of all downstream street systems can accommodate the flow. ................................................................................. 352
5) Street width shall not be widened beyond the width as determined by the street classification for drainage
purposes. .................................................................................................................................................................. 352
6) Stormwater conveyance on streets shall be designed to account for the cumulative impact of peak flows and
runoff volumes on the system as the stormwater progresses downgrade. ................................................................ 352
7) Curb cuts for driveways on all streets shall be designed for compatibility with the stormwater conveyance
function of streets. ................................................................................................................................................... 352
8) Potential flooding problems or conflicts at the connection points where new or modified drainage systems
(including streets, storm sewers, etc.) and the existing portions of the downstream street system and stormwater
conveyance system shall be identified and resolved either in the design of the new or modified drainage system or in
modifications to the existing system. ....................................................................................................................... 352
9) Dwelling units located on the downhill side of a T-intersection with a street or drainage channel discharging
onto the intersection shall be sited so as to avoid obstruction of the drainage patterns. ........................................... 353
(b) An arterial street is a street so designated on the current Thoroughfare Master Plan. One (1) lane in each
direction on arterial streets shall remain passable with a flow depth not to exceed 0.30 feet during a twenty five-year
(25-yr) storm event. The maximum depth of water in the street section must not exceed seven inches (7”) (the height of
a standard city curb). ..................................................................................................................................................... 353
(c) A maximum flow depth to the top of curb on a collector street section will be allowed during a one hundred-year
(100-yr) storm event. A collector street is a street with a width of forty two feet (42’) or more and not shown as an
arterial street on the current Thoroughfare Master Plan. ............................................................................................... 353
(d) Local streets shall be designed on a basis of a five-year (5-yr) frequency. A one hundred-year (100-yr) frequency
storm must be contained within the street right-of-way. ............................................................................................... 353
(e) Alleys shall be designed for five-year (5-yr) frequency within the limits of the alley pavement/curbs and twenty
five-year (25-yr) frequency within the right-of-way/easement to carry stormwater. .................................................... 353
(f) All-Weather Crossings ....................................................................................................................................... 353
1) Where streets cross existing or proposed watercourses, all weather crossings shall be required. Culverts or
bridges shall be adequate to allow passage of the design storm identified in SECTION 12B(2)(a). All crossings,
culverts and bridges shall be designed for an H-20-44 or HS-20 loading. ............................................................... 353
(8) This section addresses proposed improvements or modifications to drainage
channels and watercourses required to convey stormwater runoff from or through
the proposed development. Refer to SECTION 12B(2)(a) for storm frequency
design criteria. ..................................................................................................... 353
(a) Except as authorized by a development plan approved by the City Engineer, no person shall place or cause to be
placed any obstruction of any kind in any watercourse within the City and its ETJ. The owner of any property within
the City, through which any watercourse may pass, shall keep the watercourse free from any obstruction not authorized
by a development plan. ................................................................................................................................................. 353
(b) Channel Modifications ....................................................................................................................................... 353
1) Modifications to existing watercourses or newly created open channels may be designed as earth channels,
sod channels or as concrete-lined channels. Liners other than sod or concrete which enhance the aesthetics or habitat
value of the watercourse and which reduce future maintenance requirements are encouraged. Preliminary planning
for the applicability of other channel liners shall be reviewed with the City Engineer prior to the submittal of
construction plans for approval. ............................................................................................................................... 353
2) Runoff that results from upstream development and is discharged to an unimproved waterway can cause
flood damage to properties adjacent to the waterway. Natural undeveloped waterways do not receive regular
maintenance. Design of natural waterways shall take into consideration fluvial geomorphologic principals and
practices. Consulting engineers and development review officials shall work to resolve potential downstream
impact issues. ........................................................................................................................................................... 354
(c) Design of new channels or alterations to existing channels shall consider future maintenance requirements. A
maintenance schedule for any private channel shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer prior to
approval of construction plans. Maintenance requirements of concrete channels consist of de-silting activities,
prevention of vegetation establishment in construction joints, and repair of concrete as necessary. Maintenance of
earthen channels includes regular observation and repair, as necessary, of erosion, scouring, and removal of silt
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 87
deposits, as necessary to maintain design parameters. Developers shall be responsible for maintaining newly planted
channels until coverage is established throughout eighty-five percent (85%) of the area. This area shall include slopes,
floor, and any attendant maintenance easement. New earthen channels shall be planted with drought-resistant, lowgrowth,
native species grasses, which will allow unobstructed passage of floodwaters. Johnson grass, giant tagweed
and other invasive species shall not be allowed to promulgate in channels. Suggested species include, but shall not be
limited to, common Bermuda, coastal Bermuda, buffalo grass, sideoats grama, Seep Muhly, little bluestem, and Indian
grass. Mowing frequencies vary with the vegetation growth rates, but is required when the grass exceeds the design
roughness coefficient of the channel. ............................................................................................................................ 354
(d) Planned multiple-use of a watercourse, e.g., bike paths or a greenbelt, is allowed. If multiple use of the
watercourse is to be incorporated, the applicant shall form a property owners' association that shall assume maintenance
responsibility for private amenities. The applicant shall provide overlay easements for public or private use. ............ 354
(e) Table 12-6 shall be used to determine maximum permissible channel velocity. ................................................ 354
1) Where velocities are in the supercritical range, allowance shall be made in the design for the proper handling
of the water. ............................................................................................................................................................. 355
2) Ensure that the channel will contain the hydraulic jump (sequent depth) throughout the extent of the
supercritical profile. An exception to this criterion is where concrete-lined lateral channels discharge down the side
slopes of channels. These channels may be designed for normal depth plus freeboard provided velocity controls are
established at the main channel flow line. ............................................................................................................... 355
3) Ensure that the energy grade of the channel will not result in upstream flooding at existing or proposed lateral
facility connections. ................................................................................................................................................. 355
(f) Retard spacing shall be computed as follows when using the following equations: ........................................... 355
(g) Vegetated Earthen Channels ............................................................................................................................... 355
1) The side slope shall not be steeper than three (3) horizontal to one (1) vertical. ........................................... 355
2) Easements or rights-of-way for improved earthen channels shall conform to the requirements stated in this
UDC and shall extend a minimum of two feet (2’) on one (1) side and fifteen feet (15’) for an access road on the
opposite side of the extreme limits of the channels when such channels do not parallel and adjoin an alley or
roadway. When such channels do parallel and adjoin an alley or roadway, the easement or right-of-way shall extend
a minimum of two feet (2’) on both sides of the extreme limits of the channel. Where utilities are installed in the
access road of the drainage right-of-way, the right-of-way shall extend two feet (2’) on one (1) side and seventeen
feet (17’) on the opposite side of the design limits of the channel. These seventeen feet (17’) are to provide an
access way along the channel with a maximum cross slope of one inch (1”) per foot toward the channel. Where
designed channel bottoms exceed one hundred feet (100’) in width, the fifteen-foot (15’) extra width shall be
provided on both sides of the channel. ..................................................................................................................... 355
3) Interceptor drainage easements shall extend a minimum of two feet (2’) on both sides of the extreme limits of
the channel. Improved earthen channels will be vegetated by seeding or sodding. Eighty-five percent (85%) of the
channel surface area must have established vegetation before the City will accept the channel for maintenance. .. 356
(h) Freeboard. Allowance for extra freeboard shall be made when the centerline radius of the channel is less than
three (3) times the bottom width. Where sharp bends or high velocities are involved, the applicant shall use the
following formula for computing the extra freeboard: .................................................................................................. 356
1) The quantity d2 - d1 divided by two (2) shall be added to the normal depth of flow before adding the required
freeboard in calculating required right-of-way widths. ............................................................................................ 356
2) Where sharp turns are used without curved sections, the depth required shall be large enough to provide for
all head losses. Allowance shall be made for any backwater head that may result. ................................................. 356
3) For normal design conditions no extra freeboard is required. An accepted rule of thumb to follow is this: The
centerline radius of channel should be at least three (3) times the bottom width. .................................................... 356
(9) Storm Sewers ............................................................................................. 357
(a) For all ordinary conditions, storm sewers shall be designed on the assumption that they will flow full under the
design discharge; however, whenever the system is placed under a pressure head, or there are constrictions, turns,
submerged or inadequate outfall, etc., the hydraulic and energy grade lines shall be computed and plotted in profile. In
all cases adequate outfalls shall be provided and the system adequately designed. ...................................................... 357
(b) No storm sewers shall be less than 18 inches in diameter. ................................................................................. 357
(c) Minimum easement widths for storm sewers will be the greater of fifteen feet (15’) or six feet (6’) on both sides
of the extreme limits of the storm sewer width (e.g., the easement width for a three (3)-barrel, ten-foot wide box culvert
with six inch (6”) walls would be (3 x 10')+(4 x 0.5')+(2 x 6') = 44'). .......................................................................... 357
(10) Inlets and Openings ................................................................................ 357
(a) Drop Curb Openings - Sidewalk Does Not Abut Opening. Where drop curb openings are used to take stormwater
off the streets and into drains, the length of the curb opening can be calculated from the weir formula using the
coefficient of 3.087 in the weir formula: ....................................................................................................................... 357
(b) Curb or Drop Inlets. Where drop inlets are used, the City standard inlets with adequate reinforcing steel may be
used. All other types or designs shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. The following formulas for inlet
capacity are based on drop inlets in sag points. Inlet capacities on grades will be considered less, the amount of which
depends on street grades, deflections, cross slopes, depressions, etc. ........................................................................... 357
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 88
(c) Grate Inlets. The flow of water through grate openings may be treated as the flow of water through a rectangular
orifice. The following formula may be used for determining grate capacity: .............................................................. 357
(d) Curb Opening Inlets. The capacity of curb opening inlets will depend on whether the opening is running partially
full or submerged. If the depth of flow at the curb opening inlet is such as to cause a partially full opening, a weir
effect will develop and the following formula will apply: ............................................................................................ 358
C. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN 358
(1) Procedure ................................................................................................... 358
(a) Number of Copies. The applicant shall provide two (2) blue-line or black-line copies of the plat together with
two (2) copies of construction drawings. ...................................................................................................................... 358
(b) Format. Plats shall be drawn in India ink on Mylar on sheets eighteen inches (18”) wide and twenty-four inches
(24”) long, with a margin of two and one-half inches (2½”) on the left side of the sheet, and appropriate margins on the
other three (3) sides. Plats shall be drawn at a scale of one hundred feet (100’) to one inch (1”) unless a smaller scale is
approved by the City Manager. Plats which include one-half (½) acre or less in area shall be drawn at a scale of fifty
feet (50’) to one inch (1”). Where more than one (1) sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area to be
subdivided, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate scale shall be attached to the plat. .......... 358
(c) Contents. To standardize the review process and minimize the time for approval by the City during review of
the plat and construction drawings for a subdivision, a complete submittal regarding the analysis of existing drainage
conditions and the design of modifications or new drainage facilities is necessary. The owner of the property to be
developed is required by the City Manager to provide, at the owner’s expense and as a condition of construction plan
approval, a stormwater management report for the total development area to be ultimately constructed. The stormwater
management report shall contain all of the necessary support data, methodologies used in calculations, and conclusions.
A checklist is below that will be used by the City reviewer as a guide during the evaluation of all stormwater
management reports submitted to the City. The purpose of the checklist is to expedite the review process for both the
engineer and the City, and to aid the engineer in the preparation of reports for the City's review. The stormwater
management report shall be submitted to the City Engineer prior to approval of any construction plans. .................... 358
(d) Report. The stormwater management plan shall include two (2) copies of a written report that includes the
following information, as applicable: ............................................................................................................................ 359
1) A vicinity map of the site and affected reach of the outfall channel; ............................................................ 359
2) A detailed map of the area and the outfall channel with all pertinent physiographic information; ................ 359
3) A watershed map showing the existing and proposed drainage area boundary along with all sub area
delineations and all areas of existing and proposed development; ........................................................................... 359
4) Discharge calculations specifying methodology and key assumptions used including a table of discharges at
key locations; ........................................................................................................................................................... 359
5) Hydraulic calculations specifying methodology used, assumptions and values of the design parameters; ... 359
6) Profiles of the affected channels, including water surface elevations for the specified design frequencies, all
existing and proposed bridge, culvert and pipeline crossings, the location of all tributary and drainage confluences,
and the location of all hydraulic structures; ............................................................................................................. 359
7) Detention basin design calculations, including those used for design of the control structure; ..................... 359
8) Right-of-way and easement requirements, and a map showing locations of all rights-of-way and easements;
359
9) A soils report which addresses erosion and slope stability of new or altered channels and detention facilities;
359
10) A computer diskette of all existing and proposed condition HEC-1 and HEC-2 models used in analysis; and
359
11) A checklist for the submittal package is included as paragraph (2) below. A checklist for the preparation of a
HEC-2 model is included as paragraph (3) below. .................................................................................................. 359
(2) Subdivision Drainage Checklist .................................................................. 359
(a) ________U.S.G.S. Quadrangle map showing overall drainage areas, runoff coefficients, time of concentration,
intensity and Qs............................................................................................................................................................. 360
(b) ________Subdivision master drainage plan with overall interior drainage area of subdivision showing drainage
area, time of concentration, runoff coefficients, intensities, and Qs for the street and alley flows and also channel and
underground system design. .......................................................................................................................................... 360
(c) ________Subdivision plat showing interior drainage areas, time of concentration, runoff coefficients, and
intensities, Qs for street and alley flows and also channel and underground system design. ........................................ 360
(d) Drainage Calculations Required For: ................................................................................................................. 360
1) ________Open channel design ..................................................................................................................... 360
2) ________Underground systems .................................................................................................................... 360
3) ________Box culverts................................................................................................................................... 360
4) ________Pipe culverts .................................................................................................................................. 360
5) ________Hydraulic jump .............................................................................................................................. 360
6) ________Super elevation in channel bends .................................................................................................. 360
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 89
7) ________Retard spacing ............................................................................................................................... 360
8) ________Backwater curves with cross sections ............................................................................................ 360
9) ________Draw down curves with cross sections .......................................................................................... 360
10) ________Energy dissipaters.......................................................................................................................... 360
11) ________Hydraulic grade lines of pipes ....................................................................................................... 360
12) ________(1) Inlets on grades ________(2) Inlets in sump .......................................................................... 360
13) ________Drop curb openings ....................................................................................................................... 360
14) ________Sidewalk culverts .......................................................................................................................... 360
15) ________AR2/3 calculations with cross sections ........................................................................................... 360
16) ________Weir formulas structures ............................................................................................................... 360
17) ________Orifice formulas ............................................................................................................................ 360
18) ________Grade to drain channels ................................................................................................................. 360
19) ________Upstream pickup and flared section .............................................................................................. 360
20) ________Downstream backwater control and flare to match downstream condition ................................... 360
21) ________Show required freeboard ............................................................................................................... 360
22) ________Improper "N" value ....................................................................................................................... 360
23) ________Improper velocity used .................................................................................................................. 360
24) ________Improper easement width .............................................................................................................. 360
25) ________Show access road on each sodded channel .................................................................................... 360
26) ________Improper runoff coefficient used ................................................................................................... 361
27) ________Improper time of concentration used ............................................................................................. 361
28) ________Improper Qs used .......................................................................................................................... 361
29) ________Steel calculations for box culvert .................................................................................................. 361
(e) ________Subdivision plat showing all interior drainage easements, outfall drainage easements, U.S.G.S. contour
map and all other necessary drainage information ........................................................................................................ 361
1) ________Show outfall drainage easements to the centerline of existing natural low ................................... 361
2) ________Show finished fill contours ............................................................................................................ 361
3) ________Show interceptor drainage easements ............................................................................................ 361
(f) ________Typical Details Required on Plans for: ............................................................................................... 361
1) ________Box culvert with headwalls or wing walls ..................................................................................... 361
2) ________Pipe culverts with headwalls or wing walls ................................................................................... 361
3) ________Culvert headwalls shown with proper safety measures ................................................................. 361
4) ________Drop curb openings ....................................................................................................................... 361
5) ________(1) Inlets on grade ________(2) Inlets on sump ........................................................................... 361
6) ________Drop structures .............................................................................................................................. 361
7) ________Retards........................................................................................................................................... 361
8) ________Sidewalks over drains .................................................................................................................... 361
9) ________Guard post installations ................................................................................................................. 361
10) ________Guard rail on structures ................................................................................................................. 361
11) ________Header curb ................................................................................................................................... 361
12) ________Energy dissipaters.......................................................................................................................... 361
13) ________Junction boxes ............................................................................................................................... 361
14) ________Concrete lined channels with freeboard......................................................................................... 361
15) ________Earth sodded channels with freeboard ........................................................................................... 361
16) ________Other concrete structures: .............................................................................................................. 361
17) ________ Grade to drain sections ................................................................................................................. 361
18) ________Transition sections ......................................................................................................................... 361
19) ________Fencing for vertical wall channels greater than 2' deep ................................................................. 361
20) ________Other: _________ .......................................................................................................................... 361
21) ________Side slope ...................................................................................................................................... 361
22) ________Note: Adjacent lots shall be graded to provide access and drainage to adjacent street and drainage
systems. ................................................................................................................................................................... 361
(g) ________Complete Street Plans and Profiles ..................................................................................................... 362
(h) ________Complete Drainage Plan and Profile Including the Following Requirements: ................................... 362
1) ________Proposed flowline slopes with grades and elevations shown every 50' in profile .......................... 362
2) ________Proposed top of channel profile ..................................................................................................... 362
3) ________Existing ground right and left profile at property line ................................................................... 362
4) ________Finished fill profiles ...................................................................................................................... 362
5) ________Locations and size of culverts ....................................................................................................... 362
6) ________Drop structures .............................................................................................................................. 362
7) ________Retards........................................................................................................................................... 362
8) ________Grade to drain profiles ................................................................................................................... 362
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 90
9) ________Flowline elevations at every 50' station and at each structure and change in grade ....................... 362
10) ________Junction boxes ............................................................................................................................... 362
11) ________Channel plan views ....................................................................................................................... 362
12) ________Channel sections ............................................................................................................................ 362
13) ________Pipes with hydraulic grade lines on profile ................................................................................... 362
14) ________Cross sections of existing natural channels or lows which are not to be improved, but left in natural
state and dedicated to high water calculated ............................................................................................................ 362
15) ________Angles, bearings, distances, etc., for structures, channels, etc. ...................................................... 362
16) ________Lot grading layout drains ............................................................................................................... 362
17) ________Culvert structural details ................................................................................................................ 362
(i) ________Unit and Storm Hydrographs For Major Streams (Over 2,000 acres) ................................................. 362
(j) ________Drainage Easements to the Centerline of Natural Low ....................................................................... 362
(k) ________Cost Estimate ...................................................................................................................................... 362
(l) ________Engineer’s Seal ................................................................................................................................... 362
(m) ________Other .............................................................................................................................................. 362
(3) HEC-2 Submittal Checklist ......................................................................... 362
(a) Submission Package ........................................................................................................................................... 363
1) _________ Signed, sealed, and dated by an engineer certified to practice in the State of Texas .................. 363
2) _________ Signed checklist .......................................................................................................................... 363
3) _________ 3 1/2" diskette with all input files ............................................................................................... 363
4) _________ Copy of condensed printouts ...................................................................................................... 363
(b) Narrative ............................................................................................................................................................. 363
1) _________ Table of Contents ....................................................................................................................... 363
2) _________ Abstract or executive summary .................................................................................................. 363
3) _________ Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 363
4) _________ Project description and history ................................................................................................... 363
5) _________ Location ...................................................................................................................................... 363
6) _________ Scope and objective of analysis .................................................................................................. 363
7) _________ Previous and related studies that may affect this analysis .......................................................... 363
8) _________ Methodology .............................................................................................................................. 363
9) _________ Sources of discharges ................................................................................................................. 363
10) _________ Bridge routines ........................................................................................................................... 363
11) _________ Base or effective models (mention source) ................................................................................. 363
12) _________ Revised-base model .................................................................................................................... 363
13) _________ Proposed model .......................................................................................................................... 363
14) _________ Summary, conclusions, and recommendations ........................................................................... 363
15) _________ Water surface elevation impacts ................................................................................................. 363
(c) Tables ................................................................................................................................................................. 363
1) _________ Water surface comparison table at each cross section ................................................................ 363
2) _________ Floodway table ........................................................................................................................... 363
3) _________ Cross section numbering table (if stationing changes) ............................................................... 363
4) _________ Exhibits ...................................................................................................................................... 363
5) _________ Vicinity map ............................................................................................................................... 363
6) _________ Plan view of project reach .......................................................................................................... 363
7) _________ Water surface profiles for design storm ...................................................................................... 363
8) _________ Channel cross sections showing limits of drainage easements and property lines ...................... 363
9) _________ Bridge cross sections .................................................................................................................. 363
10) _________ Plan view of bridge ..................................................................................................................... 364
11) _________ Photographs (if available) ........................................................................................................... 364
(d) Appendices ......................................................................................................................................................... 364
1) _________ Pertinent correspondence (meeting notes, etc.) .......................................................................... 364
2) _________ Survey and/or certified "as-built" information for all revisions to base model ........................... 364
3) _________ Sample calculations .................................................................................................................... 364
(e) Name of submitter_________ Date_________ .................................................................................................. 364
(4) P.E. Registration Number ........................................................................... 365
SECTION 13 - TRANSPORTATION ....................................................................... 365
A. STREETS 365
(1) Street Layout .............................................................................................. 365
(2) Relation to Adjoining Streets ...................................................................... 365
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 91
(3) Projection of Streets ................................................................................... 365
(4) Private Streets ............................................................................................ 366
(a) Private streets within the City may be authorized providing all of the following conditions are met: ................ 366
1) A HOA is established to maintain and upkeep all streets in a subdivision in accordance with the City's public
street standards, to include the mowing of shoulders and rights-of-way, removal of weeds and unclogging of
culverts. ................................................................................................................................................................... 366
2) Private streets are constructed in accordance with the City's standards for public streets. ............................ 366
3) The following "maintenance agreement" note shall appear on the subdivision plat: ..................................... 366
“Streets within this subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with the City of Crandall public streets standards.
The upkeep and maintenance, including the mowing of shoulders and rights-of-way, removal of weeds and
unclogging of culverts, shall be the responsibility of the homeowners association. The City of Crandall is released
from any liability for these streets. Periodic inspection by a public official who is authorized to enforce complaints
about poor maintenance is permitted.” .................................................................................................................... 366
(b) Private streets within the City shall provide access for fire protection, ambulance, police, school bus, garbage
service and other utility agencies. ................................................................................................................................. 366
(c) One Residence .................................................................................................................................................... 366
(d) Ingress/Egress ..................................................................................................................................................... 366
(5) Dead-End Streets and Cul-de-Sacs ........................................................... 366
(a) Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as short stubs projected to be continued in future subdivisions in
conformance with this section when designed as cul-de-sacs. Temporary turnarounds shall be provided on projected
streets until such time as they are extended. .................................................................................................................. 366
(b) Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed six hundred feet (600’) in length, measured from the centerline of the
intersecting street to the center of the cul-de-sac, and shall have a turnaround with a minimum 50-foot radius. This
provision may be modified upon approval of the Fire Chief and City Engineer. .......................................................... 366
(6) Alignment ................................................................................................... 366
(7) Intersections ............................................................................................... 367
(8) Street Names and Street Numbers ............................................................ 367
(9) Construction Standards .............................................................................. 367
(10) Reserve Areas are Prohibited ................................................................. 367
(11) Half Streets or Adjacent Streets .............................................................. 367
(a) No new half streets shall be platted that do not conform to the Thoroughfare Plan and the Comprehensive Plan.
Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon an existing street or half street not conforming to the Comprehensive Plan
requirements or the requirements of this UDC, the developer shall be required to dedicate any additional right-of-way
to meet the street width required. .................................................................................................................................. 367
(b) If new development of property that abuts City-maintained roads does not meet the design or width standards in
this UDC, the Developer shall be required to make the necessary dedication and improvements in conformance with
this UDC or any other applicable code of the City. ....................................................................................................... 367
(c) The minimum dedication and construction costs shall be equal to one-half (½) of the minimum ROW and
construction costs associated with the proposed street. ................................................................................................. 367
(d) Improvements shall include right-of-way dedication, paving, curb and guttering, shoulder improvements and
sidewalk as determined by the City. .............................................................................................................................. 368
(e) Should any pavement be laid to widen existing pavement, the existing pavement shall be saw-cut back a
minimum of two feet (2’) to assure an adequate sub-base and pavement joint. ............................................................ 368
(12) Public Accesses ...................................................................................... 368
(13) Safety Lanes (Fire Lanes) ....................................................................... 368
(a) Manufactured home parks, recreational vehicle parks, apartments, multi-family residences, malls, and
commercial and business areas shall have driving surfaces within the site designated and clearly identified as safety
lanes or fire lanes for fire protection, emergency medical services (“EMS”), etc. These areas must be paved with
concrete and be maintained by the owners. Exits from these sites shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30’) in width and
must exit onto a dedicated street. The pavement width for interior safety lanes shall be a minimum of twenty-four feet
(24’). Additional width will be required when adequate off-street parking is not provided. ........................................ 368
(b) All roadways that serve emergency vehicles are required to have a minimum clearance of fourteen feet (14’) to
any overhead obstructions including, but not limited to, bridges, trees, canopies, awnings and signs. ......................... 368
(14) Access to Principal and Secondary Arterial Streets ................................ 368
(15) Street and Traffic Control Signs .............................................................. 368
(a) All street signs in a new subdivision within the City limits, including street name, speed limit, stop and yield
signs, etc., shall be paid for by the developer, and shall be provided and installed by the City in accordance with this
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 92
UDC. Traffic control devices required within the subdivision shall be installed in accordance with the latest revision of
the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for streets and highways (“MUTCD”). .................................. 368
(b) Any installation of speed control devices, such as speed bumps or humps, must also be approved by the fire
department to determine potential impact to emergency response vehicles. ................................................................. 368
(c) A required traffic control device must be fitted with traffic preemption-compatible devices for activation by
emergency vehicles. ...................................................................................................................................................... 369
(16) Street Improvements............................................................................... 369
(a) All street improvements shall meet the current requirements of the Comprehensive Plan and this section, but in
no case shall they be less than the following: ................................................................................................................ 369
(b) Islands in Roadways ........................................................................................................................................... 369
(17) Drainage ................................................................................................. 369
(18) Curb and Gutter ...................................................................................... 370
(19) Street Lights ............................................................................................ 370
(a) Developers shall furnish satisfactory easements for installation of services to street lights as required by the City
and any applicable electric utility provider. .................................................................................................................. 370
(b) Street light number, type and size shall be determined by the City and any applicable electric utility provider and
shall be designed to maximize the light directed toward the ground. ............................................................................ 370
(c) The developer shall pay the cost of purchasing and installing all street lighting equipment and the cost of all
street lighting services for a period of two (2) years or until such time as seventy percent (70%) of the buildings for
which building permits have been issued are completed, whichever is sooner. ............................................................ 370
(d) A detailed lighting plan shall be submitted with the public infrastructure improvement plans for review and
approval by the City and any applicable electric utility provider. ................................................................................. 370
(20) Street Markers (Signs) ............................................................................ 370
(a) The material of the street name signs, the method of attaching the sign to the post, the details of lettering,
painting, and method of installation, as well as the location of the sign at the intersection shall be in accordance with
this UDC. ...................................................................................................................................................................... 370
(b) The street name signs shall be of the cross-arm type, and shall be reflectorized on extruded aluminum metal
blanks. ........................................................................................................................................................................... 370
(c) Street markers are to be provided by the developer. ........................................................................................... 370
B. CRITERIA AND DESIGN 370
C. ADDITIONAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 370
(1) Purpose and Applicability ........................................................................... 370
(a) The purpose of this section is to establish additional development standards applicable to certain streets within
the City, thereby ensuring uniform and quality development that results in an attractive environment compatible with
businesses and residential dwellings, which do the following: ..................................................................................... 371
1) Provide an environment and living conditions favorable to the public; ........................................................ 371
2) Provide a creative approach to land use and related physical development; ................................................. 371
3) Create a pattern of development which preserves trees and outstanding natural topography and prevents soil
erosion and pollution; .............................................................................................................................................. 371
4) Encourage mixed use development through innovative uses of modern development concepts; and ........... 371
5) Produce open space and recreation areas. ..................................................................................................... 371
(b) The requirements of this section shall be applicable to all roadways classified as Principal Arterials or Secondary
Arterials in accordance with SECTION 13A. ............................................................................................................... 371
(2) Permitted Uses ........................................................................................... 371
(3) Landscape Buffer ....................................................................................... 371
(4) Off-Street Parking ....................................................................................... 371
(5) Building Setback Line ................................................................................. 371
(6) Driveways and Access (Connectivity) ........................................................ 372
(7) Screening ................................................................................................... 372
D. ALLEYS 372
(1) Commercial and Industrial Districts ............................................................ 372
(2) Patio Home (PH) Zoning Districts ............................................................... 372
(3) Intersections and Turns .............................................................................. 372
(4) Dead-End Alleys ......................................................................................... 372
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 93
(5) Construction ............................................................................................... 372
(6) Limitations .................................................................................................. 373
(7) Drainage ..................................................................................................... 373
E. DRIVEWAYS 373
F. SIDEWALKS AND HIKE AND BIKE TRAILS 373
(1) Sidewalks ................................................................................................... 373
(2) Curb Ramps ............................................................................................... 373
(3) Location and Width ..................................................................................... 373
(4) Timing of Construction................................................................................ 373
(5) Construction Concurrent with Street Construction ...................................... 373
(6) Corner Lot .................................................................................................. 373
(7) Waiver or Deferment of Sidewalk Installation ............................................. 374
(8) Hike and Bike Trails ................................................................................... 374
G. TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 374
(1) Application Requirements ........................................................................... 374
(2) TIA Required .............................................................................................. 374
(3) TIA Scope ................................................................................................... 375
(4) TIA Study Area ........................................................................................... 375
(5) TIA Contents .............................................................................................. 375
(a) The TIA shall conform to accepted industry standards and shall include a detailed description of the area street
network, a description of proposed land uses, the anticipated stages of construction, the anticipated completion date of
the various phases of land development, and the trigger points requiring implementation of necessary improvements.
The City Engineer may require any additional information necessary to ensure adequate review. The TIA shall contain,
at a minimum, the following information: .................................................................................................................... 375
1) Trip generation rates for both the A.M. and P.M. peak periods using the Institute of Transportation Engineers,
Trip Generation Manual for all of the land uses specified; ...................................................................................... 375
2) Trip distribution; ........................................................................................................................................... 375
3) Adequacy determination for existing and proposed street cross-sections by phase of development; ............ 375
4) Intersection level of service analysis for each phase of development, driveway sizes, locations, and adequacy;
375
5) Layout showing lane usage (pavement marking layout) for all boundary streets including driveway locations
and roadway geometry within the site; .................................................................................................................... 376
6) Driveways and intersecting streets connecting to boundary streets including all lane widths, traffic islands,
medians, sidewalks, curbs, traffic control devices and existing pavement conditions; ............................................ 376
7) Existing and proposed turning movement counts for the site; and ................................................................ 376
8) Identification of and timing for transportation improvements, if any, needed to maintain the same or higher
level of service than exists prior to development during each phase of land development and the costs of those
improvements, including costs of right-of-way acquisition, utility relocation, design and construction; ................ 376
(b) The TIA shall: .................................................................................................................................................... 376
1) Establish the baseline traffic conditions and peak hour operations prior to development of the subdivision or
site, which baseline shall establish the existing level of service that is to be maintained or bettered as the owners
develop the subdivision or site over time; and ......................................................................................................... 376
2) Address streets and street intersections, and driveways on commercial sites; ............................................... 376
(c) For projects adjacent to a TxDOT ROW, the TIA shall be accompanied by a letter from TxDOT which outlines
any agreements between the developer and TxDOT for planned improvements; and .................................................. 376
(d) The TIA shall be certified by a registered engineer with experience in the field of traffic engineering. ............ 376
(6) TIA Submittal .............................................................................................. 376
(7) TIA Review ................................................................................................. 376
(8) City Assistance in Development ................................................................. 376
(a) Assist in the acquisition of necessary right-of-way and easements; ................................................................... 377
(b) Assist in the relocation of utilities; ..................................................................................................................... 377
(c) Assist in obtaining approvals from applicable County entities; .......................................................................... 377
(d) Assist in obtaining approvals from TxDOT; and ................................................................................................ 377
Section 1 – General Provisions
Crandall Unified Development Code
July 16, 2010 94
(e) Assist in securing financial participation for major street improvements from applicable County entities, TxDOT
or the Metropolitan Planning Organization. .................................................................................................................. 377
(9) TIA Revisions ............................................................................................. 377
SECTION 14 - Easements and Utilities ................................................................... 377
A. EASEMENTS 377
(1) Utility Easements ........................................................................................ 377
(2) Drainage Easements .................................................................................. 377
(a) When a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, a stormwater easement or
drainage rights-of-way (ROW) shall be provided. Said easement or drainage ROW shall substantially encompass the
boundaries of said water course and shall be of sufficient width, in accordance with the construction standards in the
Development Standards. ............................................................................................................................................... 377
(b) Drainage or stormwater easements may be constructed as open earth channels or concrete drainage structures
and shall be maintained by the developer or his/her assigns. ........................................................................................ 377
(c) Drainage ROW shall contain concrete drainage structures or underground piping and shall be dedicated to the
City or other applicable jurisdictions. ........................................................................................................................... 377
(d) Access Easements ............................................................................................................................................... 377
B. WATER SYSTEMS 378
(1) Installation of Water Facilities ..................................................................... 378
(2) Alternative Water Sources .......................................................................... 378
(3) Location and Cost of Installation ................................................................ 378
(4) Extension of Lines ...................................................................................... 378
(5) Fire Hydrants .............................................................................................. 378
(a) Fire hydrants are to be properly located so there will be a fire hydrant every three hundred feet (300’) in
commercial and industrial areas and every five hundred feet (500’) in residential areas. ............................................. 378
(b) Any new fire hydrant is required to have a hydrant locater reflector (blue bump) installed in the roadway
perpendicular to the hydrant. ......................................................................................................................................... 378
(6) Individual Wells .......................................................................................... 379
(a) Within the City Limits ........................................................................................................................................ 379
(b) Within the ETJ.................................................................................................................................................... 379
(c) Compliance with Other Regulations ................................................................................................................... 379
(7) Design and Construction ............................................................................ 379
(8) Other Water Systems ................................................................................. 379
(a) At the time of preliminary platting the applicant shall provide the City with a letter of approval from the TCEQ
certifying that the water system serving the development complies with the rules and regulations of the TCEQ and that
the public water system provider holds a current valid Certificate of Convenience and Necessity (“CCN”) for the area
proposed for development. The letter of approval from the TCEQ shall be accompanied by a map delineating the
boundaries of the CCN in the vicinity of the development. .......................................................................................... 379
(b) For developments in the ETJ, the developer shall obtain the approval and signature of the appropriate county
health official on the water system statement as shown on the preliminary plat prior to Commission approval. The
water system statement as shown on the plat indicates that the development will be served by a water system meeting
City standards, as stated in SECTION 14B of this UDC. and the applicable standards of the water purveyor. ............ 379
(c) Plans and specifications for all water systems to serve the development shall be submitted as part of the
subdivision construction plans. ..................................................................................................................................... 380
C. WASTEWATER SYSTEMS 380
(1) Wastewater Connection Required .............................................................. 380
(2) Installation of Wastewater Facilities ........................................................... 380
(3) Location and Cost of Installation ................................................................ 380
(4) Future Extension of Lines ........................................................................... 380
(5) On-Site Sewage Facilities (OSSF) ............................................................. 380
D. UTILITIES 380
SECTION 15 - Definitions ........................................................................................ 381
July 21, 2011 95
SECTION 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. SHORT TITLE
Chapter 12 of the City of Crandall Code of Ordinances shall be known and may be
cited as the “Unified Development Code of the City of Crandall, Texas,” or simply
as the “Unified Development Code” or the “UDC.”
B. PURPOSE AND INTENT
This UDC is adopted to:
(1) Protect, promote, improve and provide for the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the City;
(2) Ensure the safe, orderly and efficient development and expansion of the City in
accordance with and pursuant to its Comprehensive Plan;
(3) Conserve, develop, protect and utilize natural resources, in keeping with the
public interest;
(4) Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration or diffusion of
population;
(5) Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the value of
buildings and improvements upon the land, and minimize conflicts among the
uses of land and buildings;
(6) Provide for open space;
(7) Minimize pollution of air and water, assure the adequacy of drainage facilities,
safeguard water resources and preserve the integrity and aesthetic quality of the
community;
(8) Lessen congestion in the streets and provide convenient, safe and efficient
circulation for vehicular and pedestrian traffic; and
(9) Facilitate the adequate and efficient provision of transportation, water,
wastewater, schools, parks, public safety, recreational facilities, and other public
facilities and services.
C. AUTHORITY
This UDC is adopted pursuant to the powers granted to the City and subject to any
limitations imposed by the Constitution and general laws of the State of Texas.
D. JURISDICTION
The provisions of this UDC apply to all property within the corporate limits of the
City and to all lands within the City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction that are not subject
to development agreements and to the extent allowed by Texas law.
(1) Jurisdiction within City Limits
The City has the statutory authority to exercise a broad range of powers
within its boundaries and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Many of those powers
are specifically authorized by Chapters 211, 212, and 216 of the Texas Local
July 21, 2011 96
Government Code (“LGC”), as amended. Pursuant to such authority, all
sections of the UDC shall apply to all areas within the city limits of Crandall.
All structures, land uses, businesses, subdivisions, and property development
constructed or commenced after the effective date of this UDC and all
enlargements of, additions to, changes in, reductions to or relocations of
existing structures, land uses, businesses, subdivisions, and property
development occurring after the effective date of this UDC are subject to this
UDC.
(2) Jurisdiction within Extraterritorial Jurisdiction
The City extends to its extraterritorial jurisdiction (“ETJ”) the regulation of
subdivisions and property development adopted under LGC Chapter 212. The
City also extends to its ETJ the authority to regulate signage as adopted
under LGC Chapters 216, 245, and 43. However, unless otherwise
authorized by State law, the City, within its ETJ, may not regulate:
(a) The use of any building or property for business, industrial, residential, or
other purposes;
(b) The bulk, height, or number of buildings constructed on a particular tract of
land;
(c) The size of a building that can be constructed on a particular tract of land,
including without limitation any restriction on the ratio of building floor
space to the land square footage;
(d) The number of residential units that can be built per acre of land; or
(e) The size, type, or method of construction of a water or wastewater facility
that can be constructed to serve a developed tract of land if:
1) the facility meets the minimum standards established for water or
wastewater facilities by state and federal regulatory entities; and
2) the developed tract of land is:
a) located in a county with a population of 2.8 million or more;
and
b) served by:
i) on-site septic systems constructed before September 1,
2001, that fail to provide adequate services; or
ii) on-site water wells constructed before September 1,
2001, that fail to provide an adequate supply of safe
drinking water.
E. CONSISTENCY WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
This UDC is intended to implement the policies and objectives contained in the
Comprehensive Plan and Thoroughfare Plan for the City and to affect the City’s
plan for provision of public facilities and services in areas both within the City’s
corporate limits and within the City’s ETJ, which areas are collectively referred to
from time to time as the “City’s jurisdictional area.” Any application for
July 21, 2011 97
development shall be consistent with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and
Thoroughfare Plan, as amended from time to time. The following general land use
policies have been used in the development of this Code to ensure that land
development within the City’s jurisdictional area is in accordance with the City’s
Comprehensive Plan and Thoroughfare Plan. These policies act as a guideline
and shall not be construed as development regulations.
(1) Growth Management
(a) New development should be compatible with existing development and
community character.
(b) New development should maintain the character, look and feel of the City.
(c) New development should occur in a fiscally responsible manner for the
City.
(2) Environmental Protection
(a) Development should preserve and protect waterways and floodplains.
(b) Development should preserve and protect surface and ground water
resources and hydrologically-active areas.
(c) Developers should cooperate with local governmental entities to ensure
water quality.
(d) Development should promote and encourage water conservation practices.
(e) Development should preserve and protect air quality.
(f) Development should seek public acquisition of open space or develop
conservative development options for areas of environmental concern.
(g) Agricultural and ranch lands should be priority areas for open space
preservation. The City is interested in preserving natural open space areas.
(h) Development should promote awareness and implementation of Best
Management Practices (“BMPs”) for purposes of water quality and land
conservation.
(3) Housing
(a) Development should provide housing alternatives for individuals of all
income levels within the City’s jurisdictional area.
(b) Development should encourage housing that is compatible with existing
neighborhoods and land uses.
(c) Development should promote cluster development when and where
appropriate.
(4) Economic Development
(a) Development should promote economic development opportunities along
US-175 and along major arterials such as FM 148.
(b) Development should promote economic development consistent with other
land use policies.
July 21, 2011 98
(c) Development should promote quality development that is compatible with
neighboring areas.
(5) Historic Preservation
(a) Development should preserve and enhance historic areas and sites
throughout the City’s jurisdictional area.
(b) Development should use community history to promote tourism and
economic development.
(6) Parks and Recreation
(a) Development should connect existing and proposed parks in accordance
with the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
(b) Development should provide and preserve open space and park land in
new neighborhoods and associated with new schools.
(c) Development should encourage maintenance and safety of parks and
recreation resources.
(7) Circulation
(a) Development should improve access to major thoroughfares identified by
the City.
(b) Development should encourage the interconnection of streets and street
network designs to provide ample, safe, and appropriately scaled access
through and between neighborhoods and to commercial centers.
(c) Development should provide safe and efficient vehicular connectivity.
(d) Development should provide for safe and effective hike and bike trails.
(e) Development should ensure that access is safely managed and integrated
into land use and site designs.
(f) Development should encourage adequate parking and aesthetically
pleasing layouts of parking for new commercial, office and retail
development, provided that the parking fields do not deter ease of
pedestrian access into and through new developments, and do not deter or
detract from community character.
(g) Development should provide for safe and ample pedestrian connectivity
throughout new and/or existing developments, including schools, park
sites, and commercial areas.
(8) Urban Design
(a) Development should encourage and provide incentives for blending of land
uses and mixed-use development.
(b) Development should utilize streetscape design criteria to encourage safe
and desirable pedestrian access and community attractiveness.
(c) Development should utilize appropriate building area and bulk regulations,
configurations, project scales and architectural design for new
developments within the community.
July 21, 2011 99
(d) Signage should not detract from the visual integrity of the community.
(9) Civic and Public Spaces
(a) Civic buildings and civic spaces should be given prominent sites.
(b) Elementary school sites should be provided as new neighborhood
developments are approved, so as to be within walking distance of a
majority of the dwelling units in adjoining neighborhoods. The location of
neighborhood schools should be coordinated with the appropriate school
district.
F. VESTED RIGHTS “ISSUANCE OF LOCAL PERMITS”
Property owners who have filed a completed application or have obtained approval
of any project or permit prior to the effective date of this UDC shall not be required
to make any change in plans, construction, size or designated use of any building,
structure, lot, or part thereof so approved provided that construction shall begin
consistent with the terms and conditions of the building permit and proceed to
completion in a timely manner in accordance with the provisions of this UDC. Any
such previously approved structures, lots, or uses may be subject to the provisions
of SECTION 6 herein, entitled “Nonconforming Uses, Lots and Structures.”
G. APPORTIONMENT OF MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE COSTS
(1) If the City requires, as a condition of approval for a property development
project, that a developer bear the costs of municipal infrastructure improvements
by the making of dedications, the payment of fees, or the payment of
construction costs, the developer's portion of the costs may not exceed the
amount required for infrastructure improvements that are roughly proportionate
to the impact generated by the proposed development as approved by a
professional engineer who is licensed by the State of Texas, and is retained by
the City.
(2) A developer who disputes the determination made under SECTION 1G(1) above
may appeal to the City Council. At the appeal hearing, the developer may
present evidence and testimony under procedures adopted by the City Council.
After hearing any testimony and reviewing the evidence, the City Council shall
make a determination within thirty (30) days following the final submission of any
testimony or evidence by the developer. If the City Council takes no action
within thirty (30) days, the appeal shall be deemed to have been denied.
(3) A developer may appeal the determination of the City Council to a county or
district court of the county in which the development project is located within
thirty (30) days after the final determination by the City Council.
(4) The City may not require a developer to waive the right of appeal authorized by
this section as a condition of approval for a development project.
H. MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
(1) The provisions of this UDC shall be interpreted and applied as the minimum
requirements for the promotion of public health, safety and general welfare.
July 21, 2011 100
(2) Whenever the requirements of this UDC are in conflict with the requirements of
any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the requirement
that is most restrictive or that imposes the higher standards, as determined by
the City Manager, shall apply.
(3) The issuance of any permit, certificate or approval in accordance with the
standards and requirements of this UDC shall not relieve the recipient of such
permit, certificate or approval from the responsibility of complying with all other
applicable requirements of any other county, special district, state or federal
agency having jurisdiction over the structures or land uses for which the permit,
certificate or approval was issued.
I. EFFECTIVE DATE
This UDC amends and restates the prior zoning ordinance of the City, which had
an effective date of May 6, 2006. This UDC also amends and restates the prior
Development Standards of the City, which had an effective date of March 2, 2000.
This UDC shall take effect upon adoption by the City Council on May 19, 2011as
reflected on the cover page hereof. Except as otherwise provided in this UDC, on
the effective date and thereafter, this UDC shall supersede all prior development
regulations governing the development of land within the City and its ETJ. All
development applications and proposals filed on or after the effective date of this
UDC, whether for new developments or amendments to plats and plans, shall be
required to meet the standards of this UDC and shall be processed in accordance
with the procedures herein.
J. SEVERABILITY
All sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this UDC are
severable, and if any such section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase is
declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction
by a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not cause
any remaining section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this UDC to fail
or become invalid.
K. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this UDC
or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order or
regulation made hereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement
of specification of plans submitted and approved hereunder, or any certificate or
permit issued hereunder, shall for each and every violation and noncompliance,
respectively, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall
be fined a sum not to exceed Two Thousand Dollars ($2,000), or the appropriate
legal maximum. In the case of a violation of SECTION 9I the penalty shall be the
sum as determined above plus the value of the tree as determined by a certified
arborist hired by the City. Each and every day that such violation and/or
noncompliance shall exist shall be deemed a separate offense. In case any
person, firm or corporation violates any of the provisions of this UDC or fails to
comply therewith, the City, in addition to imposing the penalties above provided,
may institute any appropriate action or proceedings in court to prevent, restrain,
July 21, 2011 101
correct, or abate any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about any land,
and the definition of any violation of the terms of this UDC as a misdemeanor shall
not preclude the City from invoking the civil remedies given it by law in such cases,
but same shall be cumulative of and in addition to the penalties prescribed for such
violation. Unless otherwise required by law, a culpable mental state is not required
for the commission of an offense under this UDC.
L. VALIDITY
The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans or plats, site or facility
designs, or specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval
of, any violation of any provision of this UDC or any other City ordinance. No
permit purporting to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this UDC
shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use that it authorizes is lawful and
conforms to the requirements of this UDC or a variance, exception, or modification
granted pursuant to this UDC.
SECTION 2 - OFFICIAL MAPS
A. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
(1) There shall be a map known and designated as the Official Zoning Map, which
shall show the boundaries of all zoning districts within the City and which by
reference is made a part of this UDC. One (1) original official and two (2) copies
of the Official Zoning Map are hereby adopted bearing the affidavit of the City
Secretary and shall be filed and maintained as follows:
(a) The original Official Zoning Map shall be maintained by the City Secretary;
(b) One (1) copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be maintained in the office of
the City Planner;
(c) One (1) copy of the Official Zoning Map shall be filed with the City Building
Official; and
(d) One (1) electronic copy of the Zoning Map shall be posted on the City’s
website.
(2) The boundaries of the zoning districts as set out in SECTION 5E are and shall
be delineated upon the Official Zoning Map of the City; said map being a part of
this UDC as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail.
(3) All amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be made immediately after their
enactment and the date of the change shall be the effective date of the
amending ordinance adopted by the City Council. The two (2) copies of the
official Zoning Map identified in SECTION 2A(1) above, shall be updated
quarterly to reflect changes adopted by ordinance of the City Council.
(4) Reproductions for information purposes may, from time to time, be made of the
Official Zoning Map. The Official Zoning Map may be made available to the
public in the City Secretary’s Office for inspection only.
B. DISTRICT BOUNDARY INTERPRETATION
July 21, 2011 102
(1) The boundaries of zoning districts are indicated upon the Official Zoning Map of
the City. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on
the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
(a) Boundaries indicated as following the centerlines of streets, highways, or
alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
(b) Boundaries indicated as following platted lot lines shall be construed as
following such lot lines.
(c) Boundaries indicated as following City limits shall be construed as following
such City limits.
(d) Boundaries indicated as following shorelines of creeks shall be construed
to follow such shorelines; and in the event of their movement, the
boundaries shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
Boundaries indicated as following the centerlines of streams, rivers, canals,
lakes or other bodies of water should be construed to follow such
centerlines.
(e) In unsubdivided (unplatted) property, the zoning district boundary lines on
the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by use of the scale appearing
on the map.
(f) In the case of a zoning district boundary line dividing a property into two (2)
parts, the property will remain divided until the property owner, City, firm or
corporation petitions the City Council for rezoning.
(g) Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action
of the City Council, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street,
alley or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of such
vacation and all area included in the vacation shall then and henceforth be
subject to all regulations of the extended districts.
SECTION 3 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) Source of Authority
Authority under this UDC shall be vested in and delegated to the officials and
decision-makers designated as provided in this SECTION 3, the Texas
Constitution and the general laws of the State of Texas, and the City of
Crandall, Texas Code of Ordinances (“City Code”). This authority shall be
deemed supplemental to any other authority lawfully conferred upon the
officials and decision-makers. The omission of a citation in this UDC to any
authority conferred upon the officials and decision-makers under the Texas
Constitution or general laws of the State of Texas or the City Code shall not
be construed as limiting the actions of such officials and decision-makers
taken in accordance with and in reliance upon such authority.
(2) Implied Authority
July 21, 2011 103
The officials and decision-makers identified herein shall have all implied
authority necessary to carry out the duties and responsibilities expressly
delegated by this UDC to the extent the implied authority is not in conflict with
the expressly delegated authority.
(3) Limitation on Authority
(a) City Policy
It is the policy of the City that the standards and procedures applicable to
development of property within the City’s corporate limits and within the
City’s ETJ are as stated in this UDC, notwithstanding any representation
by any City employee or official summarizing, paraphrasing or otherwise
interpreting such standards to the contrary, whether generally or as
applied to development of specific property.
(b) Representations Concerning Future Action on Petition or Application
No City official, whether an employee or consultant of the City or a
member of an appointed board or commission, or a member of the City
Council, shall have the authority to make representations to a property
owner concerning the likelihood of an outcome of that official’s decision
or the decision of an appointed board or commission or the City Council,
on any development application or petition that has yet to be filed or is
pending before the City for decision. An official may, however, upon
request of a person, convey information concerning that official’s position
on a pending application in accordance with procedures established in
this section. No person is entitled to rely upon any representation made
by an official in contravention of this section, and each and every such
representation shall be deemed in violation of the policy of the City, and
is not binding on the City in any respect. No subsequent decision of the
City shall be deemed a ratification of any representation made in
contravention of this section.
(c) Representations Concerning Future Amendments
No City official, whether an employee of the City or a member of an
appointed board or commission, or a member of the City Council, shall
have the authority to make binding representations to any person
concerning the likelihood that a change in any legislative classification or
a change in the text of this UDC as applied to a specific tract of land will
be granted, or that an existing legislative classification or text provision
will remain in effect, or that any petition for relief will be granted. No
person is entitled to rely upon any representation made by an official in
contravention of this section, and each and every such representation
shall be deemed in violation of the policy of the City, and is not binding
on the City in any respect. No subsequent decision of the City shall be
deemed a ratification of any representation made in contravention of this
section.
(d) Effect of Development Standards on Liability Claims
July 21, 2011 104
The City’s approval of a development application under the standards
and procedures of this UDC does not guarantee or assure that
development of the subject property in accordance with such standards
and procedures will prevent, minimize or mitigate harm to other property
in the vicinity of or within the same water shed or basin as the property
so proposed for development. A person who undertakes development
activities shall not rely on the City’s approval of a development
application as ensuring that the development activities will not result in
harm to other property in the vicinity of or within the same water shed or
basin as the property so proposed for development. The regulations
contained in this UDC constitute an exercise of the City’s governmental
authority, and approval of a development application shall not give rise
to any liability on the part of the City or its officers, agents and
employees, nor will an approval release the applicant from any liability
for harm arising out of development of the property under applicable law.
In this regard, it is specifically understood and agreed that the standards
adopted by the City in this UDC are the minimum standards that must be
met for development purposes.
(e) No Waivers
Except as expressly provided for in this UDC, no employee, official,
board or commission of the City, or the City Council, shall have authority
to waive any requirement or standard for a development application
except as specifically authorized in this UDC. Any attempted waiver of a
requirement or standard for a development application in contravention
of this section shall hereby be deemed null and void, and, upon
discovery, shall be grounds for revocation of a permit or approval, or
reconsideration of a legislative decision.
(f) Conflict in Authority
1) Internal Inconsistency
Whenever one (1) or more provisions of this UDC are in apparent
conflict, the provisions shall be construed, if possible, so that effect
is given to each. If the conflict is between a general provision and a
specific provision, and the conflict is irreconcilable, the more
specific provision shall prevail over and as an exception to the
general provision, unless the general provision is the later
enactment and the manifest intent is that the general provision
should prevail.
2) Incomplete Provisions
Whenever a specific standard or procedure of this UDC is
incomplete when applied in isolation to a development application
or development activity, such standard shall be supplemented by
any general or specific provision of this UDC or the City Code in
order to give effect to the incomplete provision.
B. CITY COUNCIL
July 21, 2011 105
(1) Authority Granted
The City Council, as the governing body of the City, shall have such powers
and authority as granted by Texas law applicable to general law cities to
initiate, undertake, and decide any matters pertaining to the regulation of the
use and development of land as identified in this UDC.
(2) Duties and Approval Authority
In addition to other rights of approval, the City Council shall have final
approval authority on the following applications:
(a) An application for amendment to the text or maps within the
Comprehensive Plan;
(b) An application for amendment to the text of this UDC;
(c) An application for annexation;
(d) An application to establish or amend a zoning district map classification,
including creation or amendment of an overlay district;
(e) An application for a preliminary plat, final plat or replat and waiver requests
to same;
(f) An application for historic landmark or district designation;
(g) An application for approval of a conceptual plan as part of a planned
development district (“PD”);
(h) An application for a specific use permit (“SUP”);
(i) An application for approval of a development agreement within the City’s
corporate boundaries and in the City’s ETJ;
(j) An application to extend City utilities to land located in the City’s ETJ;
(k) An appeal of the decision of any City board, commission or City staff,
except as expressly provided for in this UDC; and
(l) Any application for a development agreement as set forth in the LGC and
this UDC.
C. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
(1) Authority Granted
The Planning and Zoning Commission (“Commission”) shall have such
powers and authority as granted by Texas law and this UDC to initiate,
undertake, and decide any matters pertaining to the regulation of the use and
development of land as identified in this UDC.
(2) Structure of the Commission and Operational Procedures
There shall be established a Planning and Zoning Commission as described
in this UDC. Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the City
Council. The Commission may adopt rules to govern its proceedings
provided, however, that such rules are not inconsistent with this chapter or
Texas law. Meetings of the Commission may be held at the call of the
July 21, 2011 106
chairperson or at such other times as the Commission may determine and in
accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act (“TOMA”).
(3) Duties and Approval Authority
(a) The Commission shall have the authority to review and make a
recommendation to the City Council on the following applications:
1) An application for amendment to the text or maps in the
Comprehensive Plan;
2) An application for amendment to the text of this UDC;
3) An application for a preliminary plat;
4) An application for a final plat;
5) An application for an amending plat;
6) An application for a minor plat;
7) An application for a replat;
8) An application for a site plan;
9) An application for historic landmark or district designation;
10) An application for approval of a conceptual plan as part of a PD
district;
11) Variances relating to subdivisions and transportation (see SECTION
8, SECTION 9, SECTION 12, SECTION 13, and SECTION 14);
12) An application for subdivision master plan;
13) An application to establish or amend a zoning district map
classification, including creation or amendment of an overlay district;
and
14) An application for approval of a rezoning request, including an
application for a SUP.
(b) The Commission shall keep accurate minutes of each meeting, which shall
be maintained within the office of the City Secretary.
D. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
(1) Authority Granted
The Board of Adjustment (“BOA”) shall have such powers and authority as
granted by Texas law, the City Code, and this UDC to initiate, undertake, and
decide any matters pertaining to the regulation of the use and development of
land as identified in this UDC.
(2) Structure of the BOA
(a) Composition and Term
The BOA shall consist of the City Council. All cases before the BOA
must be heard by at least four (4) members of the BOA.
(b) Rules and Meetings
July 21, 2011 107
The BOA, by majority vote, shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings.
All meetings of the BOA shall be conducted in accordance with the
TOMA. Meetings of the BOA shall be held at the call of the chair
(Mayor) and at other times as determined by the BOA.
(c) Minutes
The BOA shall keep minutes of its proceedings that indicate the vote of
each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or
fails to vote. The BOA shall keep records of its examinations and other
official actions. The minutes and records of the BOA shall be filed in the
office of the City Secretary. The minutes of the BOA shall be filed in the
official records of the City immediately after approval of said minutes.
(d) Vote Required for Decisions
In exercising its authority under SECTION 3D(3)(a) below, the BOA may
reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative
official’s order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an
appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or
determination, and for that purpose the BOA has the same authority as
the administrative official.
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the BOA is necessary to:
1) Reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an
administrative official;
2) Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the BOA is
required to pass under this UDC; or
3) Authorize a variance from the terms of a zoning regulation.
(e) Filing of Decisions
The BOA’s decision shall be deemed filed in the City Secretary’s office
on the first business day following the date on which final action was
taken by the BOA.
(3) Duties and Approval Authority
The BOA shall have the following duties:
(a) To hear and decide appeals when error is alleged in any order,
requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official of
the City in the enforcement of this UDC or an ordinance adopted under this
UDC.
(b) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this UDC when the
UDC requires the BOA to do so.
(c) To authorize, in specific cases, a variance from the zoning regulations of
this UDC if the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to
special conditions, a literal enforcement of the regulations of this UDC
would result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the
ordinance is observed and substantial justice is done. A variance shall not
July 21, 2011 108
be granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor shall it be
based solely on economic gain or loss, nor shall it permit any person a
privilege in developing a parcel of land not permitted by this UDC to other
parcels of land in the district. In order to make a finding of hardship and
grant a variance from the zoning regulations of this UDC, the BOA must
determine the following:
1) The requested variance does not violate the intent of this UDC or its
amendments;
2) Special conditions of restricted area, topography or physical features
exist that are peculiar to the subject parcel of land and are not
applicable to other parcels of land in the same zoning district;
3) The hardship is in no way the result of the applicant’s own actions;
and
4) The interpretation of the provisions in this UDC or any amendments
thereto would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by
other properties in the same zoning district that comply with the same
provisions.
(d) To hear and decide other matters as authorized by the City Council and
deemed necessary in pursuit of the spirit and intent of this UDC.
(e) Permit the reconstruction, extension or enlargement of a building occupied
by nonconforming uses, on a lot or tract occupied by such building,
provided such reconstruction, extension or enlargement does not prevent
the return of such property to a conforming use.
(f) Permit the extension of or enlargement of a building occupied by a
nonconforming use, under such conditions as the BOA may deem
necessary in order to protect other properties in the neighborhood,
provided such extension or enlargement:
1) Does not prevent the return of such property to a conforming use;
2) Does not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the ground area of the
existing building;
3) Will not prevent compliance with applicable side yard requirements;
and
4) Does not allow such building to be used for any use that would
normally be restricted to a more restrictive classification.
(g) Require the discontinuance of a nonconforming use of land or structure
under any plan whereby the full value of the structure and facilities can be
amortized within a definite period of time, taking into consideration the
general character of the neighborhood and the necessity for all property to
conform to the regulations of this UDC. All actions to discontinue a nonconforming
use of land or structure shall be taken with due regard for the
property rights of the persons affected when considered in light of the
public welfare and the character of the area surrounding the designated
July 21, 2011 109
nonconforming use and the conservation and preservation of property. The
BOA may, from time to time, on its own motion, or upon cause presented
by any interested property owners, inquire into the existence, continuation,
termination, or maintenance of any nonconforming use within the City.
(h) Interpret the exact location of zoning district boundaries where such
location cannot reasonably be determined from the approved Zoning Map.
(4) Appeal of Administrative Official Determination
(a) Procedure
As provided under LGC Section 211.010, appeals of a decision of an
administrative official of the City may be taken to and before the BOA by
any person aggrieved by the decision, or by any officer, department, or
board of the City. Such appeal must be filed with the BOA and shall
include written notice of the appeal to the administrative official whose
decision is being appealed and specify the grounds for the appeal. The
appeal must be filed within the time period determined by the rules of the
BOA. On receiving the notice, the administrative official shall
immediately transmit to the BOA all papers constituting the record of the
action that is appealed.
(b) Stay of Proceedings
An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is
appealed unless the administrative official certifies in writing to the BOA
facts supporting the administrative official’s opinion that a stay would
cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case, the proceedings
may be stayed only by an appropriate court.
(c) Hearings of Appeals
The BOA shall set a reasonable time for the appeal hearing and shall
give public notice of the hearing and due notice to the parties in interest.
A party may appear at the appeal hearing in person or by agent or
attorney. The BOA shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time.
(5) Appeals of BOA Decisions
(a) Procedure
As granted under LGC Section 211.011, any person or persons
aggrieved by any decision of the BOA, or any taxpayer or any officer,
department, or board of the City may present to an appropriate court a
verified petition stating that the decision of the BOA is illegal, in whole or
in part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be
presented to the court within ten (10) days after the filing of the BOA’s
decision in the City Secretary’s office.
(b) Writ of Certiorari
Upon the presentation of the petition, the court may grant a writ of
certiorari directed to the BOA to review the BOA’s decision. The writ
must indicate the time by which the BOA’s return must be made and
July 21, 2011 110
served on the petitioner’s attorney, which must be after ten (10) days
and may be extended by the court. Granting of the writ does not stay
the proceedings on the decision under appeal, but on application and
after notice to the BOA, the court may grant a restraining order, if due
cause is shown.
(c) Return of Certified Copies
The BOA’s return must be verified and must concisely state any
pertinent and material facts that show the grounds of the decision under
appeal. The BOA is not required to return the original documents on
which the BOA acted but may return certified or sworn copies of the
documents or parts of the documents as required by the writ.
(d) Hearing and Testimony
The court sits only as a court of review, and the only question before it is
the legality of the BOA’s order. If at the hearing the court determines
that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, the
court may take evidence or appoint a referee to take evidence as
directed. The referee shall report the evidence to the court with the
referee’s findings of fact and conclusions of law. The referee’s report
constitutes a part of the proceedings on which the court shall make its
decision. A reviewing court or referee may not substitute its own
judgment for that of the BOA. Instead, a party challenging those findings
must establish that the BOA could only have reasonably reached one
decision.
(e) Decision of the Court
To establish that an order of the BOA is illegal, the party attacking the
order must present a “very clear showing of abuse of discretion.” The
BOA abuses its discretion if it acts without reference to any guiding rules
and principles or clearly fails to analyze or apply the law correctly. The
court may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the decision
that is appealed. Costs may not be assessed against the BOA, unless
the court determines that the BOA acted arbitrarily, capriciously,
discriminatorily, with gross negligence, in bad faith, or with malice in
making its decision.
E. ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY
(1) Authority Granted
The City Manager shall have such powers and authority as granted by Texas
law, the City Code, and this UDC to initiate, undertake, and decide any
matters pertaining to the regulation of the use and development of land as
identified in this UDC and is authorized to take all actions necessary to carry
out his/her responsibilities in accordance with the requirements and
limitations prescribed therein.
(2) Administrative Structure
July 21, 2011 111
The City Manager is designated as the chief administrative official of the City.
The City Manager, at his/her discretion, may designate the director of any
department or other employee as the administrative authority responsible for
consideration of any item deemed appropriate by the City Manager.
(3) Duties and Approval Authority
(a) The City Manager shall have the authority to review and make a
recommendation to the City Council on the following applications:
1) An application for approval of a development agreement within the
City’s corporate boundaries and in the City’s ETJ;
2) An appeal of the decision of any City board, commission or City staff,
except as expressly provided for in this UDC; and
3) An application for a development agreement as set forth in the LGC
and this UDC.
(b) The City Manager shall have the authority to review and make a
recommendation to the Commission on the following applications:
1) An application for amendment to the text or maps in the
Comprehensive Plan;
2) An application for amendment to the text of this UDC;
3) An application to establish or amend a zoning district map
classification, including the creation or amendment of an overlay
district;
4) An application for historic landmark or district designation;
5) An application for approval of a conceptual plan as part of a PD;
6) An application for a SUP;
7) An application for a subdivision master plan;
8) An application for a preliminary plat;
9) An application for a final plat;
10) An application for an amending plat;
11) An application for a minor plat;
12) An application for a replat;
13) An application for a site plan; and
14) An application for annexation.
(c) The City Manager shall have the authority to review and make a
recommendation to the Board of Adjustment on the following applications:
1) An appeal when error is alleged in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by an administrative official of the City; and
2) An application for special exceptions to the terms of this UDC when
the UDC requires the BOA to do so.
July 21, 2011 112
(d) The City Manager shall have final approval authority on the following
applications:
1) An application for a minor plat, as authorized by this UDC and LGC
Section 212.0065;
2) An application for an Amending Plat, as authorized by this UDC, and
LGC Section 212.0065;
3) Home occupation permits as authorized by SECTION 7D(3) of this
UDC; and
4) Other applications as authorized by this UDC.
(e) A record of any action taken with respect to final approval of a development
application shall be provided to the appropriate board, commission or City
Council for review.
F. Other Boards and Commissions
(1) Reserved
SECTION 4 - PROCEDURES AND APPLICATIONS
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT
The purpose of this section is to establish application procedures, internal review
procedures, public notice and hearing procedures, and review criteria for the
processing of applications and actions that affect the development and use of
property subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Crandall, Texas.
B. INITIATION OF APPLICATION
(1) Application Submittal
All applications for developments, annexations, comprehensive plan
amendments, amendments to the UDC, rezoning applications, development
agreements for property in the ETJ, utility service extensions, variances, and
special exceptions to be considered by any board or commission or by the
City Council shall be initiated by the filing of the application by the owner of
the property on which the permit is applicable or by the owner’s designated
agent. In the event an application is submitted by a designated agent, the
application must be accompanied by a written statement, signed by the
owner, authorizing the agent to file the application on the owner’s behalf.
(2) Determination of Application Completeness
(a) All development applications shall be subject to a determination of
completeness by the City Manager.
(b) No application shall be deemed complete and accepted for processing
unless it is accompanied by all documents required by and prepared in
accordance with the requirements of this UDC. For a determination of
completeness to be issued, an application must include the following:
1) Payment of the appropriate fee;
July 21, 2011 113
2) An accurate metes and bounds description of the subject property (or
other suitable legal description, identifying the property as a lot of
record);
3) A survey exhibit and other appropriate exhibits as identified in this
section for the individual permit; and
4) Any additional documents, forms or other materials required by the
City Manager or identified in this UDC for the processing of a specific
development application.
(c) The City Manager may from time to time identify additional requirements
for a complete application that are not contained within, but are consistent
with the application contents and standards set forth in this UDC.
(d) A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of
compliance with the substantive requirements of this UDC.
(e) Not later than the tenth (10th) business day after the date an application is
submitted, the City Planner shall make a written determination whether the
application constitutes a complete application. This determination shall
include a statement that all information and documents required by this
UDC for the type of permit being requested or other requirements have
been submitted. A determination that the application is incomplete shall be
mailed to the applicant within such time period by United States Mail at the
address listed on the application. The determination shall specify the
documents or other information needed to complete the application and
shall state that the application will expire if the specified documents or
other information are not submitted within forty-five (45) days after the date
the application was submitted.
(f) An application filed on or after the effective date of this amended and
restated UDC shall be deemed complete on the eleventh (11th) business
day after the application has been received, if the applicant has not
otherwise been notified that the application is incomplete. For purposes of
this section, the applicant shall be deemed to have been notified if the City
has mailed a copy of the determination as provided in SECTION 4B(2)(e)
above.
(g) The processing of an application by any City employee prior to the time the
application is determined to be complete shall not be binding on the City as
the official acceptance of the application for filing. However, this application
may be denied for incompleteness within the forty-five (45)-day period as
provided in SECTION 4B(2)(e) above.
(h) A development application shall be deemed to expire on the forty-fifth (45th)
day after the application is submitted to the City Manager for processing if
the applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to
meet the requirements of this UDC or other requirements as specified in
the determination provided to the applicant. Upon expiration, the
application will be returned to the applicant together with any
July 21, 2011 114
accompanying documents. Thereafter, a new application must be
submitted.
(i) No vested rights accrue solely from the filing of an application that has
expired pursuant to this section, or from the filing of a complete application
that is subsequently denied.
(3) Application Withdrawal
Any request for withdrawal of an application must be submitted in writing to
the City Manager. If notification is required for the application and has been
properly given via publication in the newspaper and/or written notification to
surrounding property owners, such application must be placed on the agenda.
The staff representative shall notify the Board, Commission or City Council of
the request for withdrawal of the application. The Board, Commission or
Council may, at its discretion, accept the request for withdrawal of the
application by general consent of the members. Application fees are not
refundable unless reimbursement of part or all of the fees is otherwise
authorized by the City Manager.
C. NOTICE REQUIREMENTS
(1) Published Notice
Whenever published notice of a public hearing before a board, commission or
the City Council regarding a zoning matter is required, the City Manager shall
cause notice to be published in an official newspaper or a newspaper of
general circulation in the City before the fifteenth (15th) day before the date
set for the required hearing. Said notice shall set forth the date, time, place
and purpose of the hearing as required under LGC Section 211.006(a).
(2) Written Notice
Whenever written notice of a public hearing before a Board, Commission or
the City Council regarding a zoning matter is required, before the tenth (10th)
day before the hearing date, the City Manager shall cause written notice to be
sent to each owner, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax
roll, of the real property that is the subject of the public hearing and all real
property within two hundred feet (200’) of the exterior boundary of the
property in question. Said notice shall set forth the date, time, place and
purpose of the hearing as required under LGC Section 211.007(c). The
notice may be served by its deposit, properly addressed with postage paid, in
the United States mail. If the property within two hundred feet (200’) of the
property in question is located in territory within the City and is not included
on the most recently approved municipal tax roll, notice to such owners shall
be given by one (1) publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality at least fifteen (15) days before the date
of the hearing. Failure of one (1) or more owner(s) to receive notice of
hearing shall in no way affect the validity of the action taken.
D. PUBLIC HEARINGS
(1) Public Hearing Required
July 21, 2011 115
Whenever a public hearing is required, the City Manager shall establish the
date, time and place of the public hearing and shall cause any notice required
under SECTION 4C above of this UDC to be prepared and made accordingly.
(2) Conduct of Public Hearing
Any person may appear at the public hearing and submit evidence, either
individually or as a representative of an individual or organization. Each
person who appears at a public hearing shall state his or her name, address,
and, if appearing on behalf of an individual or organization, the name and
mailing address of the organization for the record. Subject to the
chairperson’s inherent authority to conduct meetings, public hearings shall
generally be conducted as follows:
(a) The City staff may present a description of the proposed project and a
written or oral recommendation, if requested. Any written recommendation
shall be available to the public upon request at or about the time that the
agenda packet for the body conducting the hearing is compiled.
(b) The applicant may present any information it deems appropriate.
(c) Testimony in support of the application may be presented by any individual
who expresses an interest in the proposed project.
(d) Testimony in opposition to the application may be presented by any
individual who expresses an interest in the proposed project.
(e) At the discretion of the chairperson, the City staff and the applicant may
respond to any statement by the public.
(f) The body conducting the hearing may exclude or disregard testimony or
evidence that it finds to be irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious.
(g) At the sole discretion of the chairperson of the body conducting the
hearing, an individual may be permitted to pose relevant questions to staff,
the applicant or the body conducting the public hearing, as directed by the
chairperson.
(h) Closure of the public hearing.
(i) If the public hearing is held before an advisory body, the advisory body
(i.e., Commission) shall make a recommendation and shall prepare a
written report with its recommendations to the City Council.
(3) Continuance of Public Hearing
The body conducting the public hearing may, on its own motion or at the
request of any person, continue the public hearing to a fixed date, time and
place. Except as required by the TOMA, or other applicable law, no further
notice shall be required if a public hearing is so continued. If a public hearing
is closed, no further public testimony shall be taken regarding that matter.
(4) Additional Rules
July 21, 2011 116
The body conducting the public hearing may adopt additional rules of
procedure and may apply such additional rules to govern the public hearing
that are not inconsistent with this SECTION 4D.
(5) Joint Public Hearing
Unless otherwise prescribed in this UDC, whenever an application must be
preceded by a public hearing both before an advisory body (i.e., Commission)
and before the City Council, the advisory body and the Council may conduct a
joint public hearing and take action on the application in the following manner:
(a) The City Council shall establish the date of the joint public hearing by
motion at a regular or special meeting.
(b) The City Council shall cause notice of the joint public hearing to be
provided as required by this UDC and the TOMA and, by a vote of twothirds
(2/3) of its members, may prescribe the type of notice for the joint
public hearing.
(c) The advisory body (i.e., Commission) and the City Council shall be
convened for the public hearing and for any action to be taken on the
petition or application.
(d) The advisory body (i.e., Commission) and the City Council may take action
on the application at the same meeting, provided that the City Council shall
not take action until the written report and recommendation of the advisory
body (i.e., Commission) have been received.
E. POST-DECISION PROCEDURES
(1) Notification Required
Within ten (10) business days following final action on any development
application, the City Manager shall provide written notification to the applicant
of the decision of the board, commission or City Council considering the
request. If an application has been denied, the notification may, but is not
required to, include the reasons for denial as well as any information relating
to reapplication procedures for the appropriate application.
(2) Reapplication Following Denial
Whenever any development application, with the exception of any plat
application, is denied, a development application for all or a part of the same
property shall not be accepted for filing for a period of six (6) months after the
date of denial unless the subsequent application involves a proposal that is
substantially different from the previously denied proposal. For the purpose of
this section, a request may be considered substantially different if the change
is to a different zoning classification, there is a change in conditions relating to
zoning principles of the property or surrounding properties or there is a
change in the nature of the development of the property or surrounding
properties. The City Manager shall resolve any questions concerning the
similarity of the reapplication. The final decision-maker may, at its option,
waive the six (6)-month waiting period if, after due consideration of the matter
July 21, 2011 117
at a scheduled and posted meeting, it is determined that denial of the request
was based upon erroneous or omitted information, or if substantial new
information pertaining to the request is discovered.
(3) Amendments and Revisions to Approved Application
Unless otherwise expressly provided by this UDC, any request to amend or
revise an approved development application shall be considered a new
application, which must be decided in accordance with the procedures
governing the original application and the standards in effect at the time such
new application is filed with the City.
F. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT
(1) Applicability
The Comprehensive Plan of the City reflects the long-term plan for growth
and development of the City. The City Council may, from time to time, on its
own motion, by request of the City Manager or by application from a property
owner, amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal the text of the
Comprehensive Plan or may amend the boundaries shown on any of the
applicable maps contained in the Comprehensive Plan.
Approved amendments to the Comprehensive Plan authorize a property
owner to submit subsequent development applications consistent with the
amendment.
(2) Application Requirements
(a) Application Required
Any request for an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan shall be
accompanied by an application prepared in accordance with the City of
Crandall Development Standards (“Development Standards”), set forth
in SECTION 8 of this UDC.
(b) Accompanying Applications
Approval of an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan shall require all
subsequent development applications to be consistent with the approved
amendments.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan shall be
submitted to the City Manager. The City Manager shall review the
application for completeness in accordance with SECTION 4B(2) of this
UDC. The City Manager may, at his or her option, request a
recommendation from any other City employee or consultant. The City
Manager shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or
attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After
appropriate review, the City Manager shall forward a written
recommendation to the Commission for consideration.
July 21, 2011 118
(b) Notification Requirements
An application for an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan requires
published notice prior to consideration by the Commission and City
Council in accordance with SECTION 4C, above, of this UDC.
(c) Commission Recommendation
The Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the
TOMA and SECTION 4D of this UDC and make a written
recommendation regarding any proposed amendment to the
Comprehensive Plan to the City Council. The Commission may
recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the
amendment.
(d) Decision by City Council
The City Council shall receive the written recommendation of the
Commission regarding a proposed amendment to the Comprehensive
Plan and shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the TOMA and
SECTION 4D of this UDC. The City Council may vote to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the amendment.
(4) Criteria for Approval
The Commission, in making its recommendation, and the City Council, in
considering final action on an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan, should
consider whether the following criteria are met:
(a) The proposed amendment promotes the health, safety, or general welfare
of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the
City;
(b) An amendment to the text is consistent with other policies of the
Comprehensive Plan, taking into account the nature of any proposed map
amendment associated with the text amendment;
(c) An amendment to the Thoroughfare Master Plan or any other applicable
maps contained in the Comprehensive Plan is consistent with the policies
of the Comprehensive Plan that apply to the map being amended, taking
into account the nature of any proposed land use associated with the map
amendment;
(d) Any proposed amendment is consistent with the goals and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan;
(e) Any proposed amendment addresses circumstances that have changed
since the last time the plan map or text was considered, implements plan
policies better than the current plan map or text, corrects a mapping error,
or addresses a deficiency in the plan; and
(f) Other criteria that, at the discretion of the Commission and City Council,
are deemed relevant and important in the consideration of the amendment.
G. AMENDMENT OF UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
July 21, 2011 119
(1) Applicability
The provisions of this SECTION 4G apply to any request for an amendment
to this UDC. The City Council may, from time to time, on its own motion, or at
the request of the City Manager, amend, supplement, change, modify or
repeal the text of any portion of this UDC in order to establish and maintain
sound, stable and desirable development within the jurisdiction of the City.
The provisions of this section shall exclude amendments to any appendix
which may be amended by general consent of the City Council.
(2) Application Requirements
Requests for amendments to the text of this UDC may be initiated by the
request of the Commission, the City Council and/or the City Manager. A
request for an amendment to the text of this UDC shall be accompanied by an
application prepared in accordance with the Development Standards.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for an amendment to the text of this UDC shall be
submitted to the City Manager. The City Manager shall review the
application and may direct the proposed amendment to any other City
employee or consultant for review and recommendation. After
appropriate review, the City Manager shall forward a recommendation to
the Commission for consideration.
(b) Notification Requirements
An application for an amendment to the text of this UDC requires
published notice prior to consideration by the City Council.
(c) Commission Recommendation
The Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the
TOMA and SECTION 4D of this UDC and make a written
recommendation regarding a proposed amendment to the text of this
UDC to the City Council. The Commission may recommend approval,
approval with conditions, or denial of the amendment.
(d) Decision by City Council
The City Council shall receive the written recommendation of the
Commission regarding a proposed amendment to the text of this UDC
and shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the TOMA and
SECTION 4D of this UDC. The City Council may vote to approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the amendment.
(4) Criteria for Approval
The Commission, in making its written recommendation, and the City Council,
in considering final action on an amendment to the text of this UDC, should
consider whether the following criteria are met:
July 21, 2011 120
(a) The proposed amendment promotes the health, safety, or general welfare
of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the
City.
(b) An amendment to the text is consistent with other policies of this UDC and
the City.
(c) Any proposed amendment is consistent with the goals and objectives of
this UDC and the City.
(d) Other criteria which, at the discretion of the Commission and the City
Council, are deemed relevant and important in the consideration of the
amendment.
H. ANNEXATION
(1) Applicability
Annexation may be voluntary or involuntary and shall be required to meet all
requirements of LGC Chapter 43 for each proposed annexation.
The provisions of this SECTION 4H apply to any request for voluntary
annexation by a property owner wishing to extend the corporate limits of the
City to incorporate property adjacent to the City’s existing municipal
boundaries.
(2) Application Requirements
(a) Application Required
A request for annexation shall be accompanied by an application
prepared in accordance with the Development Standards.
(b) Accompanying Applications
Any request for annexation shall be accompanied by an application to
establish the initial zoning on the property. An application to establish
the zoning may be considered at the same meeting as the annexation
request so long as the ordinance providing for annexation is acted on
prior to any action on the zoning request. In the event that an
application for annexation is considered concurrently with the application
for zoning, the Commission may consider the zoning request and
provide a written recommendation to the City Council so long as the City
Council has adopted the annexation ordinance.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for annexation shall be submitted to the City Manager.
The City Manager shall review the application for completeness in
accordance with SECTION 4B(2) of this UDC. The City Manager may
request a recommendation from any other City employee or consultant.
The City Manager shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction
or attention before providing a recommendation on the application. After
July 21, 2011 121
appropriate review, the City Manager shall forward a written
recommendation to the City Council for consideration.
(b) Development Agreement
The City Manager shall comply with the approval. The City Council shall
comply with LGC Section 43.035, as amended.
(c) Notification Requirements
The City Manager shall provide notification in accordance with LGC
Section 43.062, as amended.
(d) Service Plan Required
The City Manager shall prepare an annexation service plan in
accordance with LGC Section 43.056, as amended.
(e) Decision by City Council
The City Council shall timely consider the request, or petition, for
annexation. If accepted the City Council shall schedule and hold two (2)
public hearings in accordance with LGC Section 43.063, as amended,
and shall take final action as required under Texas law.
(f) Other Procedures Applicable
A request for annexation is subject to all applicable rules and procedures
required by Texas law. In the event of a conflict between the
requirements of this UDC and Texas law, the requirements of Texas law
shall apply.
(4) Criteria for Approval
When considering a request for voluntary annexation, the City Council should
consider whether the following criteria are met:
(a) The application is consistent with the requirements of Texas law and this
UDC;
(b) The annexation promotes the health, safety, or general welfare of the City
and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City;
(c) The property owners and residents of the area consent to the annexation;
(d) The application includes a service plan as required by this SECTION 4H;
(e) The annexation is consistent with the goals and objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan; and
(f) Other criteria which, at the discretion of the Commission and City Council,
are deemed relevant and important in the consideration of the amendment.
I. DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS FOR PROPERTY IN THE ETJ
(1) Applicability
The purpose of a development agreement is to determine whether the City
wishes to authorize a plan of development for land located within the City’s
ETJ, to prescribe land uses, environmental standards, development
July 21, 2011 122
standards and public facilities standards governing development of the land
for the term of the agreement, to provide for the delivery of public facilities to
the property and to provide for annexation of the property to the City. A
development agreement may be approved for land located in the ETJ of the
City in accordance with LGC Section 212.172.
(2) Application Requirements
(a) Application Required
Any application for a development agreement shall be accompanied by
an application prepared in accordance with the Development Standards
and payment of the application fee.
(b) Accompanying Applications
An application for a development agreement shall be accompanied by a
preliminary plat prepared in accordance with SECTION 8G of this UDC.
Approval of a preliminary plat as part of a development agreement shall
meet the requirements for preliminary plat approval under SECTION 8G
of this UDC.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for a development agreement shall be submitted to the
City Manager. The City Manager shall review the application for
completeness in accordance with SECTION 4B of this UDC.
(b) Preparation and Negotiation of Agreement
An application for a development agreement shall be prepared in
accordance with LGC Section 212.172. After review by the City staff,
the application, signed agreement and accompanying plans shall be
transmitted to the office of the City Attorney for review. The City Council
shall have the sole authority for approval of a development agreement.
(c) Decision by City Council
The City Council may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the agreement. The City Council may, on its own motion or by request
of the property owner, postpone consideration of the request to a date
certain that is not more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of
the current consideration in order to review additional information or
modifications which may have a direct bearing on the final decision.
(d) Recording Agreement
Upon execution by the parties the approved development agreement
shall be recorded in the real property records of Kaufman County and
said development agreement shall be a covenant running with the land.
J. UTILITY SERVICE EXTENSION WITHIN THE ETJ
(1) Applicability
July 21, 2011 123
A request for approval of a utility extension shall be required where a property
owner seeks water or wastewater services from the City for a proposed
project that will be located within the City’s ETJ at the time of the proposed
extension and subsequent development. Approval of a request for a utility
extension authorizes the City to annex the property in accordance with the
requirements of LGC Chapter 43, and authorizes the property owner to
submit development applications consistent with the capacity of the facilities
to be extended, and upon approval of the applications, to construct
extensions of the facilities in accordance with the terms of the approved utility
service extension request.
(2) Application Requirements
(a) Application Required
Any application for utility service extension shall be accompanied by an
application prepared in accordance with the Development Standards.
(b) Accompanying Applications
1) An application for utility service extension shall be accompanied by a
request for voluntary annexation. The City may, at its option, elect to
annex the property upon request if the property meets the
requirements of LGC Chapter 43 and this UDC or may delay the
annexation until such time the City deems necessary to promote the
health, safety or general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly,
efficient and healthful development of the City.
2) An application for utility service extension may be accompanied by an
application for a subdivision master plan prepared in accordance with
SECTION 8E of this UDC. A subdivision master plan may not be
approved until final approval of the utility service extension by the City
Council.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
A request for utility service extension shall be submitted to the City
Engineer. The City Engineer shall review the application for
completeness in accordance with SECTION 4J(3)(b) below.
(b) Review and Processing of Request
The City Engineer shall circulate the application among applicable City
employees and/or consultants for review and recommendation. The City
Engineer shall evaluate the request for consistency with the approval
criteria and shall prepare a written recommendation to be forwarded to
the City Council. The recommendation should include any comments
received from other departments including, but not limited to, an analysis
of the financial feasibility of extending services and any fiscal impacts on
existing utilities from the extension.
(c) Decision by City Council
July 21, 2011 124
The City Council shall receive the written recommendation of the City
Engineer and shall decide whether to approve, approve with conditions,
or deny the request for utility service extension.
(4) Criteria for Approval
The City Council, in considering final action on a request for utility service
extension, should consider the following criteria:
(a) Whether the proposed development to be served by the extension is
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan;
(b) Whether the extension is proposed to be constructed in accordance with all
applicable City ordinances, regulations and standards;
(c) Whether it is feasible to annex the property, and any intervening or
adjacent and abutting property which is needed for utility rights-of-way, into
the City in conformity to Chapter 43 of the LGC;
(d) Whether the utility extension would compromise the City's ability to timely
provide adequate water or wastewater facilities to property inside the City;
(e) Whether the utility extension will lead to premature development that
cannot be served efficiently and timely by emergency services and
roadway, drainage or park facilities;
(f) Whether the utility extension is financially feasible to the City given the
proposed means of financing the extension;
(g) Whether the utility extension will lead to significant degradation of water
quality or other environmental resources, either from construction of the
water or wastewater improvements, development of the property owner’s
land, or development of other land that may be served through the
extended facilities;
(h) Whether the property owner proposes to extend wastewater facilities
without utilizing City water facilities; and
(i) The extent to which the proposed agreement promotes the health, safety or
general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful
development of the City.
K. VARIANCES
(1) Applicability
(a) The BOA shall have the ability to authorize, in specific cases, a variance
from the zoning regulations of this UDC if the variance is not contrary to the
public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this
UDC is observed and substantial justice is done. A variance shall not be
granted to relieve a self-created or personal hardship, nor shall it be based
solely on economic gain or loss, nor shall it permit any person a privilege in
developing a parcel of land not permitted by this UDC to other parcels of
land in the district.
July 21, 2011 125
(b) Approval of a variance legitimizes a condition that would otherwise be a
violation of this UDC and authorizes a property owner to submit
subsequent development applications consistent with the approved
variance.
(2) Application Requirements
Any request for a variance shall be accompanied by an application prepared
in accordance with the Development Standards.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for a variance and payment of the application fee shall be
submitted to the City Manager. The City Manager shall review the
application for completeness in accordance with SECTION 4Bof this
UDC. The City Manager may request a recommendation from any other
appropriate City employee or consultant. The City Manager shall notify
the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing a
recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City
Manager shall forward a written recommendation to the BOA for
consideration.
(b) Notification Requirements
An application for a variance requires the following notification in
accordance with SECTION 4C of this UDC:
1) Written notice; and
2) Published notice.
(c) Decision by the BOA
The BOA shall receive the recommendation of the City Manager and
shall hold a public hearing in accordance with SECTION 4D of this UDC.
The BOA may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
variance. The BOA may, on its own motion or by request of the property
owner, postpone consideration of the variance to a date certain that is
not more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the current
consideration in order to review additional information or modifications
which may have a direct bearing on the final decision.
(4) Criteria for Approval
In order to make a finding of hardship and grant a variance from the zoning
regulations of this UDC, the BOA shall determine the following:
(a) The requested variance does not violate the intent of this UDC or its
amendments;
(b) Special conditions of restricted area, topography or physical features exist
that are peculiar to the subject parcel of land and are not applicable to
other parcels of land in the same zoning district;
(c) The hardship is in no way the result of the applicant’s own actions; and
July 21, 2011 126
(d) The interpretation of the provisions in this UDC or any amendments thereto
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties
in the same zoning district that comply with the same provisions.
(5) Appeals of BOA Decisions
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the BOA, or any
taxpayer or any officer, department, or board of the City may appeal a
decision of the BOA regarding any variance request in accordance with
SECTION 3D of this UDC.
L. SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
(1) Applicability
(a) The BOA shall have the ability to authorize a modification of zoning
standards applicable to particular types of development within any zoning
district which is consistent with the overall intent of the zoning ordinance
and for which express standards are prescribed, but that requires
additional review to determine whether the development with the
modification is compatible with adjoining land uses and the character of the
neighborhood in which the development is proposed. An application for a
special exception may be filed for only those modifications specifically
identified in this UDC.
(b) Approval of a special exception authorizes a property owner to submit
subsequent development applications consistent with the approved special
exception.
(2) Application Requirements
Any request for a special exception shall be accompanied by an application
prepared in accordance with the Development Standards.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for a special exception shall be submitted to the City
Manager. The City Manager shall review the application for
completeness in accordance with SECTION 4B of this UDC. The City
Manager may request a recommendation from any other appropriate
City employee or consultant. The City Manager shall notify the applicant
of items requiring correction or attention before providing a
recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City
Manager shall forward a written recommendation to the BOA for
consideration.
(b) Notification Requirements
An application for a special exception requires the following notification
in accordance with SECTION 4C of this UDC:
1) Written notice; and
2) Published notice.
July 21, 2011 127
(c) Decision by the BOA
The BOA shall receive the written recommendation of the City Manager
and shall hold a public hearing in accordance with SECTION 4D of this
UDC. The BOA may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the special exception. The BOA may, on its own motion or by request of
the property owner, postpone consideration of the special exception to a
date certain that is not more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date
of the current consideration in order to review additional information or
modifications which may have a direct bearing on the final decision.
(4) Criteria for Approval
To approve an application for a special exception, the BOA must determine
that the following criteria are met:
(a) That granting the special exception serves an obvious and necessary
purpose.
(b) That granting the special exception will ensure an equal or better level of
land use compatibility than the otherwise applicable standards.
(c) That granting the special exception will not materially or adversely affect
adjacent land uses or the physical character of uses in the immediate
vicinity of the proposed development because of inadequate buffering,
screening, setbacks or other land use considerations.
(d) That granting the special exception will not adversely affect adjoining
property values in any material way.
(e) That granting the special exception will be generally consistent with the
purposes and intent of this UDC.
(f) That the use or special exception being sought is specifically identified in
the permitted uses section of the controlling zoning district for the subject
property as identified in this UDC.
(g) That the applicant’s requested use or exception specifically meets or
exceeds the express standards prescribed for the property in the
controlling zoning district.
(5) Appeal of Decision on Special Exception
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the BOA, or any
taxpayer or any officer, department, or board of the City may appeal a
decision of the BOA regarding any special exception request in accordance
with SECTION 3D(5) of this UDC.
M. APPEAL OF DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION DETERMINATION
(1) Purpose and Applicability
The purpose of an appeal is to contest an initial decision on a development
application based upon alleged misapplication of the regulations contained
within this UDC and the criteria for approval of the application. An appeal
may not be used to amend, vary or otherwise modify the standards of this
July 21, 2011 128
UDC that apply to the development application. Any decision on a
development application required by this UDC may be appealed to the board,
commission or City Council indicated within the specific procedures for each
such application. The granting of an appeal supersedes the decision from
which the appeal was taken and results in approval, conditional approval or
denial of the development application for which the approval was sought.
(2) Appeal Requirements
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision on a development
application, or any officer, department, or board of the City may appeal a
decision on a development application to the board, commission or City
Council responsible for consideration of the appeal as indicated in this UDC.
An appeal shall contain a written statement of the reasons why the decision is
erroneous, and shall be accompanied by a fee established by the City
Council. An appeal by an applicant shall be accompanied by a copy of the
development application on which the initial decision was rendered. An
appeal may include any other documents that support the position of the
appellant. A written appeal must be filed with the City Manager within ten
(10) working days from the date of notification of the decision on the
development application from which decision the appeal is sought.
(3) Processing of Appeal and Decision
(a) Submittal
An appeal of a development application decision shall be submitted to
the City Manager for processing. Upon receipt of a written appeal, the
City Manager shall compile all documents constituting the record of the
decision subject to appeal and transmit the record to the board,
commission or City Council responsible for considering the appeal.
(b) Stay of Proceedings
Receipt of a written appeal of a decision on a development application
stays all proceedings of the City in furtherance of the decision from
which the appeal is taken, including without limitation: acceptance,
processing or issuance of any subsequent development applications,
and any development activities authorized by initial approval of the
development application. The stay shall be lifted only if the City
Manager certifies in writing to the board, commission or City Council
responsible for consideration of the appeal that a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property. Thereafter, the stay may be reinstated
only by order of the board, commission or City Council responsible for
consideration of the appeal or a court of record, on application, after
notice to the City Manager, for due cause shown.
(c) Notification Requirements
An appeal requires the following notification in accordance with
SECTION 4C of this UDC:
1) Written notice; and
July 21, 2011 129
2) Published notice.
(d) Decision on Appeal
The board, commission or City Council responsible for consideration of
the appeal shall hold a public hearing and decide the appeal within thirty
(30) days of written receipt of the request for the appeal. The board,
commission, or City Council responsible for consideration of the appeal
shall affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the administrative official
from which the appeal was taken.
(e) Notification of Decision on Appeal
The appellant, property owner and the applicant for the development
application under appeal shall be notified of the decision on the appeal in
accordance with SECTION 4E of this UDC.
(4) Criteria for Approval
In deciding the appeal, the board, commission, or City Council responsible for
consideration of the appeal shall apply the same criteria that govern the initial
decision on the development application under the provisions of this
SECTION 4M
(5) Expiration and Extension
For purposes of determining expiration or extension periods under this UDC,
the date the board, commission or City Council responsible for consideration
of the appeal grants relief on the appeal is the date on which the development
application is deemed approved, modified or denied.
N. PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND
COMMUNITY FACILITIES AGREEMENTS
(1) Applicability
Every subdivision or development that requires the installation of public
infrastructure improvements to serve the proposed subdivision or
development is required to submit construction plans to ensure that the
required improvements are constructed in accordance with all applicable
standards of this UDC and any other codes of the City pertaining to the
construction and installation of the public infrastructure improvements. All
public infrastructure improvement construction plans shall be submitted and
approved by the City’s Director of Public Works prior to an application for a
final plat.
(2) Application Requirements
Any request for an approval of construction plans for public infrastructure
improvements shall be accompanied by an application prepared in
accordance with the requirements of this UDC. The City Manager shall be
responsible for determining the form and content of the construction plans.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
July 21, 2011 130
An application for approval of construction plans for public infrastructure
improvements shall be submitted to the City Manager prior to or
concurrently with an application for final plat. The City Manager shall
transmit the plans to the appropriate City employees and consultants for
review. The City Manager shall provide written notification of any items
requiring correction or attention within thirty (30) days after submittal of a
complete application.
(b) Decision by the City Manager
The City Manager shall be responsible for the final approval of any
construction plans for public infrastructure improvements and may
approve, approve with conditions, or deny said construction plans. Once
the construction plans for public infrastructure improvements are
approved, the property owner shall provide additional sets of the
approved plans to the City, as required by the City Manager, for use
during construction. A full set of the City-approved and stamped
construction plans for public infrastructure improvements must be
available for inspection on the job site at all times.
(c) Revisions to Construction Plans
If the conditions of approval require revision(s) to the construction plans
for public infrastructure improvements, one (1) set shall be marked with
objections noted (on the plans themselves and in memo format) and
returned to the applicant for correction, whereupon the applicant's
engineer shall correct the plans as requested and resubmit them for
decision. A properly revised set of construction plans for public
infrastructure improvements shall be submitted to the City Manager.
The City Manager shall approve or deny the revised set of plans.
(d) Appeals
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the City Manager,
or any taxpayer or any officer, department, or board of the City may
appeal the decision of the City Manager to the City Council and such
appeal shall be decided prior to action on a Final Plat. An appeal of the
City Manager’s decision must be accompanied by a written statement
regarding the grounds for appeal and shall be certified and documented
by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas.
(4) Criteria for Approval
When considering final action on public infrastructure improvement
construction plans, the City Manager, or the City Council on appeal, should
consider whether said construction plans meet the following criteria:
(a) The plans are consistent with the approved preliminary plat and the
proposed final plat;
(b) The plans conform to all applicable regulations pertaining to the
construction and installation of public infrastructure improvements; and
July 21, 2011 131
(c) The plans have been reviewed and approved by the City Manager.
(5) Timing of Public Infrastructure Improvement Construction
(a) Completion Prior to Final Plat Recordation
Except as provided below, after approval of a preliminary plat and before
an approved final plat is recorded, the installation of all public
infrastructure improvements required to serve the subdivision, whether
to be located off-site or on-site, including but not limited to water,
wastewater, drainage, roadway, sidewalks, trails and park
improvements, shall be completed in accordance with the approved
public infrastructure improvement construction plans and final accepted
by the City. The installation of improvements required for proper
drainage and prevention of soil erosion on individual residential lots and
improvements on any common areas shall also be completed prior to
recordation of the final plat in accordance with the approved construction
plans.
(b) Installation after Final Plat Approval
The property owner or applicant may request to defer the obligation to
construct and install one (1) or more public improvements to serve the
subdivision until after final plat recordation. The request shall be
submitted with an application for preliminary plat approval to provide fair
notice of the intent of the developer. Deferral of the obligation to install
public improvements shall be conditioned on execution of a subdivision
improvement agreement and sufficient surety in the form of a subdivision
improvements performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or cash
escrow acceptable to the City in the amount of at least one hundred
twenty-five percent (125%) of the cost to design and construct the
deferred improvements and to secure the obligations defined in the
agreement.
(c) Off-Site Easements
All necessary off-site easements required for installation of off-site public
improvements to serve the subdivision or development, together with a
title insurance policy therefore, shall be acquired by and at the sole cost
and expense of the subdivider or developer and conveyed solely to the
City by a warranty deed and as approved by the City Attorney.
(6) Community Facilities Agreement
(a) Obligations under Agreement
Whenever public infrastructure improvements to serve the development
are deferred until after recordation of the final plat, the property owner
shall enter into a community facilities agreement by which the owner
covenants to complete all required public infrastructure improvements,
including residential lot improvements for drainage or erosion control,
and common area improvements, no later than two (2) years following
the date upon which the final plat is approved. The agreement shall be
July 21, 2011 132
subject to review and approval by the City Attorney and City Engineer,
and shall be approved by the City Manager. The agreement shall
contain the following provisions:
1) Covenants to complete the improvements;
2) Covenants to warranty the improvements for a period of two (2) years
following final acceptance by the City;
3) Covenants to provide a maintenance bond in the amount of one
hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the costs of the improvements
for such two (2)-year warranty period;
4) Provisions for participation in the costs of the public infrastructure
improvements by the City, if authorization has been obtained from the
City Council, and a performance bond and payment bond for such
improvements from the contractor in favor of the City as a co-obligee;
5) Provisions for securing the obligations of the agreement consistent
with SECTION 4N(7) below; and
6) Such other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the property
owner and the City, or as may be required by this UDC.
(b) Covenants to Run with the Land
The community facilities agreement shall provide that the covenants
contained in the agreement run with the land and bind all successors,
heirs and assignees of the property owner. All existing lien holders shall
be required to execute the agreement or provide written consent to the
covenants contained in the agreement. The City shall deliver a release
to the developer and/or bona fide third party purchasers of individual lots
when all required public infrastructure improvements for the subdivision
or development in question have been completed and final accepted by
the City.
(7) Security for Completion of Improvements
(a) Security
Whenever the obligation to install public infrastructure improvements to
serve a subdivision or development is deferred until after recordation of
the final plat, the property owner shall provide sufficient security to
ensure completion of the required public infrastructure improvements.
The security shall be in the form of one or more of the following singly or
in combination:
1) A cash escrow with the City; or
2) A performance bond provided by a licensed surety company
authorized to underwrite federal obligations; or
3) A certificate of deposit issued by any financial institution which is
insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or Federal
Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation assigned to the City and
July 21, 2011 133
providing for the City to withdraw the deposit if necessary to complete
construction; or
4) An irrevocable letter of credit in a form approved by the City Attorney;
and
5) A conditional assignment to the City of the construction contract
between the property owner or developer and a general contractor for
the construction of the deferred public infrastructure improvements in
a form acceptable to the City Attorney.
(b) Amount and Acceptability
The security shall be issued in the amount of one hundred twenty-five
percent (125%) of the amount of the construction contract approved by
the City Engineer and City Manager for the design and construction of all
public infrastructure improvements associated with the subdivision.
Alternatively, the property owner or developer may provide a cost
estimate for the design and construction of all public infrastructure
improvements associated with the subdivision prepared and sealed by a
professional engineer licensed by the State of Texas and approved by
the City Engineer and Director of Public Works. The terms of the
security agreement shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney.
(c) Building Permits
No building permit for vertical construction shall be issued until all public
infrastructure improvements within the development have been final
accepted by the City.
(d) Remedies
Where a community facilities agreement has been executed and security
has been posted and required public infrastructure improvements have
not been installed in accordance with the terms of the agreement, the
City may:
1) Declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the public
infrastructure improvements be installed regardless of the extent of
completion of the development at the time the agreement is declared
to be in default;
2) Obtain funds under the security and complete the public infrastructure
improvements itself or through a third party;
3) Obtain funds under the security and hold the funds in escrow for
completion of the public infrastructure improvements at a future date;
or
4) Assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party,
including a subsequent owner of the development in exchange for the
subsequent owner's agreement and posting of security to complete
the public infrastructure improvements serving the tract.
(8) Inspection and Final Acceptance of Public Improvements
July 21, 2011 134
(a) Inspections
Construction inspection shall be supervised by the City Engineer.
Construction shall be in accordance with the approved construction
plans. Any significant change in design required during construction shall
be made by the subdivider’s engineer, and shall be subject to approval
by the City Engineer. If the City Engineer finds upon inspection that any
of the required public infrastructure improvements have not been
constructed properly and in accordance with the approved construction
plans, the property owner shall be responsible for completing and/or
correcting the construction of such public infrastructure improvements.
(b) Submission of As-Built Plans or Record Drawings
The City shall not final accept dedication of required public infrastructure
improvements until the applicant's engineer has certified to the City
Engineer, through submission of a detailed “as-built” record drawing or
survey plat of the property and any off-site easements, the location,
dimensions, materials, and other information establishing that the public
infrastructure improvements have been built in accordance with the
approved construction plans and the City’s Code of Ordinances and all
other applicable local, state and federal regulations. Each “as-built”
sheet shall show all changes made in the plans during construction and
on each sheet there shall be an as-built stamp bearing the signature of
the engineer and date. “As-built” items required are as follows:
1) One (1) set of full size plans;
2) Electronic (digital) copies of all plans in CAD .dxf or .dwg format and
.pdf format;
3) Design Engineer’s Certificate of Review; and
4) Letter with guaranties and costs of all infrastructure being dedicated to
the City to include information regarding: linear feet of streets, public
drainage, sewer lines and water lines.
(c) Final Acceptance of Infrastructure Improvements
When the City Engineer has determined that the public infrastructure
improvements have been installed in accordance with the approved
construction plans, the City Engineer shall final accept such
improvements on behalf of the City. Final acceptance of the public
infrastructure improvements shall mean that the property owner has
transferred all rights to all the public infrastructure improvements to the
City for use and maintenance. The City Engineer may final accept
dedication of a portion of the required public infrastructure
improvements, provided adequate surety has been given for the
completion of all of the other public infrastructure improvements. Upon
final acceptance of the required public infrastructure improvements, the
City Engineer shall have a certificate issued to the property owner
July 21, 2011 135
stating that all or part of the required public infrastructure improvements
have been satisfactorily completed.
(d) Disclaimer
Approval of a preliminary or final plat by the Commission shall not
constitute final acceptance of any of the public infrastructure
improvements required to serve the subdivision or development. No
public infrastructure improvements shall be accepted for dedication by
the City except in accordance with SECTION 4N(8)(c) of this UDC.
(9) Maintenance and Warranty of Improvements
(a) Maintenance During Construction
The developer shall maintain all required public infrastructure
improvements during construction of the development.
(b) Bond
The developer or owner shall covenant to warranty the required public
infrastructure improvements for a period of two (2) years following final
acceptance by the City of all required public infrastructure improvements
and shall provide a maintenance bond in the amount of one hundred
twenty-five percent (125%) of the costs of the public infrastructure
improvements for such period. All public infrastructure improvements
located within an easement or right-of-way shall be bonded.
O. BUILDING PERMITS
(1) Applicability
An application for a building permit is required within the City’s corporate
limits, and in the City's ETJ, prior to the placement, construction or alteration
of a building or structure. Approval of an application for a building permit
authorizes the property owner to construct, alter or place a structure on the
lot, tract or parcel. Approval of an application for a building permit also
authorizes the property owner, upon completion of a structure intended for
human occupancy, to make application for a certificate of occupancy.
(2) Application Requirements
Any request for a building permit shall be accompanied by an application
prepared in accordance with requirements of the Development Standards.
The Building Official shall be responsible for determining the form and content
of the building permit application.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for a building permit shall be submitted to the Building
Official. The Building Official shall review the application for
completeness in accordance with SECTION 4B of this UDC. The
Building Official shall review the permit for compliance with all adopted
building codes and regulations and shall provide written notification of
July 21, 2011 136
any items requiring correction or attention within forty-five (45) days after
submittal of a complete application.
(b) Decision by the Building Official
The Building Official may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
building permit.
(c) Appeals
Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the Building Official,
or any taxpayer or any officer, department, or board of the City may
appeal the decision of the Building Official to the BOA.
(4) Criteria for Approval
The Building Official shall apply the following criteria in deciding whether to
approve the application for a building permit:
(a) The application generally conforms to all prior approved development
applications for the property and any variance authorizing variation from
the standards otherwise applicable to the permit;
(b) The location of the structure on the property is in accordance with all prior
approved development applications, the City’s Code of Ordinances, and all
other applicable local, state and federal regulations;
(c) The proposed plan for construction or alteration conforms to the City’s
adopted Building Code and other applicable construction codes adopted by
the City;
(d) All applicable fees, including impact fees, have been paid;
(e) A final plat of the property has been recorded in the Kaufman County plat
records; and
(f) All public infrastructure required has been installed and accepted by the
City.
(5) Issuance
No building permit shall be issued on property that is not a lot of record with
the following exceptions:
(a) Additions to existing structures which do not exceed twenty-five percent
(25%) of the building’s floor area in existence at the time of the adoption of
this UDC; and
(b) Interior finish-out or improvements to existing structures.
(6) Cancellation of Building Permit
Failure of an applicant or any of his/her agents, representatives or contractors
to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, use or maintain any building, structure
or premises in conformance with the approved plans upon which a building
permit was issued, when such failure constitutes a violation of any provision
of this UDC, shall render such building permit void, and the Building Official
(or his/her designee) is hereby authorized and directed to revoke any such
July 21, 2011 137
permit by giving written notice to the applicant or his/her agent or
representative, and all work upon such building, structure or premises shall
be immediately discontinued until such building, structure or premises shall
be brought into conformance with the approved plans and with all applicable
provisions of this UDC.
P. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
(1) A Certificate of Occupancy (“CO”) shall be required for any of the following:
(a) Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered;
(b) Change in use of an existing building to a different use; and
(c) Change in the use of land to a different use.
(2) No such use, or change of use, shall take place until a CO therefor shall have
been issued by the Building Official.
(3) A record of all COs shall be kept on file in the City Secretary’s office, and copies
shall be furnished upon request to any person in accordance with Texas law.
(4) Procedure for New or Altered Buildings - Written application for a CO for a new
building or for an existing building that is to be altered shall be made at the
same time as the application for the building permit for such building. Said CO
shall be issued after the Building Official orders the building or structure
inspected and finds no violations of the provisions of this UDC, or other
regulations that are enforced by the Building Official. Said CO shall be issued
by the Building Official after the erection or alteration of such building or part
thereof has been completed in conformity with all applicable provisions of this
UDC and City building codes.
(5) Procedure for Vacant Land or a Change in Building Use - Written application for
a CO for the use of vacant land, a change in the use of land or a change in the
use of a building, or for a change from a nonconforming use to a conforming
use, shall be made to the Building Official. If the proposed use is a conforming
use, as herein provided, written application shall be made to said Building
Official. If the proposed use is found to be in conformity with the provisions of
this UDC and other applicable City codes, the CO shall be issued after the
application for same has been made and all required inspections are completed
and approved by the Building Official within ten (10) days following receipt of the
application.
(6) Contents of CO - Every CO shall contain the following information:
(a) Building permit number;
(b) The address of the building;
(c) The name and address of the owner;
(d) A description of that portion of the building for which the CO is issued;
(e) A statement that the described portion of the building has been inspected
for compliance with the requirements of the City’s building codes for the
particular group and division of occupancy;
July 21, 2011 138
(f) The name of the Building Official;
(g) Use(s) allowed;
(h) Maximum number of persons/occupants; and
(i) Issue date of the CO.
(7) Posting of CO - The CO shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
and shall not be removed except by the Building Official.
(8) Revocation of CO - The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a
CO issued under the provisions of this UDC whenever the CO is issued in error,
or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or when it is determined that
the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or
regulation or any of the provision of this UDC or the building code and other
codes adopted by the City, and any amendments thereto.
(9) Temporary CO - Pending the issuance of a regular Certificate, a temporary CO
may be issued by the Building Official for a time period not exceeding one
hundred eighty (180) calendar days during the completion of alterations or
during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Issuance of a
temporary CO shall only be upon a finding by the Building Official that early
occupancy of the premises prior to completion will not, in his/her opinion, be
detrimental to the occupant’s or others’ health, safety or welfare. Issuance of a
temporary CO shall not be construed to alter the respective rights, duties or
obligations of the owner or of the City relating to the use occupancy of the
premises or any other matter covered by this UDC.
(10) CO for Nonconforming Uses - A CO shall be required for all lawful
nonconforming uses of land and/or buildings created by adoption of this UDC.
Application for such CO for a nonconforming use shall be filed with the Building
Official by the owner or occupant of the structure or land that is occupied by the
nonconforming use within one (1) year following the effective date of this UDC.
It shall be the duty of the Building Official to issue a CO for a lawful
nonconforming use upon receipt of application for same, but failure to apply for
such CO for a nonconforming use (i.e., by the owner or occupant of the
premises) shall be evidence that said nonconforming use was either illegal or
did not lawfully exist as of the effective date of this UDC.
Q. COMPLETION OF BUILDINGS IN PROGRESS
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the plans, construction or
designated use of a building, the foundation for which has been completely
constructed as of the effective date of this UDC, and the remaining construction of
which shall have been completed within one (1) year following the effective date of
this UDC. In addition, any nonresidential building or structure for which a building
permit has been approved by the City not more than one (1) year prior to the
effective date of this UDC may be constructed according to the terms of that
building permit
SECTION 5 - ZONING DISTRICTS
July 21, 2011 139
A. PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
The zoning regulations and districts contained in this SECTION 5 are established
in accordance with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and as authorized by LGC
Chapter 211, for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare, and protecting and preserving places and areas of historical,
cultural and/or architectural importance and significance within the City limits.
They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets, to secure safety
from fire, panic and other dangers, to ensure adequate light and air, to prevent the
overcrowding of land and thus avoid undue concentration of population, and to
facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water supply, wastewater
treatment, schools, parks and other public requirements. They are established
with reasonable consideration for, among other things, the character of each
zoning district and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified,
conserving the value of buildings and environmentally sensitive features, and
encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.
B. DIMENSIONAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL STANDARDS
(1) General
All projects or developments shall comply with all of the applicable
dimensional and development standards of this section. Additional
requirements may also apply as required in other sections of this UDC. All
area requirements and lot sizes shall be calculated based on gross acres.
(2) Additional Dimensional and Development Standards
(a) All lots developed shall comply with the lot area, minimum setbacks and
height requirements established in SECTION 5E for the zoning district(s) in
which the lot(s) is/are located.
(b) All lots developed for nonresidential purposes shall comply with lot, area,
minimum setbacks, and maximum height requirements established for the
zoning district(s) in which the lot(s) is located, as established in SECTION
5E.
(c) All lots shall have at least the minimum area, width and depth as indicated
in SECTION 5E.
(d) Platted subdivisions established by a duly approved plat filed prior to
adoption of this UDC shall be exempt from meeting any new lot width,
depth, and/or square footage requirements.
(e) No lot existing at the time of passage of this UDC shall be reduced in size
below the minimum area requirements set forth in SECTION 5E.
(f) Minimum lot size requirements shall not apply to previously platted lots that
are annexed into the City, but shall apply in the event of a vacation and
replat of such property. All other requirements of this UDC shall,
nevertheless, apply.
July 21, 2011 140
(g) No portion of any building on a residential lot may be located on any lot
closer to any lot line or to the street right-of-way line than is authorized in
SECTION 5E, unless otherwise listed below:
1) Where the frontage on one (1) side of a street is divided by two (2) or
more zoning districts, the front yard setback shall comply with the
requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire frontage
between the nearest intersecting streets.
2) Where the building setback line has been established by plat and
exceeds the requirements of this UDC, the more restrictive setback
line shall apply.
3) The front yard setback shall be measured from the property line to the
front face of the building, covered porch, covered terrace, or attached
accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions may project into the
required front yard, not to exceed twenty-four inches (24”).
4) Side Yards: Every part of a required side yard shall be open and
unobstructed except for accessory buildings as permitted herein and
the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and
other architectural features projecting, not to exceed, twelve inches
(12”) into the required side yard, and roof eaves projecting, not to
exceed, twenty-four inches (24”) into the required side yard.
5) Rear Yards: Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and
unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty inches (30”) above the
general ground level of the graded lot, except for accessory buildings
as permitted and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses,
cornices and roof overhangs and other architectural features
projecting, not to exceed, twenty-four inches (24”) into the required
rear yard.
6) Where lots have double frontage, running from one (1) street to
another, a required front yard setback shall be provided on both
streets.
7) Mixed Use Building: In a building serving dwelling and other uses, in
any district, the height and area regulations applicable to
nonresidential buildings shall apply.
8) There shall be only one (1) residential dwelling on each platted
residential lot of a duly recorded plat.
C. ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
The zoning district boundary lines shown on the Zoning Map are usually along
streets, alleys, property lines, or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to
the boundaries of districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall
apply:
(1) Boundaries shown as approximately following the centerlines of streets,
highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
July 21, 2011 141
(2) Boundaries shown as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed
as following such lot lines.
(3) Boundaries shown as approximately following City limits shall be construed as
following such City limits.
(4) Boundaries shown as following railroad lines shall be construed to be located
along the centerline of the railroad right-of-way lines.
(5) Boundaries shown as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such
shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as
moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries shown as approximately following
the centerlines of streams, rivers, creeks, canals, bodies of water, or drainage
ways shall be construed to follow such centerlines, and in the event of change in
any such centerlines shall be construed to move with such centerlines.
(6) Boundaries shown as parallel to, or extensions of, features described in
SECTION 5C(1) through SECTION 5C(5) above shall be so construed. The
scale of the Map shall determine distances that are not specifically indicated on
the Zoning Map.
(7) Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the
City Council, or whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the
zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way
shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or
public way and all areas so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all
regulations of the extended districts.
(8) The zoning classification applied to a tract of land adjacent to a street shall
extend to the centerline of the street unless, as a condition of zoning approval, it
is specifically stated that the zoning classification shall not apply to the street.
(9) Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information shown
on the Zoning Map, or if there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of
property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of
SECTION 5C(1) through SECTION 5C(8) above, then the BOA shall interpret
the zoning district boundaries. If the BOA cannot ascertain the zoning of the
property, then the property shall be considered classified as “A” (Agricultural
district) in the same manner as provided for newly annexed territory.
(10) If the zoning of property is invalidated by a judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction, the property shall be considered classified as "A" (Agricultural
district) in the same manner as provided for newly annexed territory.
(11) Zoning changes which are still valid and which were made between the effective
date of the previous Zoning Ordinance (Ordinance No. 050406, as amended),
adopted on May 8, 2006, and the effective date of this Ordinance are indicated
in approximate locations on the Zoning Map. For exact legal descriptions, refer
to the adopting ordinances for each particular zoning change.
D. ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
July 21, 2011 142
(1) The City is hereby geographically divided into zoning districts and the
boundaries of those districts herein are delineated upon the Official Zoning Map
of the City. The use and dimensional regulations, and other standards, as set
out in this section apply to each district. Zoning districts are established in
compliance with adopted Comprehensive and Thoroughfare Plans. The districts
established herein shall be known as:
Table 5-1
Zoning District Summary
Abbreviated
Designation Zoning District Name
A Agricultural
SF-E Single-Family Estate Residential - (min 40,000 square-foot lots)
SF-20 Single-Family Residential-20 (min 20,000 square-foot lots)
SF-12.5 Single-Family Residential-12.5 (min 12,500 square-foot lots)
SF-9 Single-Family Residential-9 (min 9,000 square-foot lots)
SF-6.5 Single-Family Residential-6.5 (min 6,500 square-foot lots)
SF-PH Single-Family Residential-Patio Home (zero-lot-line homes)
SF-TH Single-Family Residential-Town Home Residential
MF-15 Multi-Family Residential-15 (apartments)
SF-MH Single-Family Residential-Manufactured Home
MHP Manufactured Home Park
O Office
NS Neighborhood Service
R Retail
BP Business Park
OTC Old Town Crandall
HB Highway Business
C Commercial
LI Limited Industrial
IP Industrial Park
PD Planned Development
(2) Permitted Uses
Those uses listed for each district listed in SECTION 5H as “P” are authorized
uses permitted by right and those uses listed in SECTION 5H as “S” are
permitted upon approval of a SUP.
(3) Special Requirements for Single-Family (SF) Zoning Districts
(a) Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used for
on-site dwelling purposes, and shall be parked and stored behind the front
building façade of the main structure (i.e., the house).
(b) Electrical fencing and barbed wire are prohibited as perimeter fencing
except for containment of farm animals on parcels of five (5) or more acres.
July 21, 2011 143
(c) Open storage is prohibited (except for usable materials for the resident's
personal use or consumption such as firewood, garden materials, farm
equipment that is in usable and running condition, etc., which cannot be
stored in any required setback and which shall be screened from view of
public streets and neighboring properties).
(d) Single-family homes, including town homes and manufactured homes, with
side-entry garages where lot frontage is only to one street (not a corner lot)
shall have a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') from the door face of the
garage or carport to the side property line for maneuvering. The minimum
setback from any garage door to a street or alley right-of-way line shall also
be twenty-five feet (25’).
(e) The elimination of a garage space by enclosing the garage with a
stationary building wall shall be prohibited unless another garage of the
same size (i.e., that has the same number of parking spaces) is built
elsewhere on the lot within the proper setbacks, not exceeding the
maximum lot coverage, etc.
(f) Swimming pools shall comply with the City of Crandall’s codes/ordinances
pertaining to same.
(g) Site plan approval shall be required for any nonresidential use (e.g.,
school, church, child care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the
Agricultural District. Any nonresidential land use which may be permitted in
this district shall conform to the NS-Neighborhood Service district
standards with respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building
construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc.
(h) Other Regulations - As established by SECTION 7, SECTION 8, and
SECTION 9 of this UDC.
(4) Special Requirements for Certain Nonresidential Zoning Districts
The following requirements apply to the O, NS, R, BP, HB, C, LI, and IP
zoning districts:
(a) Parking requirements are as set forth in SECTION 10 of this UDC.
(b) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9E of this UDC.
All façades of main buildings that face a public street or a residentially
zoned district shall have façade offsets of at least five feet (5’) for every
fifty-foot (50’) length of flat wall, both horizontally and vertically, and such
offsets shall comprise at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total overall
horizontal façade length for horizontal offsets, and average vertical façade
height for vertical offsets (i.e., above the average vertical roof plane of the
building as viewed on plan elevations).
(c) Driveway Spacing (i.e., distance between driveways, measured edge-toedge):
1) Arterial street – One driveway per two hundred (200) linear feet of
frontage.
July 21, 2011 144
2) Collector street – One driveway per one hundred (100) linear feet of
frontage.
3) Local/residential street – One driveway per fifty (50) linear feet of
frontage unless a platted lot’s frontage is less than fifty feet (50’) but in
conformance with the Development Standards’ requirements for
minimum lot frontage, in which case one driveway shall be allowed
per platted lot.
4) Minimum distance from driveway to street corner – Seventy-five feet
(75’), as measured from the street corner radius point of tangency.
Fifty feet (50’) may be permitted via site plan approval by the City
Council, upon recommendation by the Commission, provided that the
lesser distance of fifty feet (50’) is approved in writing by the City
Manager or, if located on a State roadway, it is approved in writing by
the local representative of the Texas Department of Transportation.
(d) Site Plan Review - Review and approval of a site plan by the Commission
and the City Council (in accordance with SECTION 8N of this UDC) shall
be required for any tract/lot within these zoning districts. No certificate of
occupancy shall be issued unless all construction and development
conforms to the Site Plan as approved by the City Council.
(e) Landscaping Requirements – Landscaping is required for these zoning
districts. See SECTION 9G of this UDC.
(f) Screening Requirements – Screening is required in these zoning districts.
See SECTION 9H of this UDC.
(g) Building facade (i.e., elevation) plans shall be submitted for review and
approval along with the Site Plan. Facade plans shall clearly show how the
building(s) will look, especially as viewed from the major thoroughfare upon
which the property faces and/or sides, and will portray a reasonably
accurate depiction of the materials and colors to be used. The City
Manager may require submission of additional information and materials
(possibly actual samples of materials to be used) during the Site Plan
review process.
(h) Recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes or temporary buildings
may not be used for on-site dwelling or permanent nonresidential
purposes.
(i) Where outside storage or display of merchandise is allowed, the following
requirements shall be met:
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of
seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) shall meet the
following requirements:
a) Storage
i) Shall not occupy any of the parking spaces that are
required by this UDC for the primary use(s) of the
July 21, 2011 145
property (except on a temporary basis only, which is a
maximum of thirty (30) days per display and a maximum
of two displays per calendar year);
ii) Shall not pose a safety or visibility hazard, nor impede
public vehicular or pedestrian circulation, either on-site or
off-site, in any way; and
iii) Shall not extend into public right-of-way or onto adjacent
property.
b) All outside display items shall be removed at the end of
business each day (except for large seasonal items such as
Christmas trees).
2) Long-term or permanent open storage shall require issuance of a
Specific Use Permit (SUP) in accordance with SECTION 5I of this
UDC, shall be limited to a maximum of five percent (5%) of the total lot
area, shall not be located in front of (i.e., on the street side of) or on
top of the building, and must be screened in accordance with the
provisions of SECTION 9H of this UDC (i.e., cannot be visible from
any public street or adjacent property). However, periodic temporary
display of seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) is
allowed during the appropriate time periods (see provisions for
outside display above).
3) All merchandise shall be displayed in a neat, orderly manner, and the
display area shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free manner.
(j) Other regulations apply as established in SECTION 7, SECTION 8, and
SECTION 9 of this UDC.
E. ZONING DISTRICTS
(1) A - Agricultural District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The A, Agricultural, district is designed to permit the use of land for the
ranching, propagation and cultivation of crops and similar uses of vacant
land. Single-family uses on large lots are also appropriate for this
district. Territory that has been newly annexed into the City is initially
zoned Agricultural until it is assigned another more permanent zoning
district. It is anticipated that Agricultural zoned land will eventually be
rezoned to another more permanent, suburban zoning classification in
the future. The Agricultural district is also appropriate for areas where
development is premature due to lack of utilities or City services; to
preserve areas that are unsuitable for development due to problems that
may present hazards such as flooding, in which case the Agricultural
zoning designation should be retained until such hazards are mitigated
and the land is rezoned; and to provide permanent greenbelts or to
preserve open space areas as buffers around uses that might otherwise
be objectionable or pose environmental or health hazards.
July 21, 2011 146
(b) Maximum Height
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main
building/house, whichever is less.
2) Forty-five feet (45') for uninhabited agricultural structures (e.g., barns,
silos, water towers, etc.), provided they are no closer than one
hundred feet (100') from any residential structure on the premises,
and they are set back at least one hundred feet (100') or three (3)
times their height (whichever is greater) from any front, side or rear
property line.
3) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached
garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling units, etc.
4) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9, of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lots
a) Minimum Lot Area - Five (5) acres.
b) Minimum Lot Width - Two hundred and fifty feet (250').
c) Minimum Lot Depth - Two hundred feet (200').
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard - Fifty feet (50').
b) Minimum Side Yard - Fifteen percent (15%) of the lot width,
but need not exceed fifty feet (50'); twenty-five feet (25') from a
street right-of-way line for a corner lot.
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty-five feet (25').
3) Maximum Lot Coverage
Fifteen percent (15%) for main buildings and accessory buildings.
4) Parking Regulations
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed
parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot
as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces
on a paved driveway having a minimum length of twenty-five
feet (25’) as measured from the street right-of-way line.
b) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC.
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – Two thousand two hundred
and fifty (2,250) square feet.
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this
UDC.
(2) SF-E - Single-Family Estate Residential District
July 21, 2011 147
(a) General Purpose and Description
The SF-E, Single-Family Estate Residential, district is intended to
provide for development of primarily very low-density detached, singlefamily
residences on lots of not less than 40,000 square feet in size,
churches, schools and public parks in logical neighborhood units. Areas
zoned for the SF-E district shall have, or shall make provision for, City of
Crandall water and sewer services. They shall be designed to
adequately accommodate storm drainage; they shall have paved
concrete streets with logical and efficient vehicular circulation patterns
that discourage non-local traffic; they shall be properly buffered from
nonresidential uses; and they shall be protected from pollution and
undesirable environmental and noise impacts.
(b) Maximum Height
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main
building/house, whichever is less.
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached
garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling units, etc.
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9, of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lots
a) Minimum Lot Area - Forty thousand (40,000) square feet;
maximum density one (1) dwelling unit per acre.
b) Minimum Lot Width - One hundred and twenty feet (120’).
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred and twenty feet (120’).
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard - Forty feet (40').
b) Minimum Side Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’); twenty-five feet
(25’) from a street right-of way line for a corner lot.
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’).
3) Maximum Lot Coverage
Twenty-five percent (25%) for the main building; forty percent
(40%) for the main building and any accessory buildings, driveways
and parking areas combined.
4) Parking Regulations
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed
parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot
as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces
on a paved driveway having a minimum length of twenty-five
feet (25’) as measured from the street right-of-way line.
b) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC.
July 21, 2011 148
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – Two thousand two hundred
and fifty (2,250) square feet.
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this
UDC.
(3) SF-20 - Single-Family Residential-20 District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The SF-20, Single-Family Residential-20, district is intended to provide
for development of primarily very low-density detached, single-family
residences on lots of not less than 20,000 square feet in size, churches,
schools and public parks in logical neighborhood units. Areas zoned for
the SF-20 district shall have, or shall make provision for, City of Crandall
water and sewer services. They shall be designed to adequately
accommodate storm drainage; they shall have paved concrete streets
with logical and efficient vehicular circulation patterns that discourage
non-local traffic; they shall be properly buffered from nonresidential uses;
and they shall be protected from pollution and undesirable environmental
and noise impacts.
(b) Maximum Height
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main
building/house, whichever is less.
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached
garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling units, etc.
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lots
a) Minimum Lot Area - Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet;
maximum density two (2) dwelling units per acre.
b) Minimum Lot Width - One hundred ten feet (110’).
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred twenty feet (120’).
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30').
b) Minimum Side Yard – Fifteen feet (15’); twenty-five feet (25')
from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot.
c) Minimum Rear Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’).
3) Maximum Lot Coverage
Thirty percent (30%) for the main building; fifty percent (50%) for
the main building and any accessory buildings, driveways and
parking areas combined.
July 21, 2011 149
4) Parking Regulations
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed
parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot
as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces
on a paved driveway having a minimum length of twenty-five
feet (25’) as measured from the street right-of-way line.
b) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC.
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – Two thousand two hundred
and fifty (2,250) square feet.
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this
UDC.
(4) SF-12.5 - Single-Family Residential-12.5 District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The SF-12.5, Single-Family Residential-12.5, district is intended to
provide for development of primarily low-density detached, single-family
residences on lots of not less than 12,500 square feet in size, churches,
schools and public parks in logical neighborhood units. Areas zoned for
the SF-12.5 district shall have, or shall make provision for, City of
Crandall water and sewer services. They shall be designed to
adequately accommodate storm drainage; they shall have paved
concrete streets with logical and efficient vehicular circulation patterns
that discourage non-local traffic; they shall be properly buffered from
nonresidential uses; and they shall be protected from pollution and
undesirable environmental and noise impacts.
(b) Maximum Height
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main
building/house, whichever is less.
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached
garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling units, etc.
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lots
a) Minimum Lot Area - Twelve thousand five hundred (12,500)
square feet; also, the minimum average lot area shall be
thirteen thousand five hundred (13,500) square feet in order to
provide diversity in lot sizes within each SF-12.5
neighborhood; maximum density three (3) dwelling units per
acre.
b) Minimum Lot Width – Eighty-five feet (85’).
July 21, 2011 150
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred twenty feet (120’).
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’).
b) Minimum Side Yard – Ten feet (10’) for interior side yard;
twenty-five feet (25') from a street right-of-way line for a corner
lot.
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’).
3) Maximum Lot Coverage
Forty percent (40%) for the main building; sixty percent (60%) for
the main building and any accessory buildings, driveways and
parking areas combined.
4) Parking Regulations
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed
parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot
as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces
on a paved driveway having a minimum length of twenty-five
feet (25’) as measured from the street right-of-way line.
b) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC.
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – One thousand eight hundred
(1,800) square feet; also, the minimum average floor area shall be two
thousand (2,000) square feet in order to provide diversity in house
sizes within each SF-12.5 neighborhood.
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this
UDC.
(5) SF-9 - Single-Family Residential-9 District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The SF-9, Single-Family Residential-9, district is intended to provide for
development of primarily detached, single-family residences on smaller
and more compact lots of not less than 9,000 square feet in size,
churches, schools and public parks in logical neighborhood units. Areas
zoned for the SF-9 district shall have, or shall make provision for, City
water and sewer services. They shall be designed to adequately
accommodate storm drainage; they shall have paved concrete streets
with logical and efficient vehicular circulation patterns that discourage
non-local traffic; they shall be properly buffered from nonresidential uses;
and they shall be protected from pollution and undesirable environmental
and noise impacts.
(b) Maximum Height
July 21, 2011 151
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main
building/house, whichever is less.
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached
garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling units, etc.
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lots
a) Minimum Lot Area - Nine thousand (9,000) square feet; also,
the minimum average lot area shall be ten thousand (10,000)
square feet in order to provide diversity in lot sizes within each
SF-9 neighborhood; maximum density three and one-half (3.5)
dwelling units per acre.
b) Minimum Lot Width – Seventy-five feet (75’).
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred ten feet (110’).
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’)
b) Minimum Side Yard – Ten feet (10’) for interior side yard;
fifteen feet (15’) for a corner lot on a residential or collector
street; twenty-five feet (25’) for a corner lot on an arterial
street.
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’).
3) Maximum Lot Coverage
Forty percent (40%) for the main building; sixty percent (60%) for
the main building and any accessory buildings, driveways and
parking areas combined.
4) Parking Regulations
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed
parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot
as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces
on a paved driveway having a minimum length of twenty-five
feet (25’) as measured from the street right-of-way line.
b) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC.
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – One thousand six hundred
and fifty (1,650) square feet; also, the minimum average floor area
shall be one thousand seven hundred and fifty (1,750) square feet in
order to provide diversity in house sizes within each SF-9
neighborhood.
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this
UDC.
July 21, 2011 152
(6) SF-6.5 - Single-Family Residential-6.5 District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The SF-6.5, Single-Family Residential-6.5, district was originally
intended to provide for development of primarily detached, single-family
residences on small, compact lots of not less than 6,500 square feet in
size, churches, schools and public parks in logical neighborhood units.
Areas zoned for the SF-6.5 district shall have, or shall make provision
for, City of Crandall water and sewer services. They shall be designed
to adequately accommodate storm drainage; they shall have paved
concrete streets with logical and efficient vehicular circulation patterns
that discourage non-local traffic; they shall be properly buffered from
nonresidential uses; and they shall be protected from pollution and
undesirable environmental and noise impacts.
(b) Maximum Height
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main
building/house, whichever is less.
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached
garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling units, etc.
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lots
a) Minimum Lot Area - Six thousand five hundred (6,500) square
feet; also, the minimum average lot area shall be seven
thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet in order to provide
diversity in lot sizes within each SF-6.5 neighborhood;
maximum density four and one-half (4.5) dwelling units per
acre.
b) Minimum Lot Width – Sixty-five feet (65’).
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred feet (100’).
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’).
b) Minimum Side Yard – Eight feet (8’) of the lot width for interior
side yard; fifteen feet (15’) for a corner lot on a residential or
collector street; twenty-five feet (25’) for a corner lot on an
arterial street.
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’).
3) Maximum Lot Coverage
Forty percent (40%) for the main building; sixty percent (60%) for
the main building and any accessory buildings, driveways and
parking areas combined.
July 21, 2011 153
4) Parking Regulations
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed
parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot
as the main structure, plus two (2) additional parking spaces
on a paved driveway having a minimum length of twenty-five
feet (25’) as measured from the street right-of-way line.
b) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC.
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – One thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet; also, the minimum average floor area shall be
one thousand six hundred and fifty (1,650) square feet in order to
provide diversity in house sizes within each SF-6.5 neighborhood.
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this
UDC.
(7) SF-PH - Single-Family Residential-Patio Home District (Zero-Lot-Line Homes)
(a) General Purpose and Description
The SF-PH, Single-Family Residential-Patio Home, district is designed
to provide for development of primarily detached single-family
residences on compact lots having one side yard reduced to zero feet
(i.e., "zero-lot-line"), and having not less than four thousand five hundred
(4,500) square feet. Patio home developments shall be arranged in a
clustered lot pattern with a common usable open space system that is an
integral part of the development. Areas zoned for the SF-PH district shall
have, or shall make provision for, City of Crandall water and sewer
services. They shall be designed to adequately accommodate storm
drainage; they shall have paved concrete streets with logical and
efficient vehicular circulation patterns that discourage non-local traffic;
they shall be properly buffered from nonresidential uses; and they shall
be protected from pollution and undesirable environmental and noise
impacts.
(b) Permitted Uses
Those uses listed for the SF-PH district in SECTION 5H as “P” are
authorized uses permitted by right and uses listed in SECTION 5H as
“S” are permitted upon approval of a SUP.
(c) Maximum Height
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main
building/house, whichever is less.
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached
garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling units, etc.
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC).
(d) Area Regulations
July 21, 2011 154
1) Size of Lots
a) Minimum Lot Area - Four thousand five hundred (4,500)
square feet; also, the minimum average lot area shall be five
thousand two hundred (5,200) square feet in order to provide
diversity in lot sizes within each SF-PH neighborhood;
maximum density six (6) dwelling units per acre.
b) Maximum Project Size - The maximum size of a patio home
development shall be ten (10) acres.
c) Minimum Lot Width – Forty-five feet (45').
d) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred feet (100').
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty feet (20’); twenty-five feet (25')
to the garage door face for front-entry homes.
b) Minimum Side Yard - One side yard reduced to zero feet (0');
other side yard a minimum of ten feet (10') required with
fifteen feet (15') required on corner lots adjacent to a
residential or collector street, and twenty-five feet (25’)
required on corner lots adjacent to an arterial street.
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20’); twenty-five feet (25’)
for rear garage entry.
3) Maximum Lot Coverage
Fifty percent (50%) for the main building; sixty-five percent (65%)
for the main building and any accessory buildings, driveways and
parking areas combined.
4) Parking Regulations
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed
parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot
as the main structure, plus one (1) additional parking space on
a paved driveway.
b) Visitor Parking - One half (0.5) parking space per dwelling unit
(off-street) which is located within six hundred feet (600’) of
the dwelling unit.
c) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC.
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – One thousand five hundred
(1,500) square feet.
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this
UDC.
(e) Special Requirements
July 21, 2011 155
1) Patio home developments shall be developed as zero-lot-line homes.
One side yard shall be reduced to zero feet, while the other side yard
shall be a minimum of ten feet (10'; fifteen feet for a corner lot on the
residential or collector street side, or twenty-five feet for a corner lot
on an arterial street). A minimum six-foot (6') wide maintenance
easement shall be placed on the adjacent lot (i.e., the other side of
the zero-lot-line) to enable the property owner to maintain that portion
of his/her house that is on the zero-lot-line. Side yards and
maintenance easements shall be shown on the subdivision plat. A
minimum separation between patio homes of ten feet (10') shall be
provided. Roof overhangs will be allowed to project into the
maintenance easement a maximum of twenty-four inches (24").
2) Maintenance Requirements for Common Areas - A property owners
association is required for continued maintenance of common land
and facilities.
3) Usable Open Space Requirements - Except as provided below, any
patio home subdivision shall provide useable open space that equals
or exceeds ten percent (10%) of the gross platted area, excluding
rights-of-way for collector and larger-sized streets. Useable open
space shall not be required for a patio home development if it contains
twenty (20) or fewer lots, and if the property contiguous (i.e., abutting
or separated only by a residential or collector size street) to the
subdivision is either developed for use(s) other than patio homes or is
restricted by zoning to not permit patio home development. Properties
that are separated by thoroughfares larger than a collector street
and/or by drainage/utility easements in excess of sixty feet (60') in
width shall not be considered as contiguous. Usable open space shall
meet the requirements of SECTION 7D(4).
4) Single-family lots and detached dwellings constructed in this district
shall conform to the standards as set forth in the SF-9 zoning district.
(8) SF-TH – Single Family Residential-Town Home District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The SF-TH, Single-Family Residential-Town Home, district is designed
to provide for development of attached single-family residences in
structures built to accommodate two (2) to six (6) units per structure.
Town home units may be constructed on a single lot or on adjacent
individual lots. Minimum lot area shall not be less than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet per dwelling unit. Ten percent (10%) of the
total platted area shall be provided as common, usable open space.
Town home developments shall be arranged in a clustered lot pattern
with a common usable open space system that is an integral part of the
development. Areas zoned for the SF-TH district shall have, or shall
make provision for, City of Crandall water and sewer services. They
shall be designed to adequately accommodate storm drainage; they
July 21, 2011 156
shall have paved concrete streets with logical and efficient vehicular
circulation patterns that discourage non-local traffic; they shall be
properly buffered from nonresidential uses; and they shall be protected
from pollution and undesirable environmental and noise impacts..
(b) Maximum Height
1) Three (3) stories, or forty feet (40') for the main building/house,
whichever is less.
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached
garage, garden shed, accessory dwelling units, etc.
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lots
a) Minimum Lot Area - Two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet per dwelling unit; also, the minimum average lot area shall
be three thousand hundred (3,000) square feet in order to
provide diversity in lot sizes within each SF-TH neighborhood;
maximum density eight (8) dwelling units per acre.
b) Maximum Project Size - The maximum size of a town home
development shall be ten (10) acres.
c) Minimum Lot Width – Twenty-five feet (25').
d) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred feet (100').
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’).
b) Minimum Side Yard – None between buildings. Ten feet (10’)
of the lot width for interior side yard; fifteen feet (15’) for a
corner lot on a residential or collector street; twenty-five feet
(25’) for a corner lot on an arterial street.
c) Minimum Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20’); twenty-five feet (25’)
for rear garage entry.
3) Maximum Lot Coverage
Fifty percent (50%) for the main building; seventy-five percent
(75%) for the main building and any accessory buildings, driveways
and parking areas combined.
4) Parking Regulations
a) Single-Family Dwelling Unit - A minimum of two (2) enclosed
parking spaces behind the front building line on the same lot
as the main structure, plus one (1) additional parking space on
a paved driveway.
July 21, 2011 157
b) Visitor Parking - One half (0.5) parking space per dwelling unit
(off-street) which is located within six hundred feet (600’) of
the dwelling unit.
c) Other - See SECTION 10 of this UDC.
5) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit – One thousand (1,000) square
feet.
6) Minimum Roof Pitch – 4:12
7) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9 of this
UDC.
(d) Special Requirements
1) All town home developments are subject to site plan review and
approval by the City Manager. The site plan shall show the typical
layout of the town home lot and an overall layout of the development.
2) Maintenance Requirements for Common Areas - A property owners
association is required for continued maintenance of common land
and facilities.
3) Usable Open Space Requirements - Except as provided below, any
town home development shall provide usable open space which
equals or exceeds ten percent (10%) of the gross platted area,
excluding rights-of-way for collector and larger sized streets. Useable
open space shall not be required for a town home development if it
contains twenty (20) or fewer lots, and if the property contiguous (i.e.,
abutting or separated only by a residential or collector size street) to
the development is either developed for use(s) other than town homes
or is restricted by zoning to not permit town home development.
Properties that are separated by thoroughfares larger than a collector
street and/or by drainage/utility easements in excess of sixty feet (60')
in width shall not be considered as contiguous. Usable open space
shall meet the requirements of SECTION 7D(4).
4) Single-family lots consisting of detached dwellings constructed in this
district shall conform to the standards as set forth in the SF-6.5 zoning
district.
(9) MF-15 – Multi-Family Residential-15 District (Apartments)
(a) General Purpose and Description
The MF-15, Multi-Family Residential-15, district is an attached
residential district intended to provide the highest residential density of
fifteen (15) dwelling units per acre. The principal permitted land uses will
include low- and mid-rise multiple-family dwellings and garden
apartments. Recreational, religious, health and educational uses
normally located to service residential areas are also permitted in this
district. This district should be located adjacent to a major thoroughfare
and serve as a buffer between nonresidential development or heavy
July 21, 2011 158
automobile traffic and medium- or low-density residential development.
Areas zoned for the MF-15 district shall have, or shall make provision
for, City of Crandall water and sewer services. They shall be designed to
adequately accommodate storm drainage; they shall have paved
concrete drive aisles with logical and efficient vehicular circulation
patterns; they shall be properly buffered from nonresidential uses; and
they shall be protected from pollution and undesirable environmental and
noise impacts.
(b) Maximum Height
1) Two and one-half (2.5) stories, or thirty-five feet (35') for the main
building/house; where a structure exceeds twenty-five feet (25’) in
height, it shall be set back from the front property line two (2)
additional feet beyond the required front yard setback for each foot
above twenty-five feet (25’) in height.
2) Fifteen feet (15') for other accessory buildings, including detached
garage, garden shed, carports, gazebo, clubhouse, mail kiosks,
laundry rooms, etc.
3) Other requirements (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lots
a) Minimum Lot Area – Three thousand (3,000) square feet per
dwelling unit, not to exceed fifteen (15) dwelling units per acre
(calculated on gross acreage). The minimum lot (i.e., project)
size shall be ten (10) acres.
b) Minimum Lot Width - Eighty feet (80').
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred twenty feet (120').
d) Special Exception - If a property was platted or zoned for MF-
15 prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, then it can
remain its original size and configuration and does not have to
meet the minimum project size, lot width or lot depth stated
above. The property shall conform to all other MF-15
development standards herein, unless the building setbacks
shown on a recorded plat vary from those contained herein, in
which case the platted setbacks shall prevail unless a replat
modifies same.
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30'). All areas adjacent to a
street shall be deemed front yards. See SECTION 7I(2) of this
UDC for additional setback requirements.
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Twenty feet (20'), unless
adjacent to a single-family, duplex, patio home or single-family
July 21, 2011 159
attached district; then side and rear setbacks shall be
according to the height of the multi-family building, as follows:
i) One-story building – twenty-five feet (25’).
ii) Two-story building – sixty feet (60’).
iii) Over two-story building – seventy-five feet (75’).
c) Building Separation
i) One-story buildings - Fifteen feet (15') for buildings
without openings; twenty feet (20’) for buildings with
openings.
ii) Two-story buildings (or a two-story building adjacent to a
one-story building) -Twenty feet (20') for buildings without
openings; twenty-five feet (25’) for buildings with
openings.
iii) Over two-story buildings (or an over two-story building
adjacent to a one- or two-story building) - Twenty-five feet
(25') for buildings with or without openings.
3) Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit
a) Efficiency unit - Five hundred (500) square feet per unit.
b) One-bedroom unit - Seven hundred twenty-five (725) square
feet per unit.
c) Two- or more bedroom unit - Eight hundred seventy-five (875)
square feet for the first two bedrooms, plus an additional one
hundred twenty-five (125) square feet for each bedroom over
two (e.g., three-bedroom unit must have 1,000 square feet,
etc.).
4) Maximum Lot Coverage
Forty percent (40%) total, including main and accessory buildings;
sixty percent (60%) for the main building and any accessory
buildings, driveways and parking areas combined.
5) Parking Regulations
a) 1.5 spaces for each efficiency or one-bedroom unit.
b) 2 spaces for each two-bedroom unit.
c) 2.5 spaces for each three-bedroom unit.
d) 3 spaces for each four- or more-bedroom unit.
e) The average number of parking spaces for the total
development shall be no less than two (2) spaces per dwelling
unit, at least one (1) of which shall be enclosed (i.e., garage)
for each dwelling unit.
July 21, 2011 160
f) No parking space may be located closer than ten feet (10’)
from any building or closer than two feet (2’) from any side or
rear lot line.
g) All parking areas adjacent to public streets shall be screened
from view. Screening may be in the form of live plant
materials, berms, low masonry walls that match the exterior
finish of main buildings, or any combination of the above.
h) See SECTION 10 of this UDC, for additional requirements.
6) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9E of this
UDC.
(d) Special Requirements
1) Usable Open Space Requirements – Except as provided below, any
multi-family development shall provide usable open space which
equals or exceeds fifteen percent (15%) of the total lot area. Usable
open space areas shall be in conformance with SECTION 7D(4).
2) Landscape Area Requirements – A minimum of twenty percent (20%)
of the total lot area shall be devoted to a combination of landscaping
(i.e., pervious surface area) and usable open space (see above). See
SECTION 9G of this UDC for landscaping requirements.
3) Refuse Facilities - Every multi-family dwelling unit shall be located
within two hundred feet (200') of a refuse facility, measured along the
designated pedestrian travel way, and at least six (6) cubic yards of
refuse container volume shall be provided for every thirty (30) dwelling
units (or portion thereof). A refuse facility shall be a dumpster or other
similar container designed for receiving garbage in bulk for more than
one dwelling, and all refuse containers shall be maintained in
accordance with local public health and sanitary regulations. Refuse
containers shall be located no closer than thirty feet (30') to any
adjacent single-family property, shall be located so as to provide safe
and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies, and shall be
screened in accordance with SECTION 9H(2)(e) of this UDC.
4) Screening Requirements – See SECTION 9H for screening
requirements.
5) A swimming pool shall be provided in multi-family developments of
fifty (50) or more units.
6) One playground area containing at least five (5) pieces of play
equipment shall be provided for every one hundred (100) dwelling
units, or fraction thereof. The playground equipment shall be of heavy
duty construction, such as is normally used in public parks or on
public school playgrounds.
July 21, 2011 161
7) Single-family, patio home, duplex, or townhome residential units
constructed in this district shall conform to SF-9, SF-PH or SF-TH
district standards, respectively.
8) Recreational vehicles, travel trailers or motor homes may not be used
for on-site dwelling purposes.
9) Open storage is prohibited.
10) All points on the exterior facades of all buildings shall be within one
hundred fifty feet (150') of a dedicated fire lane easement (as
measured by an unobstructed pathway, or route, for fire hoses).
11) A four-foot (4’) wide paved walkway shall connect the front door of
each ground floor unit to a parking area. The minimum width of any
sidewalk adjacent to head-in parking spaces shall be six feet (6’) to
accommodate a two-foot (2’) bumper overhang for vehicles.
12) Buildings shall not exceed two hundred feet (200') in length.
13) Boats, campers, trailers and other recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited unless oversize parking areas are provided as part of the
approved site plan. This parking area shall not be used to meet the
minimum parking requirements and shall not be visible from a public
street.
14) All buildings containing residential units shall provide signage that
clearly identifies the numbers (i.e., addresses) of the units within each
building. Signage shall be visible from entrances into the complex
and/or from vehicular drive aisles within the complex such that each
individual unit is easy to locate by visitors, delivery persons, and/or
emergency personnel.
15) All parking areas shall have appropriate lighting and shall be
positioned such that no light adversely impacts adjacent residential
areas.
16) Site plan approval (see SECTION 8N of this UDC) shall be required
for any multi-family or nonresidential use (e.g., school, church, child
care center, private recreation facility, etc.) in the MF-15 district. Any
nonresidential land use which may be permitted in this district shall
conform to the NS-Neighborhood Service district standards with
respect to building setbacks, landscaping, exterior building
construction, screening requirements, lighting, signage, etc.
17) Other Regulations - As established by SECTION 7, SECTION 8, and
SECTION 9 of this UDC.
(10) SF-MH – Single-Family Residential-Manufactured Home District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The SF-MH, Single-Family Residential-Manufactured Home, district is
intended to recognize that certain areas of the City are suitable for a
mixture of single-family dwelling units and HUD-Code manufactured
July 21, 2011 162
homes, to provide adequate space and site diversification for residential
purposes designed to accommodate the peculiarities and design criteria
of manufactured homes, along with single-family residences, to promote
the most desirable use of land and direction of building development, to
promote stability of development, to protect the character of the district,
to conserve the value of land and buildings, and to protect the City's tax
base. This district provides for the creation and/or subdivision of any lot,
tract or parcel of land used for the placement of manufactured homes.
This district is not intended to prohibit or unduly restrict any type of
housing, but to ensure compatibility in housing types between
manufactured home subdivisions and surrounding single family
residential subdivisions and recognize their inherent differences. Areas
zoned for the MH district shall have, or shall make provision for, City of
Crandall water and sewer services. They shall be designed to
adequately accommodate storm drainage; they shall have paved
concrete streets with logical and efficient vehicular circulation patterns
that discourage non-local traffic; they shall be properly buffered from
nonresidential uses; and they shall be protected from pollution and
undesirable environmental and noise impacts.
(b) Maximum Height
1) The maximum height for any structure in the manufactured home
district shall be thirty-five feet (35').
2) The average height of the manufactured home frame above the
ground elevation, measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not
exceed three feet (3').
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lots
a) Minimum Lot Area – Six thousand six hundred (6,600) square
feet.
b) Minimum Lot Width – Sixty feet (60’).
c) Minimum Lot Depth – One hundred ten feet (110’).
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’).
b) Minimum Side Yard – Seven and one-half feet (7.5’); ten feet
(10’) from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot.
c) Minimum Rear Yard – Twenty feet (20’).
3) Maximum Lot Coverage
Fifty percent (50%) for main buildings and any accessory buildings,
driveways and parking areas combined.
4) Soil and Ground Cover
July 21, 2011 163
Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every manufactured home
lot shall be paved or protected with a vegetative ground cover that
is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating dust.
5) Drainage
The ground surface in all parts of a manufactured home lot shall be
graded and equipped to drain all surface water away from the
manufactured home.
(d) Street Lighting
Street lighting within a manufactured home district shall be provided by
the developer or property owner along all internal streets. Street lights
will be installed in accordance with SECTION 13A(19) of this UDC.
(e) Parking Requirements
A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each
manufactured home lot. Each parking space will be a minimum of ten
feet (10’) by twenty feet (20'). Each parking space shall be constructed
of concrete and located to eliminate interference with access to parking
areas provided for other manufactured home lots and for public parking.
Required parking spaces shall not obstruct pedestrian walkways.
(f) Carports
See SECTION 7C of this UDC.
(g) Manufactured Home Installation
In addition to the requirements of any building code and fire code, a
manufactured home shall be installed in accordance with the following
criteria:
1) Axle and hitch assemblies shall be removed at the time of placement
on the foundation.
2) Each manufactured home shall be totally skirted with masonry,
pressure-treated wood, or other nondegradable, fire resistant material
which is compatible with the design and exterior materials of the
primary structure.
(h) Fire Safety Standards
1) Access for Fire Fighting
Approaches to all manufactured homes shall be kept clear for fire
fighting.
2) Water Supply Facilities for Fire Department Operations
Water supply facilities for fire department operations shall be
connected to an available City water supply. The adequacy of the
water supply for firefighting requirements shall be determined by
the City Engineer. The developer of a manufactured home
subdivision shall provide standard hydrants, acceptable to the City,
July 21, 2011 164
located within five hundred feet (500') of all manufactured home
lots, measured along the driveways or streets. Fire hydrants will be
subject to periodic inspection by the City.
(i) Recreation Area
All manufactured home subdivisions shall be required to dedicate park
land in accordance with SECTION 9J of this UDC.
(j) Utilities
All utilities, including but not limited to electrical wiring, natural gas,
telephone, cable, internet and security systems, shall be installed
underground and shall be maintained in accordance with applicable City
codes and regulations for such systems.
(k) Plat Required
Prior to the construction or placement of any manufactured home or
structure on a development of any manufactured home lot or
subdivision, a final plat must be approved and filed for record in
accordance with SECTION 8I of this UDC. No permit shall be issued for
the placement of any manufactured home on any property that is not
located on a legally platted lot of record.
(l) Miscellaneous Requirements
1) Every manufactured home lot owner shall be responsible for ensuring
compliance with all requirements of this UDC including proper
installation of the manufactured home, proper installation of all utility
connections and proper tie-down of the manufactured home.
2) Skirting with the necessary vents, screens and/or openings shall be
required on all manufactured homes and shall be installed within thirty
(30) days after the placement of the manufactured home.
3) Skirting, porches, awnings and other additions, when installed, shall
be maintained in good repair. The use of space immediately
underneath a manufactured home for storage shall be permitted only
under the following conditions:
a) The storage area shall have a base of impervious material;
b) Stored items shall not interfere with the underneath inspection
of the manufactured home; and
c) The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting.
(11) MHP – Manufactured Home Park
(a) General Purpose and Description
The MHP, Manufactured Home Park, district is intended to provide
adequate space and site diversification for residential purposes designed
to accommodate the peculiarities and design criteria of manufactured
homes and recreational vehicles, to promote the most desirable use of
land and direction of building development, to promote stability of
July 21, 2011 165
development, to protect the character of the district, to conserve the
value of land and buildings, and to protect the City's tax base. This
district provides for the creation of tracts of land used for the placement
of multiple manufactured homes or recreational vehicles on a single lot,
tract or parcel of land which are utilized for rent or lease. This district is
not intended to prohibit or unduly restrict any type of housing, but to
ensure compatibility between manufactured home park districts and
surrounding properties and recognize the inherent differences in housing
types between manufactured home parks, recreational vehicle (“RV”)
parks and other residential districts.
(b) Maximum Height
1) The maximum height for any structure in the manufactured home park
district shall be thirty-five feet (35').
2) The average height of the manufactured home frame above the
ground elevation, measured at 90 degrees to the frame, shall not
exceed three feet (3').
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lots
a) Minimum Lot Area – Forty-three thousand five hundred sixty
(43,560) square feet; minimum lot area for each space.
b) Minimum Lot Width – Not applicable.
c) Minimum Lot Depth – Not applicable.
2) Manufactured Home Park Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’).
b) Minimum Side Yard – Twelve and one-half feet (12.5’); fifteen
feet (15’) from a street right-of-way line for a corner lot.
c) Minimum Rear Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’).
d) Setback – For structures, other than the manufactured home,
on each space, the minimum setback from any space line
shall be at least ten feet (10').
e) Distance – The minimum distance between manufactured
homes at any point shall be twenty-five feet (25').
3) Recreational Vehicle Park Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’).
b) Minimum Side Yard – Ten feet (10’); twenty-five feet (25’) from
a street right-of-way line.
c) Minimum Rear Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’).
d) Setback – For other structures on each space, the minimum
setback from any space line shall be at least ten feet (10').
July 21, 2011 166
e) Distance – The minimum distance between recreational
vehicles at any point shall be twenty-five feet (25’).
f) Property line – No RV shall be placed or erected closer than
five feet (5’) from the property line separating the RV park from
adjoining property, measuring from the nearest point of the RV.
4) Maximum Lot Coverage
Fifty percent (50%) for main buildings and any accessory buildings,
driveways and parking areas combined.
5) Soil and Ground Cover
Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every lot shall be paved or
protected with a vegetative ground cover that is capable of
preventing soil erosion and of eliminating dust.
6) Drainage
The ground surface in all parts of a lot shall be graded and
equipped to drain all surface water away from the manufactured
home or RV, as applicable.
7) Storage Facilities
A maximum of one only, one hundred twenty (120) square foot
accessory building may be provided on every manufactured home
space or RV space to be utilized solely for storage of personal
items belonging to the owner or tenant of the space. In lieu of
individual accessory buildings on each lot or space, self storage
facilities may be provided for adequate storage. Where provided,
storage facilities shall be designed in a manner that will enhance
the appearance of the manufactured home park or RV park and
shall be one-hundred percent (100%) masonry, excluding doors
and windows. Storage outside of approved storage facilities shall
be prohibited.
(d) Street Lighting
Street lighting within a manufactured home park or RV park shall be
provided by the developer or property owner along all internal streets.
Street lights will be installed in accordance with SECTION 7E, of this
UDC.
(e) Access, Traffic Circulation and Parking
1) Internal Streets and Signage
All infrastructure (streets, signs, and utilities) are required to be built
to City standards. Internal streets, no-parking area signs and street
name signs shall be privately owned, built and maintained. Streets
shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all spaces and
to facilities for common use of residents. Internal streets shall be
kept open and free of obstruction in order that police and fire
July 21, 2011 167
vehicles may have access to any area of the manufactured home
park or RV park. The police department shall be authorized to issue
citations for the violation of the provisions herein and to remove and
impound offending vehicles.
2) Signs Prohibiting Parking Required
On all sections of internal streets on which parking is prohibited
under this UDC, the developer or its successors and/or assigns
shall erect metal signs prohibiting parking. The sign type, size,
height and location shall be approved by the City prior to
installation.
3) Internal Street Construction and Maintenance
All internal streets shall be constructed to specifications established
by this UDC and shall be maintained by the developer or its
successors and/or assigns and shall be free of any cracks, holes
and other hazards. Internal streets shall be designed by a licensed
professional engineer in accordance with good engineering
practices and shall be approved by the City Engineer prior to
issuance of an occupancy permit for the manufactured home park
or RV park.
4) Emergency Ingress and Egress
All residents shall be notified when and where emergency
ingress/egress has been provided. Procedures shall be
established to warn the residents of the opening of the emergency
access in the event of an emergency.
5) Internal Street Dimensions
An internal street shall be provided to be contiguous to each
manufactured home space. Each street shall have a minimum
width of thirty feet (30'). On-street parking shall be permitted on
only one side of the street. The internal streets shall be continuous
and connect with other internal streets or with public streets, or
shall be provided with a cul-de-sac having a minimum diameter of
one hundred fifty feet (150'). No internal street ending in a cul-desac
shall exceed five hundred feet (500') in length.
6) Parking Requirements
A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each
manufactured home or RV lot. Each parking space will be a
minimum of ten feet (10’) by twenty feet (20'). Each parking space
shall be constructed of concrete and located to eliminate
interference with access to parking areas provided for other
manufactured home lots, RV lots and for public parking. Required
parking spaces shall not obstruct pedestrian walkways.
7) Unobstructed Access
July 21, 2011 168
Internal streets shall permit unobstructed access to within at least
one hundred feet (100') of any portion of each manufactured home.
8) Intersections with Public Streets
Interior streets shall intersect adjoining public streets at
approximately ninety (90) degrees and at locations which will
eliminate or minimize interference with traffic on these public
streets.
9) Common Area Parking Area Required
To minimize on-street parking and to facilitate movement of
emergency vehicles into and through a manufactured home park, a
minimum parking area of one hundred fifty (150) square feet per
manufactured home space or lot shall be provided in a common
area for storage of boats or other vehicles in excess of the
minimum required parking and for visitors' vehicles.
10) Sidewalks
Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets and shall
connect to every space within a manufactured home park.
Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with City standards.
11) Access
Each manufactured home or RV park shall have direct access from
a public street or an internal street, either of which shall be
constructed/paved to City standards. Where an internal private
street provides access, it shall be dedicated to the public as an
emergency access/fire lane easement to allow for the rapid and
safe movement of vehicles used in providing emergency health or
public safety services. Each emergency access/fire lane easement
shall have a clear unobstructed width of twenty-four feet (24'), shall
connect to an improved dedicated public street, and shall have a
turning area and radii of a minimum of fifty feet (50') to permit free
movement of emergency vehicles. Dead-end streets are not
allowed. Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed four hundred feet
(400') in length. Access/fire lane easements shall be maintained by
the manufactured/mobile home park.
(f) Street lighting
Street lighting within a manufactured home park or RV park shall be
provided by the developer or property owner along all internal streets.
Street lights will be installed in accordance with this UDC and shall have
a height and spacing to ensure that an average illumination level of not
less than two-tenths (2/10) foot-candles measured at ground level and
parallel thereto shall be maintained.
(g) Fire Safety Standards
1) Access for Fire Fighting
July 21, 2011 169
Approaches to all lots shall be kept clear for fire fighting.
2) Water Supply Facilities for Fire Department Operations
Water supply facilities for fire department operations shall be
connected to an available City water supply. The adequacy of the
water supply for firefighting requirements shall be determined by
the City Engineer. The developer of a manufactured home park or
RV park shall provide standard hydrants, acceptable to the City,
located within five hundred feet (500') of all lots, measured along
the driveways or streets. Fire hydrants will be subject to periodic
inspection by the City.
(h) Recreation Area
1) Recreation Area Required
In all manufactured home or RV parks accommodating or designed
to accommodate twenty (20) or more manufactured homes or RVs,
there shall be at least one (1) recreation area which shall be easily
accessible to all park residents.
2) Size of Recreation Area
Not less than five percent (5%) of the gross site area of the
manufactured home or RV park shall be devoted to recreational
facilities, generally provided in a central location. In large parks, this
may be decentralized. Recreation areas include space for
community buildings and community use facilities such as adult
recreation and child play areas, swimming pools, and drying yards,
but not including vehicle parking areas.
3) Playground Location
When playground space is provided, it shall be so designated and
shall be protected from traffic, thoroughfare and parking areas.
Such space shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and free of
safety hazards.
(i) Utilities
All utilities, including but not limited to electrical wiring, natural gas,
telephone, cable, internet and security systems, shall be installed
underground and shall be maintained in accordance with applicable City
codes and regulations for such systems.
(j) Plat Required
Prior to the construction or placement of any manufactured home or
structure on any manufactured home park or RV park, a final plat must
be approved and filed for record in accordance with SECTION 8I, of this
UDC. No permit shall be issued for the placement of any manufactured
home or RV on any property that is not located on a legally platted lot of
record.
July 21, 2011 170
(k) Manufactured Home Miscellaneous Requirements
1) Each manufactured home space shall have a minimum space size of
sixty feet (60') by one hundred ten feet (110') for each manufactured
home.
2) Carports – See SECTION 7C of this UDC.
3) Manufactured Home Installation
In addition to the requirements of any building code and fire code, a
manufactured home shall be installed in accordance with the
following criteria:
a) Axle and hitch assemblies shall be removed at the time of
placement on the foundation.
b) Each manufactured home shall be totally skirted with masonry,
pressure-treated wood, or other nondegradable, fire resistant
material which is compatible with the design and exterior
materials of the primary structure.
4) Every manufactured home lot owner shall be responsible for ensuring
compliance with all requirements of this UDC including proper
installation of the manufactured home, proper installation of all utility
connections and proper tie-down of the manufactured home.
5) Skirting with the necessary vents, screens and/or openings shall be
required on all manufactured homes and shall be installed within thirty
(30) days after the placement of the manufactured home.
6) Skirting, porches, awnings and other additions, when installed, shall
be maintained in good repair. The use of space immediately
underneath a manufactured home for storage shall be permitted only
under the following conditions:
a) The storage area shall have a base of impervious material;
b) Stored items shall not interfere with the underneath inspection
of the manufactured home; and
c) The storage area shall be enclosed by skirting.
7) Refuse and Garbage Handling
a) The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in a
manufactured home park shall be so conducted as to create
no health hazards, rodent harborage or air pollution. One or
both of the systems described in the paragraphs b) and c)
below shall be used in every park.
b) If refuse is gathered at the individual spaces, it shall be stored
in fly-tight, watertight, rodent-proof containers, and shall be
located at each manufactured home space. Containers for this
use shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to
properly store all refuse.
July 21, 2011 171
c) Centrally located refuse containers having a capacity of three
(3) cubic yards or larger may be provided. If provided, such
containers shall be so designed as to prevent spillage and
container deterioration, and to facilitate cleaning around them.
d) The manufactured home park owner or agent shall ensure that
refuse containers, if provided within the manufactured home
park, are maintained in a sanitary and usable condition.
(l) Recreational Vehicle Miscellaneous Requirements
1) Size and Marking of Units or Sites
Each unit or site reserved for the accommodation of any RV shall
have an area of not less than five hundred seventy-six (576) square
feet, exclusive of driveways, and shall be at least twenty-four feet
(24’) wide. It shall be defined clearly by proper markers at each
corner, shall be level, paved, and well drained. Any area in the City
limits proposed for use as a RV park must be zoned for a district
that permits the use of land for a RV park.
2) Water Supply
Each site used as a RV park shall be provided with a connection
and an adequate supply of water of safe, sanitary quality, approved
by the City. Where water from other sources than that of the
municipal supply is proposed to be used, the source of the supply
shall first be approved by the City.
3) Collection and Removal of Waste and Garbage; Wastewater System
Each RV park shall be provided with safe and adequate facilities for
the collection and removal of waste and garbage and shall provide
a proper and acceptable wastewater system, either by connection
to the City wastewater system where it is available or to a septic
tank, all of which shall comply with all on-site sewage facility rules.
If individual wastewater connections at each park space are not
provided, then a centralized dump station for disposal of waste and
garbage shall be provided.
4) Compliance
The owner, developer or manager of a RV park shall be
responsible for ensuring compliance with all requirements of this
UDC and shall maintain the recreational vehicle park, its facilities
and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
(12) O – Office
(a) General Purpose and Description
The O, Office, district is established to create an appropriate setting for
low intensity office and professional uses. The district can be used as a
transition district between residential uses and more intense uses, and
with appropriate buffers and landscaping, this district may be located in
July 21, 2011 172
close proximity to residential districts. Permitted uses should be
compatible with adjacent residential areas by limiting heights to one (1)
or two (2) stories, and shall not include uses that create excessive
amounts of traffic, noise, trash or late-night business operations. Traffic
generated by uses in this district shall not be encouraged to travel
through residential areas. Adaptive reuse of existing structures is
encouraged. Buildings in this district should be compatible and similar in
scale with residential uses and adjacent property.
(b) Maximum Height
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s).
2) One (1) story or fifteen feet (15’) for accessory buildings.
3) Other (see SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lots
a) Minimum Lot Area - Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
b) Minimum Lot Width - Sixty feet (60’), except one hundred and
twenty feet (120’) along U.S. Highway 175 frontage.
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred feet (100’).
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30’) from the ultimate rightof-
way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be
considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for
additional setback requirements).
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless
adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see below).
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District –
Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story building, and an additional
twenty feet (20’) for each story (or fraction thereof) above one
story in height.
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side yard setback between
two nonresidential buildings may be reduced to zero feet (0’)
where the two buildings share a common interior lot line,
where construction of a party wall in accordance with the
City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City
Council on the site plan. Where such a reduced side yard
setback is utilized, the equivalent open space and landscape
plantings and buffers that are normally required along a
shared side property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on
each respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just
provided somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that shows
such a reduced 0’ side yard setback between two
July 21, 2011 173
nonresidential buildings shall be discretionary in nature, and
shall be based upon an analysis of the location, the
configuration, and the impact and compatibility of the
proposed construction with respect to adjacent land uses and
structures.
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and
accessory buildings; maximum eighty percent (80%) impervious
coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.).
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – One to one (1:1).
5) Maximum Building Size - The maximum building foot print (first floor)
area of a structure shall be determined by applying the lot’s size,
minimum building setbacks, maximum of fifty percent (50%) lot
coverage, minimum parking requirement, minimum landscaping
percentage and areas, and other pertinent development requirements.
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise
1) Outside display or storage of merchandise and seasonal items is
prohibited.
(13) NS – Neighborhood Service
(a) General Purpose and Description
The NS, Neighborhood Service, district is established to provide areas
for limited local neighborhood, low intensity retail and service facilities for
the retail sales of goods and services. These shopping areas should
utilize established landscape and buffering requirements. The
Neighborhood Service district should be located along or at the
intersection of major collectors or thoroughfares to accommodate higher
traffic volumes, but it can also act as a buffer against residential areas.
(b) Maximum Height
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s).
2) One (1) story or 15 feet for accessory buildings.
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9 of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lot
a) Minimum Lot Area - Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
b) Minimum Lot Width - Sixty feet (60’), except one hundred and
twenty feet (120’) along U.S. Highway 175 frontage.
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred feet (100’).
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30’) from ultimate right-ofway
line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be
July 21, 2011 174
considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for
additional setback requirements).
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless
adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see below).
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District –
Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story building, and an additional
twenty feet (20’) for each story (or fraction thereof) above one
story in height.
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side yard setback between
two nonresidential buildings may be reduced to zero feet (0’)
where the two buildings share a common interior lot line,
where construction of a party wall in accordance with the
City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City
Council on the site plan following a favorable recommendation
by the Commission. Where such a reduced side yard setback
is utilized, the equivalent open space and landscape plantings
and buffers that are normally required along a shared side
property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on each
respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just provided
somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that shows such a
reduced 0’ side yard setback between two nonresidential
buildings shall be discretionary in nature, and shall be based
upon an analysis of the location, the configuration, and the
impact and compatibility of the proposed construction with
respect to adjacent land uses and structures.
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and
accessory buildings; maximum eighty percent (80%) impervious
coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.).
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – One to one (1:1).
5) Maximum Building Size - The maximum building foot print (first floor)
area of a structure shall be determined by applying the lot’s size,
minimum building setbacks, maximum of 50% lot coverage, minimum
parking requirement, minimum landscaping percentage and areas,
and other pertinent development requirements.
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of
seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) shall be
allowed but shall not be placed/located more than twenty feet (20’)
from the main building or within any required front, side or rear yard.
2) Long-term or permanent open storage is prohibited.
(14) R – Retail District
(a) General Purpose and Description
July 21, 2011 175
The R, Retail, district is established to provide areas for local
neighborhood shopping and service facilities for the retail sales of goods
and services. These shopping areas should utilize established
landscape and buffering requirements. The Retail district should be
located along or at the intersection of major collectors or thoroughfares
to accommodate higher traffic volumes.
(b) Maximum Height
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s).
2) One (1) story or fifteen feet (15’) for accessory buildings.
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lot
a) Minimum Lot Area - Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
b) Minimum Lot Width - Sixty feet (60’), except one hundred and
twenty feet (120’) along U.S. Highway 175 frontage.
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred feet (100’).
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard - Thirty feet (30’) from ultimate right-ofway
line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be
considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for
additional setback requirements).
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless
adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see below).
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District –
Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story building, and an additional
twenty feet (20’) for every story (or fraction thereof) above
one-story in height.
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side yard setback between
two nonresidential buildings may be reduced to zero feet (0’)
where the two buildings share a common interior lot line,
where construction of a party wall in accordance with the
City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City
Council on the site plan following a favorable recommendation
by the Commission. Where such a reduced side yard setback
is utilized, the equivalent open space and landscape plantings
and buffers that are normally required along a shared side
property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on each
respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just provided
somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that shows such a
reduced 0’ side yard setback between two nonresidential
buildings shall be discretionary in nature, and shall be based
July 21, 2011 176
upon an analysis of the location, the configuration, and the
impact and compatibility of the proposed construction with
respect to adjacent land uses and structures.
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and
accessory buildings; maximum eighty percent (80%) impervious
coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.).
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – One to one (1:1).
5) Maximum Building Size - The maximum building foot print (first floor)
area of a structure shall be determined by applying the lot’s size,
minimum building setbacks, maximum of 50% lot coverage, minimum
parking requirement, minimum landscaping percentage and areas,
and other pertinent development requirements.
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of
seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) shall be
allowed but shall not be placed/located more than twenty feet (20’)
from the main building or within any required front, side or rear yard.
2) Long-term or permanent open storage shall require issuance of a
SUP.
(15) BP – Business Park District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The BP, Business Park, district is intended to support economic
development that is an asset to the community, neighborhood, and
landowners, through promoting and maintaining desirable development
activities in a park-like setting. It is further intended that this district is to
provide a conducive work environment for business research and
development facilities, offices, and certain specialized manufacturing
establishments.
Further objectives for this district include:
1) To preserve natural and historic resources; maintain and enhance
surface and ground water quality; and promote architecturally
attractive buildings and structures.
2) To ensure that the nature, scale, and function of uses pose no
significant or unusual risk to the public health, safety, and welfare.
3) To ensure that the nature, scale, and function of uses generate a
minimum of noise, heat, glare, odor, dust, vibration, or other
nuisances and do not emit harmful radiation or pollution into the air,
water, or ground.
4) To ensure that the nature, scale, and function of uses do not
contribute to significant traffic congestion or other safety hazards.
(b) Maximum Height
July 21, 2011 177
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s).
2) One (1) story or 15 feet (15’) for accessory buildings.
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lot
a) Minimum Lot Area - One-half acre (21,780 square feet) for any
Business Park-zoned lot or site located within Tier One, and
ten thousand (10,000) square feet for any Business Parkzoned
lot or site located within Tier Two.
b) Minimum Lot Width - One hundred twenty feet (120’) for any
Business Park-zoned lot or site located within Tier One, and
seventy-five feet (75') for any Business Park-zoned lot or site
located within Tier Two.
c) Minimum Lot Depth – One hundred seventy-five feet (175’) for
any Business Park-zoned lot or site located within Tier One,
and one hundred feet (100’) for any Business Park-zoned lot
or site located within Tier Two.
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’) from ultimate rightof-
way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be
considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for
additional setback requirements).
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless
adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see below).
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District –
Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story building, and an additional
twenty feet (20’) for every story (or fraction thereof) above one
story in height.
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side-yard setback between
two nonresidential buildings may be reduced to zero feet (0’)
where the two buildings share a common interior lot line,
where construction of a party wall in accordance with the
City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City
Council on the site plan following a favorable recommendation
by the Commission. Where such a reduced side-yard setback
is utilized, the equivalent open space and landscape plantings
and buffers that are normally required along a shared side
property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on each
respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just provided
somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that shows such a
reduced 0’ side-yard setback between two nonresidential
buildings shall be discretionary in nature, and shall be based
July 21, 2011 178
upon an analysis of the location, the configuration, and the
impact and compatibility of the proposed construction with
respect to adjacent land uses and structures.
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and
accessory buildings; maximum eighty percent (80%) impervious
coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.).
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – Two to one (2:1).
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of
seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) shall be
allowed but shall not be placed/located more than thirty feet (30’) from
the main building or within any required front, side or rear yard.
2) Long-term or permanent open storage shall require issuance of a
SUP.
(16) OTC – Old Town Crandall District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The standards in the OTC, Old Town Crandall, district are designed to
maintain and encourage redevelopment within the original business
section (old downtown) of the City in a “pedestrian friendly” environment
that is conducive to special events such as sidewalk sales, street
dances, festivals, and other similar events. Standards for the district are
generally intended to regulate development such that new structures
look similar to image-setting existing ones (i.e., that promulgate the
image of Crandall’s heritage as a small, Texas farming town) within this
section of the City, or such that they aesthetically improve the
appearance of the area by strengthening the “small town” design theme
(i.e., using “period” architecture, etc.).
(b) Maximum Height
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s).
2) One (1) story or fifteen feet (15’) for accessory buildings.
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9 of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lot
a) Minimum Lot Area - none specified.
b) Minimum Lot Width - twenty-five feet (25’).
c) Minimum Lot Depth - one hundred feet (100’).
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard - to match existing sidewalk width, or a
minimum of eight feet (8’) from the back of the street curb
where no sidewalk exists.
July 21, 2011 179
b) Minimum Side Yard - zero feet (0’) if next to another Town
Square district building, or shall match the required front yard
setback if on a street or alley corner.
c) Minimum Rear Yard - twenty-five feet (25’).
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – sixty-five percent (65%) including main and
accessory buildings.
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – Two to one (2:1).
(d) Parking Requirements
1) For existing structures/uses (in existence prior to the effective date of
this UDC) - Any existing parking, or lack of same, for any existing
structure or use within the TS district shall be considered a conforming
parking arrangement (including head-in and off-site parking
arrangements in existence prior to the effective date of this UDC).
Additional parking shall only be required for significant additions to an
existing building, for significant expansion of an existing use (as
determined by the City Manager), and for a newly constructed building
within the district. In the event of destruction of an existing structure
within the Old Town Crandall district, said structure may be rebuilt to
its pre-destruction size with no requirements for additional parking
provided that reconstruction commences (i.e., a building permit is
applied for and issued) within one (1) year of the date of destruction.
If reconstruction does not commence within the one-year time frame,
or if the structure is rebuilt to exceed its pre-destruction size, then the
structure’s nonconforming parking status is deemed to expire and any
reconstruction of the structure must provide additional parking spaces
in accordance with this UDC (this can be additional head-in or off-site
parking spaces, provided that this was the parking arrangement that
existed for such structure prior to the effective date of this UDC, and
provided that such space is available without compromising other
properties’ rights, access, or public safety).
2) For new structures and uses - One (1) space per two hundred and
fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area, and each use shall provide a
minimum of two (2) spaces. For any use which cannot provide offstreet
parking due to the size or location of the lot, such parking may
be provided on other property not more than two hundred feet (200’)
from the site. In cases where the parking requirement cannot be
achieved, up to seventy-five percent (75%) of the parking requirement
may be waived by the City Council on the site plan, or may be
provided as head-in parking spaces and/or off-site with City Council
approval on the site plan for such an alternative arrangement.
(e) Special Requirements
1) Site Plan Review – Public hearing, review and approval of a site plan
by the Commission and the City Council shall be required for site
redevelopment or the construction of any new structure within the Old
July 21, 2011 180
Town Crandall district. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
unless all construction and development conforms to the site plan as
approved by the City Council.
2) For site redevelopment or new construction, building facade (i.e.,
elevation) plans shall be submitted for review and approval along with
the site plan. Facade plans shall clearly show how the building(s) will
look, especially as viewed from the road(s) upon which the property
faces and/or sides, and will portray a reasonably accurate depiction of
the materials and colors to be used. Architectural style and scale of
new/renovated buildings within the Old Town Crandall district shall be
compatible with the styles and scale of other adjacent buildings, and
shall be historically accurate to the greatest extent possible in order to
preserve the unique character of the downtown area.
3) The City Manager may require submission of additional information
and materials (possibly actual samples of materials to be used) during
the site plan review process.
4) A public hearing is required by the Commission and the City Council
for all site plans within the Old Town Crandall district. Development
standards for all uses in the Old Town Crandall district shall be
established on the site plan and all supporting information will be
required at the time of approval.
(f) Design Standards for the Old Town Crandall District
1) Façades of new, reconstructed and renovated buildings shall be
compatible with, and shall promulgate and enhance, the period design
of the original Main Street buildings. False fronts or parapets may be
added to existing buildings in order to add character and detail to
simple facades provided that they enhance the overall design
aesthetic and period character of the downtown area.
2) Predominant exterior finish colors shall be of fired brick, similar to that
which is present on adjacent existing buildings (other masonry
materials may also be considered during site plan review). Trim (i.e.,
lintels, sills, door jambs, cornices and other similar items) shall be
brick, cast stone, stone, cast or wrought iron, concrete, or
cementitious fiber board trim, and colors shall be tones that are
complementary to the predominant facade colors. Wood trim may
also be used for refurbishing existing buildings to their original
construction condition (i.e., wood shall not be used for trim on newly
constructed buildings). Accent colors for friezes, doors and door
frames, window frames and mullions, signage, awnings, moldings and
other similar features shall be colors that are complementary to, and
compatible with, the spirit and intent of the downtown streetscape
(bright or fluorescent colors which were not typically used in early
Texas downtowns shall not be used).
July 21, 2011 181
3) Reflective glass shall not be used for windows; detailing for windows,
doors and other openings shall be of wood, glass or a metal material
that is complementary to the period or building style. The use of
paned windows (rather than large single-pane modern storefront style
windows) shall be required on all new buildings in the Old Town
Crandall district.
4) Façade openings shall comprise at least forty percent (40%) of the
building’s façade area.
5) Awnings/Canopies
a) Ratios -- Awnings shall be at an appropriate scale to the
building size and configuration. They shall not extend above
the roof line of any single-story structure, or above the top of
the second floor of any multi-story structure at the awnings’
highest points. Awnings shall not completely obstruct any
windows on the building.
b) Projection -- Since awnings must extend beyond the building
face, a reasonable amount of projection shall be allowed. No
awning shall extend more than eight feet (8’) outward from the
building face/surface.
c) Colors and Materials -- A mixture of colors is recommended,
but no more than three different colors shall be used for
awnings on a single building facade (excluding business logo,
which may have more colors). Materials shall be of cloth or
canvas, or another material that is complementary to the
period or building style (metal shall be allowed only if
comparable and complimentary to the gazebo, but plastic shall
be prohibited).
d) Movement -- Except for slight movements that are normal for
fabric canopies (i.e., along fringe, etc.), no movement shall be
allowed for awnings and canopy structures.
6) Pedestrian Streetscape - Pedestrian spaces shall be treated with
amenities that are selected based upon their ability to unify the
streetscape with the area’s historic past. It is important that elements
such as construction materials, colors, textures and fixture design
complement the area’s historic qualities. These features shall be
repeated throughout the streetscape so as to unify the district as a
whole.
7) Planters, window boxes, planter boxes and containers, street
furniture, street and building lighting, benches, trash receptacles,
bollards, street signs, building signage, and other streetscape
furnishings shall be complementary to the historical time frame of the
OTC area, and shall be located not more than five feet (5') from the
building front/facade or shall be located within the pedestrian zone
directly in front of the applicable building or business. The City shall
July 21, 2011 182
be authorized to create and maintain a “pattern book” to guide, and
regulate, the selection of all streetscape amenities and fixtures for the
purpose of ensuring compatibility among such amenities and fixtures
within the Old Town Crandall district. Conformance and compatibility
with such designs shall be required, and installations that are not in
keeping with these designs and with the Old Town Crandall district’s
overall historic image shall be removed if so directed by the City.
8) Long-term and permanent open storage is prohibited in the Old Town
Crandall district.
9) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of
seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) shall be
allowed but limited to the following:
a) Shall not be placed/located more than twelve feet (12') from
the main building or within any required front, side or rear
yard.
b) Shall not occupy any on-street or off-street parking spaces.
c) Shall not pose a safety or visibility hazard, nor impede public
vehicular or pedestrian circulation, either on-site or off-site, in
any way (i.e., sidewalk sales cannot block the sidewalk or
extend out into the street).
d) Shall only be located in front of the property/business that is
selling the item(s).
e) All outside display items shall be removed at the end of
business each day (except for large seasonal items such as
Christmas trees).
f) All merchandise shall be displayed in a neat, orderly manner,
and the display area shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free
manner.
10) Architectural Design – The architectural design of buildings and sites
shall strive to achieve the following objectives:
a) Architectural compatibility;
b) Human scale design;
c) Integration of uses;
d) Encouragement of pedestrian activity;
e) Buildings that relate to, and are oriented toward, the
pedestrian areas and surrounding buildings;
f) Buildings that contain special architectural features to signify
entrances; and
g) All building materials shall be established on architectural
elevations and supporting information.
July 21, 2011 183
11) Other Regulations – As established in SECTION 7, SECTION 8, and
SECTION 9 of this UDC.
(17) HB – Highway Business District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The HB, Highway Business, district is intended to permit a wide range of
highway-oriented business, retail, and service uses. It is further
intended that this district encourage uses that serve the needs of
customers who are most likely to arrive in personal vehicles. As such
these uses are generally located near the interstate interchange and
along major streets and away from concentrations of single-family
residences.
Further objectives for this district include:
1) To provide space for highway-oriented commercial uses.
2) To provide adequate and appropriate separation and/or buffering of
general business uses and residential or less intensive commercial
areas.
(b) Maximum Height
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s).
2) One (1) story for accessory buildings.
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9, of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lot
a) Minimum Lot Area - One-half acre (21,780 square feet) for any
nonresidentially-zoned lot or site located within Tier One, and
ten thousand (10,000) square feet for any nonresidentiallyzoned
lot or site located within Tier Two.
b) Minimum Lot Width - One hundred twenty feet (120’) for any
nonresidentially-zoned lot or site located within Tier One, and
seventy-five feet (75') for any nonresidentially-zoned lot or site
located within Tier Two.
c) Minimum Lot Depth - One hundred seventy-five feet (175’) for
any nonresidentially-zoned lot or site located within Tier One,
and one hundred feet (100’) for any nonresidentially-zoned lot
or site located within Tier Two.
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’) from ultimate rightof-
way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be
considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for
additional setback requirements).
July 21, 2011 184
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless
adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see below).
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District –
Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story building, and an additional
twenty feet (20’) for every story (or fraction thereof) above one
story in height.
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side-yard setback between
two nonresidential buildings may be reduced to zero feet (0’)
where the two buildings share a common interior lot line,
where construction of a party wall in accordance with the
City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City
Council on the site plan following a favorable recommendation
by the Commission. Where such a reduced side-yard setback
is utilized, the equivalent open space and landscape plantings
and buffers that are normally required along a shared side
property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on each
respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just provided
somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that shows such a
reduced 0’ side yard setback between two nonresidential
buildings shall be discretionary in nature, and shall be based
upon an analysis of the location, the configuration, and the
impact and compatibility of the proposed construction with
respect to adjacent land uses and structures.
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and
accessory buildings; maximum eighty percent (80%) impervious
coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.).
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – Two to one (2:1).
5) Parking Requirements - As established by SECTION 10 of this UDC.
6) Minimum Exterior Construction Standards – See SECTION 9E of this
UDC. All façades of main buildings that face a public street or a
residentially zoned district shall have façade offsets of at least five feet
(5’) for every fifty-foot (50’) length of flat wall, both horizontally and
vertically, and such offsets shall comprise at least fifteen percent
(15%) of the total overall horizontal façade length for horizontal
offsets, and average vertical façade height for vertical offsets (i.e.,
above the average vertical roof plane of the building as viewed on
plan elevations).
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of
seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) shall be
allowed but shall not be placed/located more than thirty feet (30’) from
the main building or within any required front, side or rear yard.
July 21, 2011 185
2) Long-term or permanent open storage shall require issuance of a
Specific Use Permit (SUP).
(18) C – Commercial District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The C, Commercial, district is intended to provide a location for
commercial and service-related establishments, such as wholesale
product sales, welding/contractors shops, automotive repair services,
upholstery shops, region-serving shopping centers with large-scale
anchor businesses, and other similar higher intensity retail and
commercial uses. Uses in this district may utilize open storage areas
that are screened from public view (see SECTION 9H of this UDC).
Some light manufacturing may also be allowed with certain conditions.
The uses envisioned for the district will typically utilize smaller sites and
have operation characteristics that are generally not compatible with
residential uses and some nonresidential uses. Convenient access to
thoroughfares and collector streets is also a primary consideration.
(b) Maximum Height
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s).
2) One (1) story or fifteen feet (15’) for accessory buildings.
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lot
a) Minimum Lot Area - One-half acre (21,780 square feet) for any
Commercial-zoned lot or site located within Tier One, and ten
thousand (10,000) square feet for any Commercial-zoned lot
or site located within Tier Two.
b) Minimum Lot Width - One hundred twenty feet (120’) for any
Commercial-zoned lot or site located within Tier One, and
seventy-five feet (75') for any Commercial-zoned lot or site
located within Tier Two.
c) Minimum Lot Depth – One hundred seventy-five feet (175’) for
any Commercial-zoned lot or site located within Tier One, and
one hundred feet (100’) for any Commercial-zoned lot or site
located within Tier Two.
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’) from ultimate rightof-
way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be
considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for
additional setback requirements).
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless
adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see below).
July 21, 2011 186
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District –
Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story building, and an additional
twenty feet (20’) for every story (or fraction thereof) above one
story in height.
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side-yard setback between
two nonresidential buildings may be reduced to zero feet (0’)
where the two buildings share a common interior lot line,
where construction of a party wall in accordance with the
City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City
Council on the site plan following a favorable recommendation
by the Commission. Where such a reduced side-yard setback
is utilized, the equivalent open space and landscape plantings
and buffers that are normally required along a shared side
property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on each
respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just provided
somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that shows such a
reduced 0’ side yard setback between two nonresidential
buildings shall be discretionary in nature, and shall be based
upon an analysis of the location, the configuration, and the
impact and compatibility of the proposed construction with
respect to adjacent land uses and structures.
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and
accessory buildings; maximum eighty percent (80%) impervious
coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.).
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – Two to one (2:1).
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of
seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) shall be
allowed but shall not be placed/located more than thirty feet (30’) from
the main building or within any required front, side or rear yard.
2) Long-term or permanent open storage shall require issuance of a
Specific Use Permit (SUP).
(19) LI – Light Industrial District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The purpose of the LI, Light Industrial, district is to support economic
development that is an asset to the community, neighborhood, and
landowners through the protection of certain areas for limited industrial
uses. It is further intended that this section ensure that the nature of the
industrial uses do not create serious problems of compatibility with other
kinds of land uses.
Further objectives for this district include:
July 21, 2011 187
1) To accommodate select commercial activities that may be appropriate
near industrial uses and which may serve the immediate needs of the
industrial uses and those employed therein.
2) To ensure that the nature, scale, and function of uses pose no
significant or unusual risk to the public health, safety, and welfare.
3) To ensure that the nature, scale, and function of uses generate a
minimum of noise, heat, glare, odor, dust, vibration, or other
nuisances and do not emit harmful radiation or pollution into the air,
water, or ground.
(b) Maximum Height
1) Two (2) stories or thirty-five feet (35') for the main building(s).
2) One (1) story or fifteen feet (15’) for accessory buildings.
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9, of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lot
a) Minimum Lot Area - One-half acre (21,780 square feet) for any
LI-zoned lot or site located within Tier One, and ten thousand
(10,000) square feet for any LI-zoned lot or site located within
Tier Two.
b) Minimum Lot Width - One hundred twenty feet (120’) for any
LI-zoned lot or site located within Tier One, and seventy-five
feet (75') for any LI-zoned lot or site located within Tier Two.
c) Minimum Lot Depth – One hundred seventy-five feet (175’) for
any LI-zoned lot or site located within Tier One, and one
hundred feet (100’) for any LI-zoned lot or site located within
Tier Two.
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard - Twenty-five feet (25’) from ultimate rightof-
way line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be
considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for
additional setback requirements).
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard - Fifteen feet (15’) unless
adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see below).
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District –
Twenty-five feet (25’) for one-story building, and an additional
twenty feet (20’) for every story (or fraction thereof) above one
story in height.
d) Interior Side Yards - The interior side-yard setback between
two nonresidential buildings may be reduced to zero feet (0’)
where the two buildings share a common interior lot line,
where construction of a party wall in accordance with the
July 21, 2011 188
City’s Building Code is used, and when approved by the City
Council on the site plan following a favorable recommendation
by the Commission. Where such a reduced side-yard setback
is utilized, the equivalent open space and landscape plantings
and buffers that are normally required along a shared side
property boundary shall be provided elsewhere on each
respective affected lot (i.e., shall not be waived, just provided
somewhere else). Approval of a site plan that shows such a
reduced 0’ side yard setback between two nonresidential
buildings shall be discretionary in nature, and shall be based
upon an analysis of the location, the configuration, and the
impact and compatibility of the proposed construction with
respect to adjacent land uses and structures.
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Fifty percent (50%) including main and
accessory buildings; maximum eighty percent (80%) impervious
coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.).
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – Two to one (2:1).
(d) Outside Display and Storage of Merchandise
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display of
seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) shall be
allowed but shall not be placed/located more than thirty feet (30’) from
the main building or within any required front, side or rear yard.
2) Long-term or permanent open storage shall require issuance of a
Specific Use Permit (SUP).
(20) IP – Industrial Park District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The IP, Industrial Park, district is intended primarily for the conduct of
light manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities, and for
warehousing, research and development, wholesaling and service
operations that do not typically depend upon frequent customer or client
visits. Such uses do require accessibility to major thoroughfares, major
highways, and/or other means of transportation such as the railroad.
(b) Maximum Height
1) Thirty-five feet (35’) for main building(s).
2) One (1) story or fifteen feet (15’) for accessory building(s).
3) Other (See SECTION 7 and SECTION 9,of this UDC).
(c) Area Regulations
1) Size of Lot
a) Minimum Lot Area – One acre (43,560 square feet) for any IPzoned
lot or site located within Tier Two (IP zoning shall not be
located within Tier One, so shall not be located closer than
July 21, 2011 189
300 feet from U.S. Highway 175 or a major thoroughfare –
however, an IP-zoned lot or site may derive access from U.S.
Highway 175 or other major thoroughfare via a public street or
a private entrance that passes through other appropriately
zoned property provided that the applicable street right-of-way
or common fire lane/access easement is dedicated by plat or
by other recorded instrument that is acceptable to the City).
b) Minimum Lot Width – One hundred feet (100') for any IPzoned
lot or site located within Tier Two (within Tier One, an
entrance for an IP-zoned lot or site from U.S. Highway 175 or
other major thoroughfare shall be the width of the accessgiving
public street or private fire lane/access easement).
c) Minimum Lot Depth – One hundred fifty feet (150') from the
front (i.e., addressed) street right-of-way line.
2) Size of Yards
a) Minimum Front Yard - Fifty feet (50’) from ultimate right-of-way
line of roadway; all yards adjacent to a street shall be
considered a front yard (see SECTION 7I(2) of this UDC for
additional setback requirements).
b) Minimum Side and Rear Yard – Twenty-five feet (25’) unless
adjacent to a residentially zoned property (see below).
c) Minimum Side or Rear Yard Adjacent to a Residential District –
Fifty feet (50’) for one-story building, and an additional twenty
feet (20’) for every story (or fraction thereof) above one story
in height.
3) Maximum Lot Coverage – Sixty percent (60%) including main and
accessory buildings; maximum eighty percent (80%) impervious
coverage (including all buildings, parking areas, sidewalks, etc.).
4) Maximum Floor-Area Ratio (FAR) – Two to one (2:1).
(d) Special Requirements
1) Temporary (i.e., not long-term or permanent) outside display
of seasonal items (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins, etc.) shall be
allowed but shall not be placed/located more than thirty feet (30’) from
the main building or within any required front, side or rear yard.
2) Long-term or permanent open storage is allowed but shall be limited
to a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of the total lot area, shall not
be located in front of (i.e., on the street side of) or on top of the
building, and must be screened in accordance with the provisions of
SECTION 9H of this UDC (i.e., cannot be visible from any public
street or adjacent property). Long-term or permanent open storage
that does not conform to all of the above requirements may be
July 21, 2011 190
allowed by applying for and obtaining a Specific Use Permit (SUP) in
accordance with SECTION 5I.
(21) PD – Planned Development District
(a) General Purpose and Description
The purpose of the PD, Planned Development, district (“PD”) is to
promote and encourage innovative development that is sensitive to
surrounding land uses and to the natural environment. If this
necessitates varying from available controlling zoning districts, the
proposed development should demonstrate community benefits. A PD
should not be used to deviate from the provisions of this UDC in a way
that contradicts its intent.
(b) Application Requirements
1) Application Required
Any request for a PD shall be accompanied by an application
prepared in accordance with the Development Standards.
2) Accompanying Applications
Approval of a PD shall require all subsequent development
applications to be consistent with the approved development
regulations.
3) Tax Certificate Required
All applications made as a request for a PD shall be accompanied
by a copy of a current tax certificate reflecting that all taxes due and
owing have been paid in full.
4) Minimum Planned Development District Size
No PD may be established on any area less than the following in
size:
a) Single-Family Residential: two (2) acres;
b) Multi-Family Residential: two (2) acres;
c) Nonresidential: two (2) acres; or
d) Mixed Residential and Nonresidential: five (5) acres.
(c) Processing of Application and Decision
1) Submittal
An application for a PD shall be submitted to the City Manager.
The City Manager shall review the application for completeness in
accordance with SECTION 4B of this UDC. The City Manager may
request a recommendation regarding the application from any other
City employee or consultant. The City Manager shall notify the
applicant of items requiring correction or attention before providing
a recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the
July 21, 2011 191
City Manager shall forward a written recommendation to the
Commission for consideration.
2) Notification Requirements
An application for a PD requires the following notification in
accordance with SECTION 4C of this UDC:
a) Written notice prior to consideration by the Commission; and
b) Published notice prior to consideration by the City Council.
3) Commission Recommendation
The Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the
TOMA and SECTION 4D of this UDC and make a written
recommendation regarding a PD to the City Council. The
Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions,
or denial of the PD. The Commission may, on its own motion or by
request of the property owner, postpone consideration of the
request to a date certain that is not more than thirty (30) calendar
days after the date of the current consideration in order to review
additional information or modifications which may have a direct
bearing on the recommendation to the City Council.
4) Decision by City Council
The City Council shall receive the written recommendation of the
Commission regarding a PD and shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with the TOMA and SECTION 4D of this UDC. The
City Council may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the PD. The City Council may, on its own motion or by request of
the property owner, postpone consideration of the request to a date
certain that is not more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date
of the current consideration in order to review additional information
or modifications which may have a direct bearing on the final
decision.
(d) Development Standards
1) Development standards for each PD shall be set forth in the
ordinance granting the PD and may include but shall not be limited to
uses, density, lot area, lot width, lot depth, yard depths and widths,
building height, building elevations, coverage, floor area ratio, parking,
access, screening, landscaping, accessory buildings, signs, lighting,
management associations, and other requirements as the City
Council may deem appropriate.
2) In the PD, the particular controlling, or base, zoning district(s) to which
uses specified in the PD are most similar shall be stated in the
granting ordinance. All PD applications shall list all requested
variances from the standard requirements set forth throughout this
ordinance (applications without this list will be considered incomplete).
July 21, 2011 192
3) The ordinance granting a PD shall include a statement as to the
purpose and intent of the PD granted therein. A specific list is
required of variances in each controlling zoning district or districts and
a general statement citing the reason for the PD request.
4) The PD shall conform to all other sections of the UDC, unless
specifically exempted in the granting ordinance.
(e) Conceptual and Development Plan
In establishing a PD, the City Council shall approve and file, as part of
the amending ordinance, appropriate plans and standards for each PD.
During the review and public hearing process a conceptual plan and a
development plan (or detailed site plan) shall be submitted.
1) Conceptual Plan: The applicant shall submit a conceptual plan. The
plan shall show the applicant’s intent for the use of the land within the
proposed PD in a graphic manner and shall be supported by written
documentation of proposals and standards for development.
a) A conceptual plan for residential land use shall show general
use(s), thoroughfares, and preliminary lot arrangements. For
residential development which does not propose platted lots,
the conceptual plan shall set forth the size, type, and location
of buildings and building sites, access, density, building height,
fire lanes, screening, parking areas, landscaped areas, and
other pertinent development data.
b) A conceptual plan for uses other than residential uses shall set
forth the land use proposals in a manner to adequately
illustrate the type and nature of the proposed development.
Data which may be submitted by the applicant, or required by
the City Council, may include, but is not limited to, the types of
use(s), topography, and boundary of the planned development
area, physical features of the site, existing streets, alleys, and
easements, location of future public facilities, building heights
and locations, parking ratios, and other information to
adequately describe the proposed development and to provide
data for approval which is used in drafting the final
development plan.
c) Changes of detail which do not alter the basic relationship of
the proposed development to adjacent property and which do
not alter the uses permitted or increase the density, building
height, or coverage of the site and which do not decrease the
off-street parking ratio, reduce the yards provided at the
boundary of the site, or significantly alter the landscape plans
as indicated on the approved conceptual plan may be
authorized by the City Manager. If an agreement cannot be
reached regarding whether or not a change of detail conforms
July 21, 2011 193
to the original concept plan, the City Council shall determine
the conformity.
2) Development Plan: This plan shall set forth the final plans for
development of the PD and shall conform to the data presented and
approved on the conceptual plan. Approval of the development plan
shall be the basis for issuance of a building permit. The development
plan shall be acted on by the City Council, upon recommendation of
the Commission. The development plan may be submitted for the total
area or any section of the planned development. The development
plan shall include:
a) A site inventory analysis including a scale drawing of existing
vegetation, natural watercourses, creeks or bodies of water,
and an analysis of planned changes in such natural features
as a result of the development and including a delineation of
any flood prone areas;
b) A scale drawing showing any proposed public or private
streets and alleys; building sites or lots; and areas reserved as
parks, parkways, playgrounds, utility easements, school sites,
street widening and street changes; sidewalks and trails; the
points of ingress and egress from existing and proposed
streets; general location and description of existing and
proposed utility services, including size of water and sewer
mains; the location and width for all curb cuts and the land
area of all abutting sites and the zoning classification thereof
on an accurate survey of the tract with the topographical
contour interval of not more than five feet (5’);
c) A site plan in accordance with SECTION 8N of this UDC;
d) A landscape plan showing screening walls, ornamental
planting, wooded areas, and trees to be planted; and
e) An architectural plan showing elevations and signage style to
be used throughout the development. Any or all of the required
information may be incorporated on a single drawing if such
drawing is clear and can be evaluated by City staff, the
Commission and the City Council.
(f) Criteria for Approval
The Commission, in making its recommendation, and the City Council, in
considering final action on a PD, should consider the following criteria:
1) Whether the proposed PD implements and conforms to the policies of
the adopted Comprehensive Plan;
2) Whether the proposed PD promotes the health, safety, and general
welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful
development of the City;
July 21, 2011 194
3) Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change in zoning district
classification and the standards applicable to such uses will be
appropriate in the immediate area of the land to be reclassified;
4) Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or
proposed plans for providing public schools, streets, water supply,
sanitary sewers or other public services and utilities to the area;
5) The extent to which the proposed PD will result in a more superior
development than could be achieved through conventional zoning;
6) Whether all of the applicant’s taxes owed to the City on the subject
property have been paid in full (no application will receive final
approval until all taxes due are paid in full); and
7) Whether other criteria are met which, at the discretion of the
Commission and City Council, are deemed relevant and important in
the consideration of the PD.
(g) Amendments
The City Manager may permit the applicant to make minor amendments
to the conceptual plan without the necessity of amending the ordinance
that established the PD. If the proposed amendments change and/or
impact the nature or purposes of the approved PD, whether individually
or cumulatively, the City Manager may deny the request for approval of
the modifications and provide the applicant with the opportunity to revise
the proposed amendments to bring them into compliance with the PD. If
an applicant wishes to make any amendments to an approved concept
plan, other than minor amendments approved by the City Manager, the
City Manager will submit the amendments to the Commission and City
Council for review and approval as a revised PD. Minor amendments
shall only be as follows:
1) Corrections in spelling, distances and other labeling that do not affect
the overall development concept;
2) Changes in building position or layout that are less than ten feet (10’)
or ten percent (10%) of the total building project or area;
3) Changes in proposed property lines as long as the original total
project acreage is not exceeded, and the area of any base zoning
district is not changed by more than five percent (5%); and
4) Changes in parking layouts as long as the number of required spaces
and general original design are maintained.
F. INITIAL ZONING UPON ANNEXATION
(1) Newly annexed property shall be deemed to be zoned Agricultural (“A”) until
such a time that the property becomes zoned to another permanent zoning
district. However, as soon as practical following annexation, but in no event
more than one hundred and eighty (180) calendar days thereafter, the City
Council shall, on its own motion or by property owners of the annexed area,
July 21, 2011 195
initiate proceedings to formally and legislatively establish Agricultural District
zoning on the newly annexed territory, whereupon the City Manager shall
commence public notification and other standard procedures for zoning
amendments as set forth in this UDC. Said proceedings to establish zoning
may be undertaken concurrently with annexation procedures (i.e., notified at the
same time, public hearings scheduled at the same time as annexation, etc.);
however, zoning approval and formal adoption of the ordinance establishing
zoning must occur after annexation approval and adoption have occurred, and
as a separate and distinct action by the City Council, after due consideration of
the zoning request has been considered by the Commission.
(2) The initial zoning of a land parcel, whether it is interim in nature, by initiation of
the landowner or by initiation of the City, must meet the requirements for
notification and public hearings as set forth in this UDC and all other applicable
State laws.
(3) The owner of land to be annexed may submit an application for zoning the
property simultaneously with submission of the petition for annexation, but no
such annexation application may be made conditioned upon the approval of any
particular zoning classification. The Commission may consider the request for
zoning and make a recommendation to the City Council prior to final adoption of
the annexation ordinance. Any recommendation by the Commission shall be
conditioned upon approval of the annexation of the property by the City Council.
The City Council may act on an ordinance to establish the initial zoning of the
property being annexed at the same meeting as the action on the annexation
ordinance so long as final approval of the annexation ordinance occurs prior to
final approval of the ordinance to establish the zoning and provided further that
both the annexation of the property and the zoning of the property have been
properly noticed pursuant to SECTION 4C of this UDC.
(4) Within an area classified as A-Agricultural:
(a) No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be issued by
the Building Official, other than a permit which will allow the construction of
a building or use permitted in the Agricultural District, unless and until such
territory has been classified in a zoning district other than the Agricultural
District by the City Council in the manner prescribed in this UDC, except as
provided in paragraph (b).
(b) If plans and preparations for developing a property for a use other than
those specified in the Agricultural District were already in progress prior to
annexation of the property into the City, then the City Council may, at its
discretion, authorize construction of the project by a majority vote.
Application of this subsection is contingent upon the following:
1) An application for a building permit for the proposed building or use
must be made to the Building Official within ninety (90) days after
annexation of the property into the City; and
July 21, 2011 196
2) The applicant must be able to demonstrate that plans and other
preparations for developing the property commenced prior to (i.e.,
were already in progress at the time of) annexation into the City.
(c) In its deliberations concerning authorization to proceed with construction of
a project which meets the above criteria, the City Council shall take into
consideration the appropriate land use for the area as shown on the
Comprehensive Plan. Upon approval by the City Council, the City Manager
shall notify the Building Official of such approval.
G. ZONING CHANGE/ZONING MAP AMENDMENT
(1) Applicability
(a) The City Council, from time to time, on its own motion, by request of the
City Manager or by application from a property owner, may establish or
amend the boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City. A
zoning change or Zoning Map amendment is required to establish the use
of land and the development associated with the proposed zoning
classification for the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable
and desirable development within the City.
(b) Approval of a zoning change or Zoning Map amendment authorizes a
property owner to submit subsequent development applications consistent
with the amendment.
(2) Application Requirements
(a) Application Required
Any request for a zoning change or Zoning Map amendment shall be
accompanied by an application and zoning exhibit prepared in
accordance with the Development Standards.
(b) Accompanying Applications
Approval of a zoning change or Zoning Map amendment shall require all
subsequent development applications to be consistent with the approved
amendments.
(c) Tax Certificate Required
All applications made as a request for a zoning change or Zoning Map
amendment shall be accompanied by a copy of a current Tax Certificate
reflecting that all taxes due and owing have been paid in full.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for a zoning change or Zoning Map amendment shall be
submitted to the City Manager. The City Manager shall review the
application for completeness in accordance with SECTION 4B of this
UDC. The City Manager may request a recommendation from any other
City employee or consultant. The City shall notify the applicant of items
requiring correction or attention before providing a recommendation on
July 21, 2011 197
the application. After appropriate review, the City Manager shall forward
a written recommendation to the Commission for consideration.
(b) Notification Requirements
An application for a zoning change or Zoning Map amendment for a
particular parcel, lot, or tract of land requires the following notification in
accordance with SECTION 4C of this UDC:
1) Written notice prior to consideration by the Commission; and
2) Published notice prior to consideration by the City Council.
(c) Commission Recommendation
The Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the
TOMA and SECTION 4D of this UDC and make a written
recommendation regarding a proposed zoning change or Zoning Map
amendment to the City Council. The Commission may recommend
approval, approval with conditions if so allowed by the zoning district
being sought, or denial of the amendment. The Commission may, on its
own motion or by request of the property owner, postpone consideration
of the request to a date certain that is not more than thirty (30) calendar
days after the date of the current consideration in order to review
additional information or modifications which may have a direct bearing
on the recommendation to the City Council.
(d) Decision by City Council
The City Council shall receive the written recommendation of the
Commission regarding a proposed zoning change or Zoning Map
amendment and shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the
TOMA and SECTION 4D of this UDC. The City Council may vote to
approve, approve with conditions if so allowed by the zoning district
being sought, or deny the amendment. The City Council may, on its own
motion or by request of the property owner, postpone consideration of
the request to a date certain that is not more than thirty (30) calendar
days after the date of the current consideration in order to review
additional information or modifications which may have a direct bearing
on the final decision.
(e) Consideration of Previously Denied Amendments
A request for a zoning change or Zoning Map amendment for a tract of
land shall not be considered by the Commission or the City Council
within six (6) months of the City Council's decision to deny a request on
the same tract of land, unless the request is to a different zoning
classification or there has been a substantial change in the conditions
surrounding the parcel since the initial request. For the purpose of this
SECTION 5G, a request may be considered substantially different if the
change is to a different zoning classification, there is a change in
conditions relating to zoning principles of the property or surrounding
properties or there is a change in the nature of the development of the
July 21, 2011 198
property or surrounding properties. The City Manager shall have the
authority to determine whether the request is substantially different from
the initial request and such decision shall be final.
(4) Criteria for Approval
The Commission, in making its recommendation, and the City Council, in
considering final action on a zoning change or Zoning Map amendment,
should consider the following criteria:
(a) Whether the proposed zoning change or Zoning Map amendment
implements and conforms to the policies of the City’s Comprehensive Plan;
(b) Whether the proposed zoning change or Zoning Map amendment
promotes the health, safety, or general welfare of the City and the safe,
orderly, efficient and healthful development of the City;
(c) Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change in zoning district
classification and the standards applicable to such uses will be appropriate
in the immediate area of the land to be reclassified;
(d) Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed
plans for providing public schools, streets, water supply, sanitary sewers or
other public services and utilities to the area;
(e) Whether there have been environmental and/or economical changes which
warrant the requested change;
(f) Whether there is an error in the original zoning of the property for which a
change is requested;
(g) Whether all of the applicant’s taxes owed to the City on the subject
property have been paid in full (no application will receive final approval
until all taxes due and owing are paid in full); and
(h) Whether other criteria are met, which, at the discretion of the Commission
and the City Council, are deemed relevant and important in the
consideration of the amendment.
(5) Protests
(a) If a proposed zoning change or Zoning Map amendment is protested in
accordance with this section, the proposed change must receive, in order
to take effect, the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of all
members of the City Council according to LGC Section 211.006(d), as
amended. The protest must be written and signed by the owners of at
least twenty percent (20%) of either:
1) The area of the lots or land covered by the proposed zoning change
or Zoning Map amendment; or
2) The area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by
the proposed zoning change or Zoning Map amendment and
extending two hundred feet (200’) from that area.
July 21, 2011 199
(b) In computing the percentage of land area under SECTION 5G(5)(a) above,
the area of streets and alleys shall be included.
H. PERMITTED USE TABLE
(1) Use of Land and Buildings
Structures, land or premises shall be used only in accordance with the use
permitted in the following use table subject to compliance with the
dimensional and development standards for the applicable zoning district and
all other applicable requirements of this UDC.
(2) Permitted Principal Uses
No principal use shall be permitted in any district unless it appears as a
permitted use in the following Permitted Use Table:
July 21, 2011 200
Table 5-2 - Legend for Permitted Use Table
Designation Description
P Use is permitted in district indicated
S Use is permitted in district indicated upon approval
of Specific Use Permit
None – Entry is blank Use is prohibited in district indicated
Table 5-3 – Permitted Use Table
PERMITTED USES
Residential Zoning Districts Nonresidential Zoning Districts
A
SF-E
SF-20
SF-12.5
SF-9
SF-6.5
SF-PH
SF-TH
MF-15
SF-MH
MHP
O
NS
R
BP
OTC
HB
C
LI
IP
Accessory Building, Residential P P P P P P P P P P P
Agriculture/Field Crops P
Airport, Heliport or Landing Field S S S
Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Commercial Please see SECTION 7F
Appliance, Furniture and Home Furnishings Store P P P P P
Art Gallery/Library/Museum P P P P P P
Assisted Care or Living Facility S S P
Automobile Parts Sales P P P
Automobile Repairs and Service, Major S S S P P
Automobile Repairs and Service, Minor S P P P
Automobile Sales P P
Bakery S P P P P P
Bank, Savings and Loan, Credit Union P P P S P P P
Beauty Salon/Barber Shop P P P P P P
Bed and Breakfast Inn S S S S S P
July 21, 2011 201
PERMITTED USES
Residential Zoning Districts Nonresidential Zoning Districts
A
SF-E
SF-20
SF-12.5
SF-9
SF-6.5
SF-PH
SF-TH
MF-15
SF-MH
MHP
O
NS
R
BP
OTC
HB
C
LI
IP
Building Material and Hardware Sales S S S P P P
Cabinet or Upholstery Shop S P P
Car Wash, Automated S S S P P
Car Wash, Self-Serve S S S P P
Cemetery or Mausoleum S
Church, Temple, Synagogue, Mosque, or Other Place of
Worship
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P S P P P P P
Civic/Convention Center P S S S P P S S
Civic Club or Lodge S P S S P S S
College, University, Trade, or Private Boarding School P S S S S P P
Commercial Amusement, Indoor S S P P
Commercial Amusement Outdoor S S S S
Community Center S S S S S S S S S S S P S P S S S P P
Concrete/Asphalt Batching Plant S S S S S
Convenience Store w/o Gas Pumps S R S S P P P P
Convenience Store w/ Gas Pumps S S S S S S S P
Day Care Center P P P S S S P
Dry Cleaning S P P S S P P
Family Home S S S S S S S S S S S
Farmers Market S S S S S S S
Flea Market S S S S
Furniture Sales P P P
Gasoline Station/Fuel Pumps S S S S S
General Manufacturing/Industrial Use P P
Golf Course and/or Country Club P S S S S S S S S S
Governmental Facilities P P P P P P P P P
Health/Fitness Center S P S S P P
July 21, 2011 202
PERMITTED USES
Residential Zoning Districts Nonresidential Zoning Districts
A
SF-E
SF-20
SF-12.5
SF-9
SF-6.5
SF-PH
SF-TH
MF-15
SF-MH
MHP
O
NS
R
BP
OTC
HB
C
LI
IP
Hospital S P P S
Hotel/Motel P P
Household Appliance Service and Repair S S
In-Home Day Care S S S S S S S S S S S
Laundromat P P P P
Livestock P
Manufactured Home P P
Medical, Dental or Professional Office/Clinic P P P P P P
Mini-Warehouse/Public Storage S S P P
Mortuary/Funeral Home S S P P
Multi-Family Apartment Dwelling P
Museum S S P P S P S P
Office-Warehouse/Distribution Center P P P P
One-Family Dwelling Attached P P P
One-Family Dwelling Detached P P P P P P P P P P P
Park/Playground/Similar Public Site P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
Pawn Shop S S S
Recreational Vehicle Park S S S
Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service S S S
Recycling Facility S S P S
Restaurant, Drive-In S S P P
Restaurant or Cafeteria S P P P P S S
Retail Stores and Shops S P P S P P P S
School, Public or Private P P P P P P P P S S
Sexually Oriented Business (Refer to Ordinance 051911A)
Stable, Commercial P
Storage or Wholesale Warehouse S P P
July 21, 2011 203
PERMITTED USES
Residential Zoning Districts Nonresidential Zoning Districts
A
SF-E
SF-20
SF-12.5
SF-9
SF-6.5
SF-PH
SF-TH
MF-15
SF-MH
MHP
O
NS
R
BP
OTC
HB
C
LI
IP
Theater, Outdoor S S S S
Theater, Indoor P S S P P
Manufactured Homes Sales S S S
Truck Sales, Heavy Equipment S S S
Two-Family Dwelling P P
Veterinarian Clinic/Kennel, Indoor S S P S S P P P
Veterinarian Clinic/Kennel, Outdoor S S S S S S
Welding/Machine Shop P P
Wrecking or Salvage Yard S S
July 21, 2011 204
(3) Uses Not Listed
Any use not listed in the Permitted Use Table is prohibited..
(4) New and Unlisted Uses
(a) It is recognized that new or unlisted types of land use may seek to locate in
the City. In order to provide for such contingencies, a determination of any
new or unlisted form of land use shall be made in accordance with this
section.
(b) It is recognized that the Permitted Use Table may require amendment, from
time to time, to allow for uses that are not permitted. In the event an
amendment to the Permitted Use Table is required, the procedure for the
amendment shall be the same as required for an amendment to the text of
the UDC in accordance with SECTION 4G of this UDC.
I. SPECIFIC USE PERMIT (SUP)
(1) Applicability
A SUP allows for discretionary City Council approval of uses with unique or
widely varying operating characteristics or unusual site development features,
subject to the terms and conditions specifically set forth in this UDC. These
uses and the districts where they may be located are listed in the Permitted
Use Table, SECTION 5H. Approval of a SUP authorizes a property owner to
submit subsequent development applications consistent with the approved
SUP.
(2) Application Requirements
(a) Application Required
Any request for a SUP shall be accompanied by an application and SUP
exhibit prepared in accordance with the Development Standards.
(b) Accompanying Applications
An application for a SUP shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared
in accordance with SECTION 8N. Approval of a site plan as part of a
SUP shall meet the requirements for site plan approval under SECTION
8N.
(c) Tax Certificate Required
All applications made as a request for a SUP shall be accompanied by a
copy of a current tax certificate reflecting that all taxes due and owing
have been paid in full.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for a SUP shall be submitted to the City Manager. The
City Manager shall review the application for completeness in
accordance with SECTION 4B of this UDC. The City Manager may
request a recommendation regarding the application from any other City
July 21, 2011 205
employee or consultant. The City Manager shall notify the applicant of
items requiring correction or attention before providing a
recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City
Manager shall forward a written recommendation to the Commission for
consideration.
(b) Notification Requirements
An application for a SUP requires the following notification in accordance
with SECTION 4C of this UDC:
1) Written notice prior to consideration by the Commission; and
2) Published notice prior to consideration by the City Council.
(c) Commission Recommendation
The Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the
TOMA and SECTION 4D of this UDC and make a written
recommendation regarding a proposed SUP to the City Council. The
Commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or
denial of the SUP. The Commission may, on its own motion or by
request of the property owner, postpone consideration of the request to
a date certain that is not more than thirty (30) calendar days after the
date of the current consideration in order to review additional information
or modifications which may have a direct bearing on the
recommendation to the City Council.
(d) Decision by City Council
The City Council shall receive the written recommendation of the
Commission regarding a proposed SUP and shall hold a public hearing
in accordance with the TOMA and SECTION 4D of this UDC. The City
Council may vote to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the SUP.
The City Council may, on its own motion or by request of the property
owner, postpone consideration of the request to a date certain that is not
more than thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the current
consideration in order to review additional information or modifications
which may have a direct bearing on the final decision.
(4) Criteria for Approval
The Commission, in making its recommendation, and the City Council, in
considering final action on a SUP, should consider whether the following
criteria are met:
(a) The proposed use at the specified location is consistent with and conforms
to the policies embodied in the adopted Comprehensive Plan;
(b) The proposed use is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the
applicable zoning district regulations and is allowed by such regulations
with the approval of a SUP;
(c) The proposed use is compatible with and preserves the character and
integrity of adjacent developments and neighborhoods, and includes
July 21, 2011 206
improvements either on-site or within the public rights-of-way to mitigate
development-related adverse impacts, such as traffic, noise, odors, visual
nuisances, drainage or other similar adverse effects to adjacent
development and neighborhoods;
(d) The proposed use does not generate pedestrian and vehicular traffic which
will be hazardous or conflict with the existing and anticipated traffic in the
neighborhood;
(e) The proposed use incorporates roadway adjustments, traffic control
devices or mechanisms, and access restrictions to control traffic flow or
divert traffic as may be needed to reduce or eliminate developmentgenerated
traffic on neighborhood streets;
(f) The proposed use incorporates features to minimize adverse effects,
including visual impacts, of the proposed use on adjacent properties;
(g) The proposed use meets the standards for the zoning district, or to the
extent variations from such standards have been requested, that such
variations are allowed by the SUP process and are necessary to render the
use compatible with adjoining development and the neighborhood;
(h) The proposed use and associated site plan promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful
development of the City;
(i) No application made under these provisions will receive final approval until
all back taxes owed to the City have been paid in full; and
(j) Other criteria which, at the discretion of the Commission and City Council
are deemed relevant and important in the consideration of the SUP.
(5) Conditions
The Commission, in making its recommendation, and the City Council, in
considering final action, may require such modifications in the proposed use
and attach such conditions to the SUP as deemed necessary to mitigate
adverse effects of the proposed use and to carry out the spirit and intent of
this UDC. Conditions and modifications may include but are not limited to
limitation of building size or height, increased open space, limitations on
impervious surfaces, enhanced loading and parking requirements, additional
landscaping, curbing, sidewalk, vehicular access and parking improvements,
placement or orientation of buildings and entryways, buffer yards,
landscaping and screening, signage restrictions and design, maintenance of
buildings and outdoor areas, duration of the permit and hours of operation.
(6) Expiration of Specific Use Permit
A SUP shall expire if any of the following occurs:
(a) A building permit, if necessary, for the use has not been approved within
two (2) years of the approval of the SUP;
(b) A building permit approved as a result of the approval of the SUP expires
within two (2) years of the approval of the SUP;
July 21, 2011 207
(c) The use has been abandoned or discontinued for a period of time
exceeding six (6) months; or
(d) The SUP expires in accordance with its terms.
SECTION 6 - NONCONFORMING USES, LOTS AND STRUCTURES
A. PURPOSE AND INTENT
(1) Within the districts established by this UDC, or amendments thereto, there may
exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of use
which were lawfully in existence and operating before this UDC was enacted,
amended or otherwise made applicable to such lots, structures or uses, but
which do not now conform to the regulations of the district in which they are
located. It is the intent of this UDC to permit such nonconforming uses to
continue, as long as the conditions within this section and other applicable
sections of this UDC are met.
(2) It is further the intent of this UDC that nonconforming uses, lots and structures
shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, and shall not be used as a
basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same
district.
(3) Nonconforming uses are hereby declared to be incompatible with the permitted
uses in the zoning districts involved.
B. NONCONFORMING STATUS
(1) Except as provided in SECTION 6I, any use, platted lot or structure that does
not conform with the regulations of this UDC on the effective date hereof or any
amendment hereto, shall be deemed a nonconforming use, platted lot or
structure provided that:
(a) Such use, platted lot or structure was in existence under, and in
compliance with, the provisions of the previous City zoning code, and has
been in regular and continuous use since such time;
(b) Such use, platted lot or structure was a lawful, nonconforming use, platted
lot or structure under the previous City zoning code, and has been in
regular and continuous use since such time; or
(c) Such use, platted lot or structure was in existence at the time of annexation
into the City, was a legal use of the land at such time, and has been in
regular and continuous use since such time.
(2) Except as provided in SECTION 6I below, any other use, platted lot or structure
which does not conform with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located on the effective date of this UDC or any amendment hereto, shall be
deemed to be in violation of this UDC, and the City shall be entitled to enforce
fully the terms of this UDC with respect to such use, platted lot or structure.
C. CONTINUING LAWFUL NONCONFORMING USE OF LAND AND STRUCTURES
July 21, 2011 208
(1) A nonconforming use or structure may continue to be used, operated or
occupied in accordance with the terms of the zoning regulations by which it was
established, or in the case of annexed property, in accordance with the
regulations under which it was created, if any.
(2) A nonconforming structure occupied by a nonconforming use may be reoccupied
by a conforming use, following abandonment of the nonconforming
use.
D. EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
(1) A nonconforming use may not be extended.
(2) A nonconforming use occupying a structure shall not be extended to occupy
land outside the structure.
(3) A nonconforming use or structure shall not be enlarged, increased or extended
to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the time the use or
structure became nonconforming, except to provide additional off-street parking
or loading areas required by this UDC.
E. ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES, AND
CESSATION OF USE OF STRUCTURES OR LAND
(1) If a nonconforming use or structure is abandoned, any future use of the
premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this UDC, as amended,
and with any other applicable City codes or ordinances that are in effect at the
time the use is resumed or the structure is re-occupied.
(2) A nonconforming use or structure shall be deemed “abandoned” in the following
circumstances:
(a) The use ceases to operate for a continuous period of one hundred eighty
(180) calendar days;
(b) The structure remains vacant for a continuous period of 180 calendar days;
or
(c) In the case of a temporary use, the use is moved from the premises for any
length of time.
(3) Any lot, tract or property that does not have a building on it and that is used for
open/outside storage as of the effective date of this UDC is hereby made and
declared to be nonconforming by this UDC. Within one hundred eighty (180)
calendar days following the effective date of this UDC such open/outside
storage use shall cease. The lot, tract or property shall be cleaned up and all
trash, debris, stored items and vehicles, and other materials shall be removed
from the premises such that the property is not a physical or visual nuisance to
the public or to surrounding property owners.
F. LIMITATIONS OF NONCONFORMING USES
(1) A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.
July 21, 2011 209
(2) A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use; provided, however,
that, once such change is made, the use shall not be changed back to a
nonconforming use.
(3) A conforming use located in a nonconforming structure may be changed to
another conforming use, but shall not be changed to a nonconforming use,
provided the degree of nonconformity of such structure shall not be increased by
such change in conforming uses.
G. RECONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
(1) If more than fifty percent (50%) of the total appraised value of a nonconforming
structure, as such appraised value was determined by the Kaufman County
Appraisal District on the most recently approved tax roll, is destroyed by fire, the
elements, or some other cause, then the structure may be rebuilt only in
conformity with the standards of this UDC.
(2) If less than fifty percent (50%) of the total appraised value of a nonconforming
structure, as such appraised value was determined by the Kaufman County
Appraisal District on the most recently approved tax roll, is destroyed by fire, the
elements, or some other cause, then the structure may be reconstructed as it
was before the partial destruction but only to its original dimensions and floor
area, and provided that such reconstruction is completed within 365 calendar
days following the event that caused the partial destruction. If reconstruction is
delayed by contested insurance claims, litigation, or some other similar cause,
then the 365 calendar day reconstruction period may be extended by the City
Manager, at his/her sole discretion.
(3) If a nonconforming structure that is totally or partially destroyed was occupied by
a nonconforming use at the time of such destruction, then the nonconforming
use may be re-established subject to the limitations on expansion set forth in
SECTION 6D and SECTION 6F above. .
(4) Any conforming structure that is totally or partially destroyed shall be
reconstructed only in conformity with the standards of this UDC.
(5) Nothing in this UDC shall be construed to prohibit the upgrading, strengthening,
repair or maintenance of any part of any structure, conforming or
nonconforming, that is declared unsafe or uninhabitable by the proper authority,
unless such repairs or maintenance exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
structure’s appraised value, as such appraised value was determined by the
Kaufman County Appraisal District on the most recently approved tax roll.
H. RELOCATION OF NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE
No nonconforming structure or building shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other location on the lot, or to any other location or lot, unless every portion of such
structure is in compliance with all the regulations of the zoning district in which the
structure is to be relocated. Such building relocation shall also require a permit
from the City, and may also require platting of the intended building site as well as
site plan approval pursuant to this UDC.
I. NONCONFORMING LOTS
July 21, 2011 210
(1) The following types of platted lots shall be deemed in conformance with the
provisions of this UDC, notwithstanding the fact that such lot does not meet the
standards of this UDC in the zoning district in which it is located:
(a) Any vacant lot that conformed to the City’s zoning district regulations at the
time that it was platted; or
(b) Any lot occupied by a single-family dwelling authorized under the zoning
district regulations in which the lot is located.
(2) Nothing in this UDC shall be construed to prohibit the use of a lot that does not
meet the minimum lot standards of the zoning district in which it is located,
provided that the lot is zoned for the land use(s) intended and the lot was platted
as a lot of record prior to the effective date of this UDC.
(3) A lot of record located within the Agriculture (A) zoning district that is
nonconforming may be occupied by a single-family dwelling provided that all
applicable zoning standards with regard to building setbacks, building size and
design criteria are met.
J. NONCONFORMING MANUFACTURED HOUSING
(1) Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this SECTION 6, the owner of a
nonconforming manufactured home or mobile home may remove the
manufactured home or mobile home from its location and place another
manufactured home on the same property, provided that the replacement is a
newer manufactured home, and is at least as large in living space as the prior
structure.
(2) Except in the case of a fire or natural disaster, the owner of the manufactured
home is limited to a single replacement of the manufactured home on the same
property.
(3) A property owner who has a manufactured home or mobile home which has
been placed on a lot in violation of the terms of this UDC shall not have the right
to replace the illegal use.
K. AMORTIZATION
(1) The BOA, on its own motion or at the direction of the City Council or an
interested property owner, may inquire into the existence of any nonconforming
use in the City, and after public hearing and investigation into the conditions
created by the use including fire or health hazards created by the use and any
other danger or nuisance to the public due to or created by any condition or use
existing on the property, require the discontinuance or termination of such
nonconforming use. The owner of the nonconforming use under investigation by
the BOA shall have no fewer than ten (10) days written notice prior to the day of
the public hearing. The BOA, after having heard from any affected parties and
the public, shall prescribe a reasonable time period for compliance,
discontinuance and termination of the nonconforming use that allows for
amortization of the owner's actual investment in the use that occurred before the
time that the use became nonconforming.
July 21, 2011 211
(2) In prescribing said time period, the BOA shall consider the following factors:
(a) The capital investment in structures, fixed equipment and other assets
(excluding inventory and other assets that may be feasibly transferred to
another site) on the property at the time the use became nonconforming;
(b) Any costs that are directly attributable to the establishment of compliance
date, including demolition expenses, relocation expenses, termination of
leases and discharge of mortgages;
(c) Any return on investment since inception of the use, including net income
and depreciation; and
(d) The anticipated annual recovery of investment, including net income and
depreciation.
(3) If the BOA establishes an amortization (or compliance) date for a nonconforming
use, the nonconforming use must cease operation on that date and it may not
operate thereafter unless it becomes a conforming use.
(4) For purposes of this SECTION 6K, "owner" means the owner of the
nonconforming use at the time of the BOA's determination of an amortization (or
compliance) date for the nonconforming use.
(5) The BOA shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, documents and things;
administer oaths; punish for contempt; and may require the production of
documents and other things, under such regulations as it may establish or deem
appropriate.
(6) This SECTION 6K is subject in all events to the owner’s rights set forth in LGC
Chapter 245 and LGC Section 211.017.
SECTION 7 - SUPPLEMENTAL USES AND GENERAL REGULATIONS
A. ANTI-MONOTONY REQUIREMENTS
(1) Purpose
(a) The purpose of this chapter is to preserve the aesthetically pleasing
character of Byron's residential districts by promoting same; protect and
enhance property values; and promote the easy identification of houses, by
encouraging new dwelling unit construction of distinctive design and
discouraging excessive similarity among adjacent dwellings. Establishment
of a Gated Community
(2) Residential Construction – Design Variety
(a) No building permit shall be issued for any new single-family detached
dwelling unit which is similar in appearance to any dwelling on the same
street which is within two lots distance of it. However, those single-family
dwellings with a signed sales contract or application for building permit
bearing a date prior to the adoption of this ordinance shall be exempt from
the provisions of this chapter.
July 21, 2011 212
(b) A dwelling on a corner lot may be considered dissimilar to another if the
two dwellings face different streets. On cul-de-sac turnarounds, no dwelling
shall be similar in appearance to another dwelling on the turnaround.
(3) Similarity Standards
(a) For the purpose of this chapter, "similar in appearance" means a dwelling
which is identical, or nearly identical, to another in any three of the
following characteristics:
1) Roof type (gable, hip, mansard, gambrel, flat, combination);
2) Roof height;
3) Approximate dimensions (height and length) of the front wall closest
to the front lot line;
4) Shape of the front elevation silhouette;
5) Relative locations and sizes of windows in the front elevation;
6) Relative location and dimensions of garage door(s), if included on the
front elevation;
7) Type(s) of siding (e.g., brick veneer, lapped horizontal siding, halftimber,
board and batten, shakes, etc.) on the front elevation.
(b) Housing Styles. If adjacent lots as defined in this chapter contain different
housing styles as herein described, the previously delineated similarity
standards do not apply. Housing style is in and of itself a significant enough
characteristic to constitute dissimilarity. Housing styles shall consist of the
following: ranch, bi-level, tri-level, 1 and ½ story, two-story, and three-story.
(4) Administration
(a) If the building and zoning officer, or person acting in that capacity, finds that
the dwelling for which a building permit is requested is similar in
appearance to a dwelling for which a building permit has been issued
within two lots distance and facing the same street, the building and zoning
officer shall deny the permit request for noncompliance with this chapter.
1) Alter the dwelling plans so that the proposed dwelling is no longer
similar to another adjacent dwelling, according to the criteria specified
herein;
2) Appeal the decision of the building and zoning officer to the health and
ordinance/public health committee of the city council;
3) In appealing the interpretation of the code to the health and
ordinance/public health committee, an applicant for a building permit
shall present evidence sufficient to demonstrate conformity with this
chapter, such as architectural drawings. Shape of the front elevation
silhouette.
July 21, 2011 213
(b) If the health and ordinance/public health committee finds in favor of the
applicant, the building and zoning officer shall issue a building permit, so
long as such application has met all other appropriate requirements. If the
health and ordinance/public health committee finds against the applicant,
the applicant may appeal to the city council. To overturn the decision of the
health and ordinance/public health committee requires a vote of threefourth
of the city council.
(5) Exceptions
(a) These regulations shall not apply to dwellings for which building permits
have been approved before the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, including dwellings that are being remodeled, reconstructed,
or replaced after fire, windstorm or other catastrophe.
(b) These regulations may be waived in cases where the applicant for a
building permit could not be expected to anticipate the design of a
neighboring dwelling for which a building permit has already been issued
but is not yet built. In such instances, the builder shall request, and the
health and ordinance/public health committee may grant, an exception from
this chapter.
(c) These regulations may be waived for residential planned unit
developments in which similarity of architectural form and style among
dwellings is integral to the success of a unified plan, in which the high
quality of building materials, building plans, and site plan details overcome
the presumed deficiencies of similarity. In such cases, the developer shall
request, and the health and ordinance/public health committee may grant,
an exception from this chapter as a condition of a planned unit
development.
B. GATED COMMUNITIES
(1) Purpose
To achieve orderly development of gated (also known as secured)
communities, to promote and develop the utilization of land to assure the best
possible community environment in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan
and to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the City.
(2) Establishment of a Gated Community
(a) Minimum Size
The minimum acreage requirement for a gated community shall be
seventy-five (75) acres.
(b) Master Plan Required
A master plan shall be required for all proposed gated communities and
shall be submitted in accordance with SECTION 8E of this UDC and
shall illustrate the security system, the type of fence, and the type of gate
(electric/manual/etc.) to be used. All gated communities shall be
July 21, 2011 214
surrounded by a masonry or decorative iron fence with at least two (2)
entrances, electronically or manually controlled gates and shall be
administered by a homeowners association (“HOA”). Entry and exit
ways to gated communities shall have a minimum width of twenty feet
(20’) when the gate is fully opened and shall be equipped with a Knox
key entry system as approved by the fire department.
(c) Conflict with Thoroughfare Plan
1) A gated community shall not cross an existing or proposed
thoroughfare as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan.
2) A gated community shall not disrupt or cross an existing or proposed
public pedestrian pathway, hike and bike trail, park or other public
facility as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan.
(3) Homeowners Association (“HOA”)
(a) A HOA shall be established for a gated community and creation shall be so
noted on the plat. The following "Maintenance Agreement" statement shall
appear on the final plat:
Streets within this subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with
the City of Crandall public streets standards, then in effect. The upkeep
and maintenance to include the mowing of shoulders and rights-of-way,
removal of weeds and unclogging of culverts and drains as well as the
re-surfacing, repair and replacement of the streets shall be the
responsibility of the HOA. The City of Crandall is hereby released from
any responsibility or liability for these streets. Periodic inspection by a
public official who is authorized to enforce complaints about poor
maintenance is permitted. In the event the HOA fails or refuses to
properly maintain the streets and common areas reflected on this plat,
the City shall have the right, but not a corresponding duty, to enter upon
such streets and common areas to perform such repairs or maintenance
to such streets and common areas at the sole cost and expense of the
HOA and its members.
(b) The HOA shall be directly responsible to, and controlled by, the property
owners involved, to provide for operation, repair and maintenance of all
common areas, fences, walls and all common facilities including, but not
limited to, streets, sidewalks or other infrastructure that are part of the
common facilities.
(c) The HOA Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (“CCRs”) must establish
a reserve fund for the maintenance of private streets and other
improvements such as common greenbelts, security station structures and
equipment, and other significant HOA infrastructure. This reserve fund shall
not be commingled with any other HOA fund. The balance of the fund shall
be equal to the total replacement cost of the private streets and other
improvements divided by the average life expectancy of those
improvements times the age of the improvements. The life expectancy for a
July 21, 2011 215
gated community with concrete streets shall be a minimum of twenty (20)
years.
(d) All owners of property within the subdivision shall automatically be
members of the HOA by virtue of their ownership of property within the
subdivision and any annexed areas.
(e) The City shall be granted permission and practical access to enter the
subdivision at any time without liability when on official business. Further,
the City shall be authorized to remove any obstructions including, but not
limited to, any gate and guard house, upon noncompliance by the HOA or if
necessary for emergency vehicle access. The cost of removal of any
obstruction shall be assessed to the owner or, if a common facility, to the
HOA.
(f) The HOA shall provide access for fire, ambulance, and police services,
mail deliveries, school buses, garbage pickup, and utilities. Access must
not require drivers to exit their vehicles.
(g) Repair and maintenance of common facilities shall be conducted on a
schedule acceptable to the City and shall be undertaken promptly by the
HOA.
(4) Controlled Access
When there is a controlled access to a subdivision, whether it is a mechanical
device or a security guard, the maintenance and upkeep will be the
responsibility of the HOA. Access at all times by public safety personnel must
be guaranteed.
(5) Private Streets
(a) All streets and sidewalks within a gated community shall be private streets,
shall be maintained by the HOA, and shall be constructed in accordance
with City standards.
(b) If repairs and maintenance are not performed by the HOA, the City shall
have the right, but not the obligation, to undertake any necessary repairs or
maintenance and shall be reimbursed by the HOA. A statement shall be
added to the plat which provides for maintenance of streets by the HOA
and authorizes the City to perform such repairs or maintenance at the
expense of the HOA.
(6) Converting Private Streets to Public Streets
(a) Subject to approval and acceptance of the City Council, the HOA for a
gated community may dedicate private streets to the City for public access
and maintenance.
(b) The HOA shall submit a written request, signed by HOA officers, to the City
Council requesting such acceptance of the dedication. The written request
shall be accompanied by a petition containing the signatures of the owners
of sixty-seven percent (67%) of the existing lots in the subdivision.
July 21, 2011 216
1) All of the infrastructure must be brought up to the City’s then-effective
development standards, at the sole cost and expense of the HOA and
its members, and in a condition that is acceptable to the City.
2) All security stations, gates, and other structures not consistent with a
public street development must be removed at the sole cost and
expense of the HOA and its members.
3) All monies in the reserve fund must be delivered to the City.
4) The subdivision plat shall be submitted to the City as a replat and
upon review and approval, shall be filed with the Kaufman County
clerk to dedicate the streets, public utility easements, storm sewer
easements and any other public easements to the City. An ordinance
converting the private streets to public streets must be approved by
the City Council prior to the filing of said subdivision replat.
5) The CCRs must be modified and refiled to remove requirements
specific to private street subdivisions.
(c) All repairs, maintenance, or reconstruction of private streets shall be
approved and accepted by the City prior to conversion. All conversion,
dedication and replatting costs shall be paid by the HOA.
C. ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
(1) No accessory use or structure shall be permitted without a primary use or
structure.
(2) Accessory buildings, as permitted herein, shall occupy more than forty percent
(40%) of the required rear yard.
(3) Accessory buildings shall be set back at least three feet (3’) from common
property lines and may not be located within an easement.
(4) No accessory building may be closer than ten feet (10’) to the main building.
(5) No accessory use or structure shall be allowed in the front yard or in front of the
front building line.
(6) Attached accessory uses or structures shall comply with the front, side and rear
setbacks and height restrictions established for the primary structure in this
UDC.
(7) Accessory structures must be architecturally compatible with the primary
structure.
(8) The wall height of the accessory building shall be limited to not more than eight
feet (8’) and total building height shall not exceed fifteen feet (15’). This limitation
is only applicable to platted subdivisions with a specific lot size, e.g., eighty feet
(80’) by one hundred feet (100’), and is not intended to be applicable for a one
(1)-owner, multiple-acre residence. For a one (1)-owner, multiple-acre
residential lot a variance is not required; however, the total building height
cannot exceed thirty-five feet (35’).
July 21, 2011 217
(9) Storage buildings that are accessory to a principal residential use on the same
lot shall require site plan approval prior to building permit issuance.
(10) The minimum separation between a main structure and detached accessory
structure other than a carport shall be ten feet (10’).
(11) The minimum separation between the main building and an in-ground or aboveground
pool, spa, hot tub, playhouse, sauna or gazebo which does not exceed
one story in height may be less than ten feet (10’) if the structure is contiguous
with or an integral part of the primary structure, and/or the accessory structure is
engineered by a professional engineer to ensure the integrity of the existing
(primary structure) foundation.
(a) Such plans indicating the design for an accessory structure shall be
submitted to the Building Official for review in connection with the issuance
of a building permit; and
(b) Setback distances for in-ground or aboveground pools, spas, hot tubs and
saunas shall be measured to the outside edge of the beam (structural
edge) of the pool, spa, etc.
D. CARPORTS/PORTE-COCHERES
(1) Carports
(a) Multi-family/Nonresidential Districts
1) Carports shall be allowed in multi-family and nonresidential districts.
2) Carports shall be located within all building setbacks.
3) Carports shall not be located within required landscaping areas.
4) The maximum height of the carport entry shall be ten feet (10’).
5) All parking spaces located under the carport shall be of concrete.
6) Carports shall be structurally sound, as determined by the Building
Official.
(b) Manufactured Home Districts
1) A carport may not be constructed in such a way that any part of the
structure encroaches into a required setback as provided in the
underlying zoning district.
2) The maximum height of the carport entry shall be ten feet (10').
3) Driveways to the carport and parking spaces under the carport shall
be constructed of concrete.
4) Parking spaces shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') by twenty feet
(20').
5) The carport shall be structurally sound as determined by the Building
Official.
July 21, 2011 218
6) The carport shall not drain directly or indirectly onto neighboring
properties.
(2) Porte-Cocheres
(a) Single-Family Districts
1) Shall be attached to a residence and shall be an integral part of the
primary structure;
2) Shall not encroach into a required setback as provided in the
underlying zoning district;
3) Shall be erected over a driveway constructed of concrete;
4) Shall not exceed one (1) story in height;
5) Shall be open on two (2) or more sides; and
6) Shall be constructed of the same material as the primary structure.
E. HOME OCCUPATIONS
(1) Purpose and Intent
(a) Protect residential areas from adverse impact of activities associated with
home occupations.
(b) Permit residents of the City a reasonable opportunity to use their homes as
a place of livelihood and for the production or supplement of personal and
family income.
(c) Establish criteria and development standards for home occupations
conducted in residential units.
(2) Home Occupations--Required Conditions
(a) The area set aside for home occupations shall not exceed twenty percent
(20%) of the total floor area of such residence.
(b) No interior or exterior business sign shall be permitted.
(c) No mechanical equipment shall be used except equipment of a type that is
similar in character to equipment normally used for purely domestic or
household purposes or for hobby purposes.
(d) Retail sales shall be prohibited on the premises.
(e) No more than one (1) person other than the immediate family permanently
residing on the premises shall be employed in the home occupation.
(f) No more than one home occupation shall be permitted within any single
dwelling unit.
(g) A home occupation shall be carried on wholly within the principal building.
No home occupation or any storage of goods, materials, or products
connected with a home occupation shall be allowed in accessory buildings
July 21, 2011 219
or garages, attached or detached, excluding paints and chemicals that may
be used in the home occupation.
(h) There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation
from the residential character of the principal building.
(i) There shall be no exterior storage of materials to be used in conjunction
with a home occupation.
(j) A home occupation shall produce no offensive noise, vibration, smoke,
electrical interferences, dust, odors, or heat detectable beyond the property
limits or beyond the walls of the dwelling unit. The judgment of the City’s
code enforcement officer pertaining to a violation under this section shall
be considered final, unless formally appealed to the BOA within thirty (30)
days of the code enforcement officer’s written determination.
(3) Home Occupation Permit
(a) Purpose
To establish a method to allow the City to regulate and control
nonresidential activities within a residential district and maintain a record
of the types and numbers of home occupations in the City.
(b) Permit Required
Each resident within the City who has, or desires to establish, a home
occupation is required to have a home occupation permit.
(c) Application for Home Occupation Permit
1) Applicant shall apply to the City Manager for a home occupation
permit.
2) The City Manager may issue the permit if the home occupation meets
all the requirements established in SECTION 7D(2) of this UDC.
3) The decision of the City Manager may be appealed to the BOA in
accordance with SECTION 3D(3)(a) of this UDC.
4) An appeal must be submitted to the BOA within thirty (30) days after
disapproval of a permit by the Building Official.
5) The decision of the BOA is final and non-appealable.
(d) Conditions Applicable to Home Occupation Permits
1) Validation
A home occupation permit remains valid for a period of one (1)
year.
2) Renewal
Permits shall be renewed annually.
3) Inspection
July 21, 2011 220
The Building Official is authorized to periodically enter the premises
to ensure full compliance with SECTION 7D and the other
requirements of this UDC.
4) Termination
When a home occupation is found to be in noncompliance with the
requirements outlined in SECTION 7D of this UDC, the permit will
be terminated immediately. A terminated permit may be appealed
in the same manner as a denied permit.
5) Renewal of terminated permits
The procedure for renewal of a terminated permit shall be the same
as required for the issuance of a new permit under this section.
F. USABLE OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
(a) Areas provided as usable open space shall meet the following criteria:
1) All residential lots must be located within six hundred feet (600') of a
usable open space area as measured along a street. The Commission
may recommend, and the City Council may allow, this distance to be
increased to up to one thousand two hundred feet (1,200’) if the
shape of the subdivision is irregular or if existing trees or other natural
features on the site can be preserved by increasing the distance.
2) Individual usable open space areas shall be at least twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet in size. Usable open space must be a minimum
of fifty feet (50') wide, and must have no slope greater than ten
percent (10%). At the time of site plan and subdivision plat approval,
the Commission may recommend, and the City Council may allow, full
or partial credit for open areas that exceed the 10% maximum slope if
it is determined that such areas are environmentally or aesthetically
significant and that their existence enhances the development and the
surrounding area.
3) Pools, tennis courts, walkways, patios and similar outdoor amenities
may be located within areas designated as usable open space. Areas
occupied by enclosed buildings (except for gazebos and pavilions),
driveways, parking lots, overhead electrical transmission lines,
drainage channels and antennas may not be included in calculating
usable open space.
4) Within usable open space areas, there shall be at least one (1) large
shade tree for every one thousand (1,000) square feet of space. New
trees planted to meet this requirement shall be a minimum three-inch
(3") caliper, and at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the trees shall be
non-deciduous (for qualifying tree species, see SECTION 9G(9)(a) of
this UDC for the City’s Approved Plant List).
July 21, 2011 221
5) A usable open space area must have street frontage on at least thirtythree
percent (33%) of the area's perimeter to ensure that the area is
accessible to residents of the subdivision.
6) Usable open space areas must be easily viewed from adjacent streets
and homes. Side or rear yard fences along common open space
areas shall be of open, decorative iron design, and shall not exceed
six feet (6’) in height adjacent to the open space and for a distance of
ten feet (10’) perpendicular or radial to the open space area.
(b) Credit for Off-Site Open Space - At the time of site plan and subdivision
plat approval, the Commission may recommend, and the City Council may
allow, up to one-third (1/3) of the required open space to be credited for offsite
dedicated open space (e.g., park land) that meets the development's
needs in terms of adjacency, accessibility, usability, and design integration.
The granting of any off-site credit for open space is a discretionary power
of the City Council. The guidelines below may assist in considering if credit
is appropriate:
1) Adjacency - Is at least fifteen percent (15%) of the patio home
development's boundary adjacent to park land?
2) Accessibility - Are there defined pedestrian connections between the
development and the park land?
3) Usability - Is the park land immediately adjacent to the development
suitable for use and accessible by residents?
4) Design Integration - Does the design of the development provide a
significant visual and pedestrian connection to the park or other open
space land?
5) Landscaped Areas - Additional common open space and landscaped
areas that do not qualify as usable open space may be provided, but
shall not be counted toward the usable open space requirement.
G. LIGHTING AND GLARE STANDARDS
(1) Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this SECTION 7E is to regulate outdoor lighting in order to
reduce or prevent light pollution in the City. New lighting technologies have
produced lights that are extremely powerful, and these types of lights may be
improperly installed so that they create problems of excessive glare, light
trespass, and higher energy use. Excessive glare can be annoying and may
cause safety problems. Light trespass reduces privacy, degrades the
enjoyment of the night sky, and results in higher energy use and increased
costs for everyone. Appropriately regulated, and properly installed, outdoor
lighting will contribute to the safety and welfare of the residents, and will help
preserve the historic and rural character of the City.
(2) Applicability
July 21, 2011 222
(a) The regulations contained in this section are applicable only within the
corporate limits of the City.
(b) Compliance with the regulations in this section is strongly encouraged for
improvements and developments within the ETJ in order to prevent light
pollution and preserve the rural and historic character of the City.
(c) All outdoor lighting fixtures installed on private and public property within a
new development or redevelopment within the City limits shall be required
to comply with this UDC. This UDC does not apply to interior lighting;
however, overly bright lighting emitted from a structure will be subject to
this UDC if it is determined by the City Manager that it creates a nuisance
or a potential safety hazard.
(d) All outdoor lighting fixtures existing and legally installed and operating
before the effective date of this UDC shall be exempt from this UDC unless
they are determined to create a nuisance or a safety hazard. When existing
lighting fixtures become inoperable, their replacements shall be subject to
the provisions of this UDC.
(e) Modifications to nonconforming lighting fixtures shall also comply with this
section.
(f) In the event of a conflict between this section and any other section of this
UDC or any other regulation of the City, the more stringent requirements
shall apply.
(3) Exemptions
The following are exempt from the provisions of this SECTION 7E:
(a) Publicly maintained traffic control devices;
(b) Street lights installed prior to the effective date of this UDC;
(c) Temporary emergency lighting (fire, police, repair crews);
(d) Lighting fixtures and illumination requirements imposed by TxDOT within
TxDOT right-of-way (“ROW”);
(e) Moving vehicle lights;
(f) Navigation lights (aircraft warning beacons on water towers and wireless
transmission facilities) required by state or federal law;
(g) Signs and associated lighting that conform to the sign regulations of this
UDC;
(h) Seasonal decorations with lights in place no longer than sixty (60) days;
(i) Other temporary uses approved by the City Council (festivals, carnivals,
fairs, night-time construction);
(j) Covered porch lighting on residences provided that each external light
fixture does not exceed one-hundred fifty (150) watts; and
(k) Security lights of any output that are controlled by a motion sensor switch
provided they do not exceed 0.25 foot-candle at the property line and do
July 21, 2011 223
not remain illuminated for a duration that exceeds ten to twelve (10-12)
minutes after activation.
(4) Submittals
Applications for all building permits for new construction or redevelopment,
including the installation of outdoor lighting fixtures, shall provide proof of
compliance with this UDC. The submittal shall contain the following
information as part of the site plan:
(a) Plans indicating the location, type, and height of lighting fixtures including
both building-mounted and ground-mounted fixtures;
(b) A description of the lighting fixtures, including lamps, poles or other
supports and shielding devices, which may be provided as catalog
illustrations from the manufacturer;
(c) Photometric data, which may be furnished by the manufacturer, showing
the angle of light emission;
(d) Detailed site lighting plan illustrating the foot-candle power measured
throughout the site; and
(e) Additional information as may be required by the Commission in order to
determine compliance with this UDC.
(5) General Standards
The following standards shall apply to all outdoor lighting installed after the
effective date of this UDC:
(a) Outdoor lighting shall be designed to provide the minimum lighting
necessary to ensure adequate safety, night vision, and comfort, and shall
not create or cause excessive glare onto adjacent properties and public
street rights-of-way.
(b) Outdoor lighting must be “full cut-off” and hooded, shielded, and/or aimed
downward.
(c) The hood or shield must mask the direct horizontal surface of the light
source. The light must be aimed so as to ensure that the illumination is only
pointing downward onto the ground surface or into the building. No
illumination may spill onto adjacent property.
(d) Any bright light shining onto an adjacent property or street that would result
in a safety hazard is not permitted. Light trespass beyond property
boundaries or above the horizontal plane shall be considered noncompliant.
(e) Existing fixtures may be adapted to comply with this UDC by adding a
properly designed hood or shield, or by redirecting any upward mounted
fixture downward onto the ground surface, sign, or illuminated structure.
(f) All outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed, located, and maintained to
minimize light trespass and all direct illumination shall be kept within the
boundaries of the property upon which the light fixture is positioned.
July 21, 2011 224
(g) When approved, accent lighting shall be directed downward onto the
structure or object and not toward the sky or adjacent properties. Direct
light emissions shall not be visible above the roofline or beyond the building
edge.
(h) Spotlights on landscaping and foliage shall be limited to one hundred fifty
(150) watts output. The light shall be shielded and so as not to create a
nuisance or safety hazard.
(i) No light source shall exceed thirty-five feet (35') in height. Street lights and
other traffic safety lighting are exempt from this standard.
(j) Minimum lighting intensities shall be measured parallel with the ground with
the photo sensor surface pointed to the zenith. Maximum lighting
intensities shall be measured perpendicular to the line of sight between the
observer and the lighting fixture measured six feet above ground level with
the photo sensor surface pointed directly at the light fixture.
(6) Specific Nonresidential Lighting Requirements
(a) The maximum allowable intensity of lighting for any nonresidential use shall
be 0.25 foot-candles measured at the property line or at the street ROW
line.
(b) Light poles shall have a maximum height equal to the maximum height
allowed for the main building in each zoning district or shall be equal in
height to the tallest building located on the property on which the light is
placed, whichever height is less.
(7) Special or Temporary Lighting -- Low Wattage
(a) Bare bulbs or strings of lamps are prohibited; provided, however, from
November 20 until January 10 of the following year, special lighting shall be
permitted in conformity with this UDC.
H. TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS
(1) Purpose
The purpose of this SECTION 7F is to further an overall plan for the
enhancement of public safety, consistent community development,
preservation of property values and the general welfare of the City while
providing for the communication needs of the residents and businesses in the
City. Additional purposes of this SECTION 7F are to:
(a) Ensure that the location and use of antenna facilities and antennas do not
compromise the aesthetic quality of the community;
(b) Facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services to the
residents and businesses of the City;
(c) Encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to locate them in
areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
(d) Encourage co-location on both new and existing antenna facilities;
July 21, 2011 225
(e) Encourage operators of antenna facilities and antennas to configure them
in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact through careful design,
landscape screening, and innovative stealth techniques; and
(f) Enhance the ability of wireless telecommunication providers to provide
services to the community effectively and efficiently.
(2) Applicability
Except as specifically provided, all new telecommunications towers or
antennas in the City shall be subject to the regulations contained in this
section. Preexisting towers or antennas lawfully in existence on the effective
date of this UDC shall not be required to meet the requirements of this UDC,
other than those set forth below. For purposes of this section, “Antenna
Facility” is defined as any type of facility listed in Table 7-1, below, and
includes both the antenna and the accompanying equipment, if any.
Table 7-1
Antenna Facility Requirements
Type of Facility Building
Permit
Required
SUP
Required
Satellite Receive Only < 1 meter No No
Satellite Antenna > 1 meter in Commercial Area Yes No
Satellite Antenna > 1 meter in Residential Area Yes Yes
Amateur Radio Antenna Complying with Height
Limits
Yes No
Amateur Radio Antenna Exceeding Height
Limits
Yes Yes
Television Antenna No No
Level 1 Stealth Facility in Nonresidential District Yes No
Level 2 Stealth Facility in Nonresidential District Yes No
Level 2 Stealth Facility in Nonresidential District Yes Yes
Level 3 Stealth Facility in Nonresidential District Yes No
Level 3 Stealth Facility in Nonresidential District Yes Yes
Level 4 Stealth Facility in Nonresidential District Yes No
Level 4 Stealth Facility in Nonresidential District Yes Yes
Monopole Tower up to 120 Feet in Height in
Nonresidential District
Yes Yes
Monopole Tower In Residential District or Over
120 Feet Tall
Prohibited Prohibited
(3) General Regulations
The following regulations apply to the listed type of facility located within any
district:
(a) Telecommunications Antennas
July 21, 2011 226
Subject to the provisions set forth herein, telecommunications antennas
may be placed on City towers or other City facilities, as designated from
time to time by the City, if the City determines that there is available
space on and around a City tower or other City facility. The applicant
shall contact the City Manager regarding City leasing requirements of
City towers or other City facilities.
Telecommunications antennas placed on the applicant’s own
commercial facilities or offices must be affixed to the building’s exterior
and may not extend more than six feet (6’) above the top roof line of the
building, unless the City Manager, in his/her sole discretion, authorizes a
higher location.
(b) Equipment Storage Building
An equipment storage building associated with an Antenna Facility shall
be screened and landscaped as described in other sections of this UDC,
or be incorporated into the stealth design so that it is consistent and
complementary with the existing structures and uses on the premises.
All equipment storage buildings must be constructed of a masonry
material or enameled metal. Alternative materials may be permitted
upon approval by the City Council and recommendation by the
Commission. The base of all tower facilities must be screened with a
masonry wall that will completely screen the equipment storage building.
(c) Driveway Surfaces
Each Antenna Facility must have an access drive that is constructed of
concrete. One (1) off-street parking space must be provided at each
telecommunication tower facility.
(d) Lights
No outdoor lighting shall be allowed on any Antenna Facility except
lights or lighting that is by required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (“FAA”) or the Federal Communications Commission
(“FCC”).
(e) Antenna Facility Capacity
Each new Antenna Facility shall be structurally designed to allow for at
least two (2) sets of antennas.
(f) Tower Types
Only monopole, alternative mounting structures or stealth towers are
permitted in the City.
(g) Prohibited in Easements
Antenna Facilities shall not be placed in, upon, over, under or across
easements unless authorized in writing by the easement holder.
(h) Construction Standards
July 21, 2011 227
A building permit must be obtained prior to the construction or
installation of any Antenna Facility. An Antenna Facility must be
installed according to the manufacturer’s recommendations and under
the seal of a professional engineer registered in the state. Additionally,
all Antenna Facilities shall comply with applicable state and local building
codes.
(i) Building Codes / Safety Standards
To ensure the structural integrity of Antenna Facilities, the owner of an
Antenna Facility must ensure that it is maintained in compliance with all
provisions of the City’s building code and zoning regulations. If upon
inspection, the City concludes that an Antenna Facility fails to comply
with such codes and regulations and/or constitutes a danger to persons
or property, then upon written notice to the owner of the Antenna Facility,
the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance
with applicable standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance
shall constitute grounds for the removal of the Antenna Facility by the
owner, at the owner’s expense. This notice requirement shall not
preclude immediate action by the Building Official as allowed by law if
public safety requires such action.
(j) Contained on Property
No part of an Antenna Facility may extend beyond the property lines or
required building lines of the lot on which the Antenna Facility is located.
(k) State or Federal Requirements
All Antenna Facilities must meet or exceed current standards and
regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or
federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas.
If such standards and regulations are changed, and if the controlling
state or federal agency mandates compliance, then the owners of the
towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring such towers
and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations within six (6) months of the effective date of such standards
and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by
the controlling state or federal agency. A copy of an approval letter from
any state or federal controlling agency shall be provided with every
application for a telecommunications tower.
(l) Variance Requirement
A variance granted by the BOA, pursuant to SECTION 4K of this UDC, is
required for an Antenna Facility which will not comply with the
requirements of this section, unless otherwise specified herein.
(4) Amateur Radio Antennas and TV Antennas
Amateur radio antennas and TV antennas are allowed as accessory uses in
the A, SF-E, SF-20, SF-12.5, SF-9, SF-6.5 SF-PH, SF-TH, MF-15, SF-MH,
July 21, 2011 228
MHP, or any residentially zoned PD. Amateur radio antennas and TV
antennas must comply with the following regulations:
(a) Antenna Location
Amateur radio antennas and TV antennas can only be located on a roof
or in the back yard of a residence.
(b) Number of Facilities Per Lot
No more than one (1) TV antenna and one (1) amateur radio antenna
are permitted on each lot. Amateur radio antennas are only permitted for
operators who have an amateur radio operator license from the FCC and
the operator must provide the City proof of a current FCC license before
an amateur radio antenna is installed or maintained on a lot.
(c) Height Limitations
An amateur radio antenna or TV antenna cannot extend more than eight
feet (8’) above the maximum height limitation applicable for the zoning
district.
(d) Setbacks
Amateur radio antennas or TV antennas are not permitted within any
required setback area.
(5) Satellite Receive-Only Antennas, One (1) Meter or Less in Diameter
A satellite dish receiving antenna, which is one (1) meter or less in diameter
(“Satellite Receive-Only Antenna”), shall be permitted as an accessory use in
the A, SF-E, SF-20, SF-12.5, SF-9, SF-6.5 SF-PH, SF-TH, MF-15, SF-MH,
MHP, or any residentially zoned PD. A Satellite Receive-Only Antenna must
comply with the following regulations:
(a) Antenna Location
A Satellite Receive-Only Antenna can only be located on a roof or in the
back yard of a residence.
(b) Number of Facilities Per Lot
No more than one (1) Satellite Receive-Only Antenna is permitted on
each lot.
(c) Height Limitations
A Satellite Receive-Only Antenna cannot extend more than eight feet (8’)
above the maximum height limitation applicable for the zoning district.
(d) Setbacks
No Satellite Receive-Only Antenna is permitted within any required
setback area.
(6) Satellite Antennas Greater Than One Meter in Diameter
A satellite antenna, which is greater than one (1) meter in diameter (“Satellite
Antenna”), is permitted as an accessory use under the following conditions:
July 21, 2011 229
(a) Nonresidential Zoning Districts
A Satellite Antenna is an accessory use permitted by right in
nonresidential zoning districts.
(b) Residential Zoning Districts
A Satellite Antenna is only permitted in residential zoning districts upon
the grant of an SUP by the BOA.
(c) Height
No Satellite Antenna shall exceed ten feet (10’) in height above the base
of its mount.
(d) Location
A Satellite Antenna cannot be erected in any required setback or in the
front or side yard of a residential lot.
(e) Screening
A Satellite Antenna that is mounted on the ground shall be screened
from view from adjoining properties by solid fencing or evergreen plants
to a height of a least six feet (6’).
(7) Placement of Antenna Facilities
This section does not apply to amateur radio, TV, and satellite receive-only
antennas. For the purpose of determining the appropriate locations for the
placement of Antenna Facilities, the City is divided into land use threshold
areas that establish different regulations pertaining to height, location, and
type of Antenna Facility. These land use thresholds are defined as follows:
(a) Full Commercial ("FC")
Property within the O, NS, R, BP, OTC, HB, C, LI, IP, or nonresidential
Planned Development zoning districts.
(b) Undeveloped Residential ("UR")
Property within A, SF-E, SF-20, SF-12.5, SF-9, SF-6.5 SF-PH, SF-TH,
MF-15, SF-MH, MHP, or any residentially zoned PD, that:
1) Is not a part of a recorded subdivision; or
2) Is a part of a recorded subdivision but has not had a building permit
issued for a residential structure; and
3) Is not located within the calculated limits of the Developed Residential
threshold, set forth below.
(c) Wireless Corridors ("WC")
Property within, and one hundred fifty feet (150’) either side of, the rightof-
way of a freeway or a principal arterial roadway, as indicated on the
Thoroughfare Plan.
(d) Developed Residential ("DR")
July 21, 2011 230
Property within the A, SF-E, SF-20, SF-12.5, SF-9, SF-6.5 SF-PH, SFTH,
MF-15, SF-MH, MHP, or any residentially zoned PD, which is:
1) A recorded subdivision that has had at least one (1) building permit for
a residential structure; or
2) Within six hundred feet (600’) of areas described in this SECTION
7F(7)(d).
(8) Antenna Facility Impact Levels
For the purpose of determining appropriate locations for Antenna Facilities,
the City recognizes differing levels of impact for antenna facilities depending
upon physical location, aesthetics, and land use compatibility. These
Antenna Facility impact levels are described as follows:
(a) Monopole: A monopole tower
requires a SUP. The antenna
equipment may not extend more
than five feet (5’) above the
highest point on the monopole.
(b) Level 4 Stealth Facility: The
antenna on a Level 4 Stealth
Facility is located on an existing
structure (other than a
telecommunications tower)
including, but not limited to, a
building, water tower, utility
tower, steeple, or light pole. The
antenna is neither screened nor
hidden. For the purpose of this
type of facility, a pole or tower
may be reconstructed to
structurally hold the antenna but
the height of the structure cannot
be increased.
(c) Level 3 Stealth Facility: The
antenna on a Level 3 Stealth Facility is located on an existing structure
(other than a telecommunications tower) including, but not limited to, a
building, water tower, utility tower, steeple, or light pole. The antenna shall
be aesthetically painted, constructed, or applied with material so that it is
incorporated into the pattern, style, and material of the structure to
effectively render the antenna unnoticeable. A new structure may be
constructed to hold or house the antenna or equipment; however, the
structure must be consistent with the overall architectural features of the
primary buildings.
(d) Level 2 Stealth Facility: The antenna on a Level 2 Stealth Facility is
attached to the structure in such a manner that if it is seen it appears
July 21, 2011 231
unrecognizable as an antenna, and the structure in which or on which the
antenna is attached is an integral part of an overall development.
(e) Level 1 Stealth Facility: The antenna on a Level 1 Stealth Facility is
attached to the structure in such a manner that the antenna is completely
unseen and the structure in which or on which the antenna is attached is
an integral part of an overall development.
(9) Antenna Facility Siting Matrix
Antenna Facilities shall be located in accordance with the following siting
matrix. This matrix provides for areas where Antenna Facilities may be
located as permitted uses, areas where they may be located with an SUP,
and areas where they are prohibited.
Table 7-2
Antenna Facility Siting Matrix
Description
Land Use Threshold
FC UR WC DR
Monopole over 120 ft. Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited
Monopole up to 120 ft. SUP SUP SUP Prohibited
Level 4 Stealth Facility Permitted Permitted SUP SUP
Level 3 Stealth Facility Permitted Permitted Permitted Permitted
Level 2 Stealth Facility Permitted Permitted Permitted Permitted
Level 1 Stealth Facility Permitted Permitted Permitted Permitted
(10) SUP
When a SUP is required by this section for the location of an Antenna Facility,
the applicant must submit an application in accordance with the procedure
established in this UDC. SUPs for Antenna Facilities are granted by the City
Council, upon recommendation of the Commission in accordance with
SECTION 5I of this UDC.
(a) Application
In order to properly evaluate an application to locate an Antenna Facility
that requires a SUP, the applicant must provide the following items
and/or information:
1) A SUP application and appropriate application fee;
2) A narrative detailing the proposed Antenna Facility. The narrative
shall describe or reflect the following:
a) Whether the proposed structure is a co-location, a new
monopole tower or a new alternate mounting structure;
b) The height of the proposed tower;
July 21, 2011 232
c) Why the Antenna Facility is necessary at the proposed
location;
d) The name(s) of the telecommunications providers or other
users of the antenna or tower and a description of the
intended use of each user;
e) Whether the applicant has made an effort to co-locate the
facilities proposed for this Antenna Facility on existing antenna
facilities in the same general area, identifying the location of
these existing sites, a detailed description of these efforts and
why these existing sites were not feasible;
f) All studies or tests performed which demonstrate why the
existing sites will not provide sufficient signal coverage;
g) Written documentation from existing sites' owners and/or
operators which confirm the statements provided;
h) Whether the existing sites allow/promote co-location and, if
not, a description why not;
i) Whether co-location will be allowed to other
telecommunications providers at the requested site. If they
are not allowed, a statement identifying each reason and the
basis of each reason; and
j) All state or federal agency approval letters.
3) A site plan of the proposed Antenna Facility at a scale of 1” = 30’. The
site plan should be on a single 24” X 36” sheet and shall include:
a) A survey and legal description of the proposed Antenna
Facility;
b) A detail on how access to the site is to be achieved;
c) A plan view layout of the proposed Antenna Facility clearly
showing:
i) The location of the facility;
ii) All equipment and structures in the proposed Antenna
Facility;
iii) The required off-street parking space;
iv) Distances to property lines;
v) Required setbacks;
vi) Adjacent land uses and zoning designations;
vii) Existing structures on the site;
viii) Required landscaping or screening of the base of the
tower;
ix) All recorded and proposed easements; and
July 21, 2011 233
x) Natural features, such as water courses and trees.
4) Elevation drawings showing:
a) The design and height of the proposed Antenna Facility;
b) Detailed drawings of all structures and equipment; and
c) Screening requirements.
5) If the requested location is in a residential district, evidence that an
effort has been made to locate the facility in a nonresidential district,
identifying the location of these nonresidential district sites, and
describing these efforts and why these nonresidential sites were not
feasible. Attach all studies or tests performed which demonstrate why
the nonresidential sites will not provide sufficient signal coverage.
6) A map showing the proposed provider's current coverage area for the
City. The map must show the roadway network and be labeled. The
applicant must also provide propagation analysis showing the areas
the proposed provider's existing antenna currently covers, and the
areas the applicant's existing sites and the requested site would
cover. The propagation analysis must be labeled and have a legend.
7) A description of the applicant's master antenna facilities plan for the
City. Attach maps and other related documents and provide
information indicating each phase of the plan.
(b) Consideration of Application
In considering whether to grant an application for a SUP, the City
Council and the Commission shall consider the following:
1) The appropriateness of the location and design of the Antenna
Facility;
2) The potential for interference with the enjoyment of the use
surrounding properties;
3) Aesthetics;
4) Impact, including but not limited to, the surrounding topography,
surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
5) Proposed buffering;
6) The design of the Antenna Facility, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
7) The proposed height of the Antenna Facility relative to surrounding
structures;
8) The zoning district and the adjoining zoning districts of the property for
which the SUP is sought;
9) Compliance with the City’s regulations; and
July 21, 2011 234
10) The availability of suitable alternative sites. Suitable alternative site(s)
shall mean a location or locations that would provide the same or
better signal coverage than the proposed site for which a SUP is
requested. The applicant shall provide documentation supporting his
contention that alternative site(s) are not suitable and/or available.
(c) Procedures for Consideration of a SUP
The procedures for consideration of an application for a SUP requested
under this section shall be in accordance with SECTION 5I of this UDC.
(d) Written Report
Denial of an application for a SUP under this section must be
documented in writing in accordance with the requirements of the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended.
I. TEMPORARY STRUCTURES
(1) A temporary structure may not be brought on-site until a building permit for the
construction or refurbishing of the permanent structure has been issued by the
Building Official. All temporary manufactured structures shall be required to
comply with the following:
(a) Time Limit: Permits issued for temporary manufactured structures shall be
valid for two (2) years or when the permanent structure is completed and
occupied, whichever is sooner. Any further extension shall require City
Council approval.
(b) Dimensions: Minimum dimensional requirements for temporary uses or
structures shall be those established in the district in which the temporary
use or structure is located.
(c) Parking: Minimum parking requirements for temporary manufactured
structures shall be the number according to the proposed use for the
building.
(2) Temporary Construction Buildings: Temporary building and material storage
areas to be used for construction purposes may be permitted for a specified
period of time in accordance with a permit issued by the Building Official for
cause shown. Upon completion or abandonment of construction or expiration of
permit, such field offices and buildings shall be removed at the direction of the
Building Official.
J. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
(1) All Uses Must Conform
In all zoning districts, any use indicated in the permitted use list shall conform
in operation, location, and construction to the performance standards as
administered by county, Texas and federal agencies. All uses, including
those which may be allowed by PD or SUP, shall conform in operation,
July 21, 2011 235
location, and construction to appropriate performance standards for noise,
smoke, and particulate matter, odorous matter, fire, or explosive hazard
material, toxic and noxious matter, vibration, and glare as specified in this
section.
(2) Must Comply With Federal and State Regulations
All federal and Texas pollution, noise, and requirements for toxic waste
disposal shall be observed.
(3) Noise
At no point at the bounding property line of any use shall the sound pressure
level of any operation or land use exceed the decibel limits specified in the
Octave Band groups designated in the following table:
(a) Maximum Permissible Daytime* Octave Band:
Table 7-3
Decibel Limits at the Bounding Property Line**
Octave Band (cps) 37-75 75-
150
150-
300
300-
600
600-
1200
1200-
2400
2400-
4800
4800-
9600
A
Scale
Decibel Band Limit (db re
0.0002 microbar)
86 76 70 65 63 58 55 53 65
Note -- "A scale" levels are provided for monitoring purposes only and
are not applicable to detailed sound analysis.
* "Daytime" shall mean the hours between sunrise and sunset on any
given day.
** "Bounding Property Line" shall be interpreted to mean at the near
side of any street, alley, stream, or other permanently dedicated open
space from the noise source when such open space exists between the
property line of the noise source and adjacent property. When no such
open space exists, the common line between two parcels of property
shall be interpreted as the bounding property line.
(b) The following corrections shall be made to the Table of octave band-decibel
limits above in determining compliance with the noise level standards:
1) When noise is present at nighttime, subtract (-7db).
2) When noise contains strong pure-tone components or is impulsive
(i.e., when meter changes at 10 decibels or more per second),
subtract (-7db).
3) When noise is present for not more than the following, add (+10db):
a) ½ minute in any ½-hour period;
b) 1 minute in any 1-hour period;
c) 10 minutes in any 2-hour period; or
d) 20 minutes in any 4-hour period.
July 21, 2011 236
(c) Measurement of noise shall be made with a sound level meter on octave
band analyzer meeting the standards prescribed by the American National
Standards Institute.
(d) Exemptions - The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the
noise level regulations herein specified.
1) Noises not directly under control of the property owner or user.
2) Noises emanating from construction and maintenance activities
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. (i.e., during daylight
hours).
3) Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure
relief valves.
4) Transient noise of moving sources such as automobiles, trucks, and
airplanes.
5) Events sanctioned by the City of Crandall.
(4) Smoke and Particulate Matter
(a) No operation or use shall cause, create, or allow the emission, for more
than three minutes in any one hour, of air contaminants that at the emission
point or within the bounds of the property are of such opacity as to obscure
an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than does smoke or
contaminants in the standard prescribed by the American Society for
Testing and Materials (“ASTM”) except for when the presence of
uncombined water is the only reason for failure to comply, or when such
contaminants are emitted inside a building which prevents their escape into
the atmosphere.
(b) The emission of particulate matter from all sources shall not exceed 0.5
pounds per acre of property within the operation’s site per any one (1) hour.
(c) Open storage and open processing operations, including on-site
transportation movements which are the source of wind or air borne dust or
other particulate matter; or which involves dust or other particulate air
contaminants, generating equipment such as used in paint spraying, grain
handling, sand or gravel processing or storage or sand blasting, shall be so
conducted that dust and other particulate matter so generated are not
transported across the boundary line of the tract on which the use is
located in concentrations exceeding four grains per one thousand (1000)
cubic feet of air.
(5) Odorous Matter
(a) No use shall be located or operated which involves the emission of
odorous matter from a source of operation where the odorous matter
exceeds the odor threshold at the bounding property line or any point
beyond the tract on which such use or operation is located.
(b) The odor threshold as herein set forth shall be determined by observation
by a person or persons. In any case, where uncertainty may arise or
July 21, 2011 237
where the operator or owner of an odor-emitting use may disagree with the
enforcing officer or where specific measurement of odor concentration is
required, the method and procedures specified by ASTM shall be followed.
(6) Fire or Explosive Hazard Material
(a) No use involving the manufacture or storage of compounds or products
which decompose by detonation shall be permitted except that chlorates,
nitrates, perchlorates, phosphorus, and similar substances and compounds
in small quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or
wholesalers may be permitted when approved by the City of Crandall.
(b) The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials such as
pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents, and petroleum products
shall be permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the
standards and regulations of the City of Crandall Fire Code.
(7) Toxic and Noxious Matter
No operation or use shall emit a concentration across the bounding property
line of the tract on which such operation or use is located of toxic or noxious
matter that exceeds ten percent (10%) of the concentration (exposure)
considered as the threshold limit for an industrial worker, as such standards
are set forth by the Texas State Department of Health in "Threshold Limit
Values Occupational Health Regulation No. 3," a copy of which is hereby
incorporated by reference.
(8) Vibration
No operation or use shall at any time create earthborn vibrations which, when
measured at the bounding property line of the source operation, exceed the
limits of displacement set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges
specified:
Table 7-4
Earthborn Vibration Limits
Frequency (Cycles Per Second) Displacement (In Inches)
0 to 10 0.0010
10 to 20 0.0008
20 to 30 0.0005
30 to 40 0.0004
40 and over 0.0003
K. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
(1) Measurement
(a) Measuring Setbacks - All setback measurements shall be made from the
property line.
(b) Configuration of Lots - Flag lots (i.e., lots with minimal, or panhandle-type,
frontage) are prohibited. Through (i.e., double-frontage) lots (particularly
July 21, 2011 238
within residential zoning districts) shall also be avoided wherever possible
(see SECTION 9C for regulations pertaining to the configuration of lots).
(c) Building Setbacks – All setbacks established on a recorded plat shall be
enforced, even if they are less than or they exceed the required setbacks in
this UDC. Setbacks established on a recorded plat shall only be changed
through replat proceedings (see SECTION 8M).
(2) Front Yard
(a) On all corner lots, the front-yard setback shall be observed along the
frontage of both intersecting streets, unless approved specifically otherwise
on a final plat. Where single-family and duplex lots have double frontage,
extending from one street to another, or are on a corner, a required front
yard shall be provided on both streets unless a side- or rear-yard building
line has been established along one frontage on the plat, in which event
only one required front yard need be observed. The side and/or rear yards
in the case of single-family and townhome uses shall be identified and the
front of the structure shall not face the side or rear yard.
(b) Where the frontage on one side of a street between two (2) intersecting
streets is divided by two (2) or more zoning districts, the front yard shall
comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire
frontage.
(c) The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of
the building, to the nearest supporting member of a covered porch or
terrace, or to any attached accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions
or a porch without posts or columns may project into the required front yard
for a distance not to exceed four feet (4'), and subsurface structures,
platforms or slabs may not project into the front yard to a height greater
than thirty inches (30") above the average grade of the yard. Open
porches extending into the front yard shall not be enclosed.
(d) Minimum lot widths for lots with predominate frontage on the curved radius
of a street (e.g., cul-de-sac or "eyebrow" portion of a street) shall be
measured as the linear distance of the curved front building line, and shall
be shown on the subdivision plat. Lot widths for all lots shall be as set forth
in the respective zoning district for each lot.
(e) Gasoline service station pump islands that parallel a public street may be
located a minimum of eighteen feet (18') to the property line adjacent to a
public street. For pump islands that are perpendicular or diagonal to a
public street, the setback shall be thirty feet (30') in order to prevent
vehicles stacking out into the street while waiting for a pump position.
Pump islands may extend beyond the front building line as described
above (provided that all other requirements of this UDC are met), but shall
not be closer than fifteen feet (15') to any property line that is not adjacent
to a public street. An unenclosed canopy for a gasoline service station
pump island may extend beyond the front building line, but shall not be
closer than ten feet (10’) to any property line or street right-of-way line.
July 21, 2011 239
(f) Where a future right-of-way line has been established for future widening or
opening of a street or thoroughfare, upon which a lot abuts, then the front,
side, or rear yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line.
(g) If a street block face has existing buildings already constructed along it for
fifty percent (50%) or more of its length, and if the front-yard setback for
these existing buildings is greater than the front yard required for that
zoning district in this UDC, then the front-yard setback of the existing
buildings shall supersede the front yard required for that zoning district.
New buildings shall conform with the already established front-yard setback
along the remainder of the block face unless a variance for a lesser frontyard
setback is applied for and granted by the BOA in accordance with this
UDC.
(3) Side and Rear Yards
(a) On a corner lot used for one- or two-family dwellings, both street exposures
shall be treated as front yards on all lots platted after the effective date of
this UDC, except that where one street exposure is designated as a side
yard for both adjacent lots or where the two lots are separated by an alley,
street right-of-way, creek/flood plain area, or other similar phenomenon. In
such case, a building line may be designated by the City Manager with a
minimum side yard of fifteen feet (15') or more (as determined by the
applicable zoning district standards). On lots which were official lots of
record prior to the effective date of this UDC, the minimum side yard
adjacent to a side street shall comply with the minimum required side yard
for the respective district unless otherwise established on the filed plat (in
which case replatting is necessary to change the setback lines, per
SECTION 8M).
(b) Every part of a required side and rear yard shall be open and unobstructed
except for the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices,
and other architectural features not to exceed twelve inches (12") into the
required side or rear yard, and roof eaves projecting not to exceed thirty-six
inches (36") into the required side or rear yard. Air conditioning
compressors and similar equipment are permitted in the side or rear yard.
Open porches and patios (on ground floor only) extending into a side or
rear yard shall not be enclosed, but upper story balconies may not
encroach into a side or rear yard setback. A canopy may project into a
required side or rear yard provided that it is not enclosed, and provided that
it is at least five feet (5’) from the property line.
(c) Where a future right-of-way line has been established for future widening or
opening of a street or thoroughfare, upon which a lot abuts, then the front,
side, or rear yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line.
(4) Special Height Regulations
In districts where the height of buildings is restricted to two (2) or more
stories, cooling towers may extend for an additional height not to exceed fifty
feet (50') above the average grade line of the building. Water stand pipes and
July 21, 2011 240
tanks, church steeples, domes and spires, ornamental cupolas, City or school
district buildings, and institutional buildings may be erected to exceed the
height limit, as specified in the particular zoning district, provided that one (1)
additional foot shall be added to the width and depth of front, side, and rear
yards for each foot that such structures exceed the district height limit.
(5) Minimum Dwelling Unit Area
Minimum dwelling unit areas specified in this UDC shall be computed
exclusive of breezeways, garages, open porches, carports and accessory
buildings.
(6) Open Storage Areas
Open storage of materials, commodities or equipment (where allowed in the
specific zoning district) shall be located behind the front building line and
observe all setback requirements for the main structure or building. This
standard does not apply to outside display.
(7) Sight Visibility
(a) Visual clearance shall be provided in all zoning districts so that no fence,
wall, architectural screen, earth mounding, landscaping or other feature
obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any street, alley,
or driveway intersection. Whenever an intersection of a street(s), alley,
and/or driveway occurs, a triangular visibility area shall be created.
Landscaping, fences, signs, walls, earthen berms and other features within
the triangular visibility area shall be designed so as to provide unobstructed
cross-visibility at a level between thirty inches (30") and eight feet (8')
above the ground. The triangular areas are defined as follows:
1) Alley intersects a public street right-of-way - The areas on both sides
of the intersection of an alley and a public street shall have a
triangular visibility area with two (2) sides of each triangle being a
minimum of ten feet (10') in length from the point of intersection, and
the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two (2)
sides.
2) Street intersection or intersection of private driveway onto a public
street - These areas shall have a triangular visibility area with two (2)
sides of each triangle being a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') in
length along the right-of-way lines (or along the driveway curb line and
the street right-of-way line) from the point of the intersection, and the
third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two (2) sides.
(b) Shrubs and plant materials that are typically less than thirty inches (30") in
height at maturity may be located within sight visibility areas provided that
they are kept maintained at a maximum height of thirty inches (30").
(c) A limited number of single-trunked trees having a clear trunk (i.e.,
branching) height of at least eight feet (8') may be located within sight
visibility areas provided that they are trimmed in such a manner that no
limbs or foliage extend into the cross-visibility area defined above and they
July 21, 2011 241
are spaced and positioned such that their trunks will not produce a
visibility-inhibiting, “picket-fence” effect when they attain mature size.
(8) Nonresidential Structures in Residential Districts
Nonresidential structures (e.g., churches, schools, day care centers, etc.)
which are permitted in residential zoning districts (A, SF-E, SF-20, SF-12.5,
SF-9, SF-6.5, SF-PH, SF-TH, MF-15, SF-MH and MHP) shall be designed
and constructed such that they conform to the development standards set
forth in the Neighborhood Service (NS) district (i.e., with respect to maximum
height, minimum lot size, minimum front/side/rear setbacks, screening,
exterior building construction, etc.) unless otherwise stated in this UDC or in
an UDC establishing a PD.
L. MOBILE FOOD VENDORS
(1) Mobile food vendors are subject to the following regulations:
(a) Mobile food vendors shall be located on private property where an existing,
permanent business operates in a building with a certificate of occupancy;
(b) Mobile food vendors shall be located on private property where an
existing, permanent business operates in a building with a certificate of
occupancy;
(c) Mobile food vendors shall provide the City with a copy of written
permission from the property owner on an annual basis to allow the
operation of a mobile vendor;
(d) A mobile food vendor shall submit a site plan depicting the location of the
mobile food vendor on the property;
(e) A mobile food vendor must secure a health permit from the State of Texas,
and an annual permit from Building Inspections prior to the operation of
such use;
(f) All mobile food venders must make arrangements to properly dispose of
trash;
(g) Mobile food vendors cannot cook food on site;
(h) Signage for mobile food venders must comply with the City of Crandall sign
regulations;
(i) Temporary connections to potable water are prohibited. Water shall be from
an internal tank, and electricity shall be from a generator or an electrical
outlet via a portable cord that is in conformance with the Electrical Code as
adopted by the City of Crandall;
(j) Mobile food vendors shall not be located within 25 feet of an entrance of a
primary building that holds the Certificate of Occupancy;
(k) Mobile food vendors shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet from major
thoroughfares, as designated on the City's Thoroughfare Plan;
July 21, 2011 242
(l) Mobile food vendors may operate only during the business hours of the
primary business on the property;
(m) A drive through is not permitted in conjunction with the mobile food vendor;
and
(n) Mobile food vendors shall not operate in required parking spaces,
driveways, fire lanes or public roads.
SECTION 8 - DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
A. PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
(1) The purpose of this SECTION 8, Development Standards, is to promote sound
planning in the subdivision of land, and to provide consistent rules, which protect
the public health, safety, and welfare while allowing the legal platting of land.
The regulations herein have been made after careful study of existing local
conditions and the desirable future development of the City. It is not the City’s
desire or intent to regiment the design of subdivisions of property and their
environs, but rather to recommend the utilization, to the fullest extent possible,
of good, sound, modern subdivision planning principles.
(2) It is intended that as much freedom as possible be allowed the individual owners
and subdividers in the design and ultimate development of new subdivisions so
that they will contribute innovation, individuality, and character to the
community's new residential neighborhoods, commercial developments, and
industrial districts. At the same time, these rules are intended to assure that
such development provides for:
(a) Sufficient, adequate major and secondary traffic thoroughfares and public
facilities;
(b) Minimum standards for facilities;
(c) A consistent and equitable pattern of development among neighboring
parcels of land; and
(d) Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan, and other
adopted plans.
(3) The regulations contained within this section are adopted under the authority of
the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including particularly LGC
Chapters 42, 212, and 242. Pursuant to the authority herein granted, the City
Council extends, to all areas within Crandall’s city limits and ETJ, the application
of all of the terms and provisions in this section establishing rules and
regulations governing plats and subdivisions of land.
B. GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) The owner of a tract of land located within the city limits or in the ETJ of the City
who divides the tract into two (2) or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the
tract, including an addition to the City, to lay out suburban, building, or other lots,
or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to
July 21, 2011 243
be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting
on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares parks or other parts, must prepare
a plat of the subdivision. A division of a tract under this section includes a
division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes-and-bounds
description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a
contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other
method.
(2) No person shall create a subdivision of land within the City or within its ETJ
without complying with the provisions of this section, and all plats and
subdivisions of any such land shall conform to the rules and regulations set forth
in this section.
(3) In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the City and its officers shall
have the right to enjoin any violation of this Code by injunction issued by a court
of competent jurisdiction.
(4) All land subdivided or platted into lots, blocks and streets within the City or
within its ETJ, as provided by state law, shall comply in full with the
requirements of this UDC. No plat shall be filed in the office of the county clerk
for a tract within the City or its ETJ unless it is recommended by the Commission
and approved by the Council.
(5) The City has requested Kaufman County not to issue a permit for the installation
of septic tanks on any lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been
approved and filed for record, or any lot in a subdivision in which the standards
contained or referred to herein have not been complied with in full.
(6) No permit shall be issued for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a
final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a
lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained herein have not been
complied with in full, unless otherwise provided by law or herein.
(7) The City shall not authorize any person nor shall the City itself repair, maintain,
install or provide any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which
a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor in which the
standards contained or referred to herein have not been complied with in full.
(8) The City shall not authorize any person nor shall the City itself sell or supply any
water or sewer service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been
approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained or referred to
herein have not been complied with in full.
(9) Disapproval of a plat by the Commission shall be deemed a refusal by the City
to accept the offered dedications shown thereon. Approval of a plat shall not
impose any duty upon the City concerning the maintenance or improvement of
any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of the City have actually
appropriated the same by entry, use, or improvement. Any such dedication,
before or after actual appropriation, may be vacated by the City in any manner
provided by law.
July 21, 2011 244
(10) On behalf of the City, the City Attorney shall, when directed by the City Council,
institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the
provisions of this UDC or the standards referred to herein with respect to any
violation thereof which occurs within any area subject to all or part of the
provisions of this UDC.
(11) In addition thereto, any abutting owner or lessee or other person prejudicially
affected by the violation of the terms of this UDC may resort to any court of
competent jurisdiction for any writ or writs, or to obtain such relief, either at law
or in equity, as may be deemed advisable in these premises.
(12) The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the issuance of
permits for any lots upon which a residential building exists and was in existence
prior to passage of this UDC, nor to prohibit the repair, maintenance, or
installation of any street or public utility services for, to or abutting any lot, the
last recorded conveyance of which prior to passage of this UDC was by metes
and bounds, and/or any subdivision, or lot therein, recorded or unrecorded,
which subdivision was in existence prior to the passage of this UDC.
C. PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE
Prior to the official filing of an application for approval of a plat or plan for a
subdivision, the subdivider, at his/her option, may consult with and present a
proposed plan for the subdivision to the City Manager for comments and advice on
the procedures, specifications, and standards required by the City for the
subdivision of land. At such a meeting the City staff will be able to make any
suggestions that would direct the proposed subdivision toward desirable objectives
and possibly prevent unnecessary work and expense if objectives are not met.
This step does not require formal application or fee. No vesting shall occur under
this SECTION 8C in accordance with SECTION 1F of this UDC.
D. APPLICATION REQUIRED
Any proposed plan for subdivision or development of a property under this section
shall be accompanied by a completed application for the proposed development.
No vesting shall occur in accordance with SECTION 1F of this UDC until a
completed application has been submitted in accordance with the requirements of
this SECTION 8.
E. SUBDIVISION MASTER PLAN
(1) General
Where required by SECTION 8F, a subdivision master plan shall be prepared
and submitted in accordance with this SECTION 8E.
(2) Submittal Requirements for Subdivision Master Plan
An application for a subdivision master plan shall include the following
information and documents:
(a) Completeness Requirements
1) Appropriate fees;
July 21, 2011 245
2) Application signed and notarized by owner;
3) Agent authorization letter;
4) Legal metes-and-bounds description;
5) Subdivision master plan checklist;
6) Traffic Impact Analysis Determination form;
7) 15 folded black-line or blue-line copies at 18”X24” or 24”X36”;
8) One (1) folded 11”X17” reduction of each exhibit;
9) One (1) CD containing a digital copy of the plan in PDF format;
10) Completed application for street name approval; and
11) Certified copy of a tax certificate for the subject property.
(b) Technical Requirements
1) Location/Vicinity map with north arrow;
2) Title Block located in lower right corner, including subdivision name,
acreage, complete legal description including survey name and
abstract number, City, county and preparation date;
3) County recording block;
4) Legend, if abbreviations or symbols are used;
5) Name, address and phone number of owner, developer, applicant,
and surveyor;
6) North arrow;
7) Graphic and written scale (minimum 1”=100’);
8) Surveyed property boundaries with bearings and distances;
9) Legal metes-and-bounds description with calls matching boundary
dimensions and distances;
10) Lot dimensions;
11) Location of significant natural features, including floodplains, water
courses and wooded areas;
12) Location of significant man-made features, including railroads,
buildings, utilities, or physical features;
13) For residential subdivisions, a minimum of two (2) points of public
access to existing public streets;
14) Right-of-way dedications or reservations;
15) Location of existing and proposed Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) 100-year floodplain limits with elevations;
16) Existing and proposed topography at five foot (5’) contour intervals
including drainage channels and creeks;
July 21, 2011 246
17) Outline of all property offered to be dedicated to the City for park land
dedication;
18) Outline of all property to be maintained as private park land;
19) Land use, zoning, subdivision name, owner name and address, and
recording information for all adjacent properties;
20) Schematic layout of tract to be subdivided, any remainder tract, and
relationship of proposed subdivision to adjacent properties and
existing adjoining development;
21) Designation of each phase of development, the order of development,
and a schedule for the development of each phase;
22) Table indicating the phasing, acreage, land uses, zoning, and
anticipated number and type of dwelling units for each phase;
23) Arterial, collector, and local street layout;
24) Provision for water, wastewater and storm drainage facilities to serve
the development;
25) Any additional information as requested to clarify the proposed
development;
26) Provide the following notes:
a) The thoroughfare alignments shown on this exhibit are for
illustration purposes and do not set the alignment. Alignment
is determined at time of final plat;
b) According to Flood Insurance Rate Map, Panel __________,
dated _________, a 100-year floodplain {does or does not}
exist on this site;
c) All private open space, common areas, greenbelts, drainage
easements, etc. are the responsibility of the developer or its
successors and/or assigns; and
d) State any and all waivers requested for the master plan; and
27) Provide the following acknowledgements and certificates:
a) Approval of City Planning and Zoning Commission
This master plan of the _____________________________
development has been submitted to and considered by the
City Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Crandall,
Texas and is hereby approved by such Commission.
Dated this _____ day of _____________________, 20___
By: Chairperson ____________________________
Secretary ____________________________
b) Certificate of Surveyor
State of Texas
July 21, 2011 247
County of _______________
I, the undersigned, a registered professional land surveyor in
the State of Texas, hereby certify that this plat is true and
correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the
property made under my supervision on the ground.
(Surveyor's Seal) __________________________
Registered Professional Land Surveyor
c) Certificate of Engineer
State of Texas
County of _______________
I, the undersigned, a licensed professional engineer in the
State of Texas, hereby certify that proper engineering
consideration has been given to this plat.
(Engineer’s Seal) __________________________
Licensed Professional Engineer
F. SUBDIVISION MASTER PLAN PROCESS
(1) Applicability
(a) The provisions of this SECTION 8F are authorized under LGC Chapter 212
and shall be applicable to all areas within the City’s limits and throughout
the City’s ETJ. A subdivision master plan is required to provide for review
of certain developments for compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, this
UDC, any additional adopted plans (i.e., water, wastewater, transportation,
drainage), the compatibility of land uses and the coordination of
improvements within and among individual parcels of land or phases of
development prior to approval of a preliminary or final plat.
(b) A subdivision master plan is required for any development meeting the
following criteria:
1) The property is undeveloped, is under one (1) ownership, and is
greater than fifty (50) acres in size;
2) The proposed subdivision of land is to occur in phases;
3) The proposed subdivision will require off-site road, drainage or utility
connections or improvements that will have a substantial impact or
effect on other properties or developments; or
4) The property is part of a development agreement.
(c) If a preliminary plat encompasses the entire development, a subdivision
master plan will not be required.
(2) Application Requirements
(a) Application Required
July 21, 2011 248
Any request for a subdivision master plan shall be accompanied by an
application prepared in accordance with the Development Standards.
(b) Accompanying Applications
An application for a subdivision master plan may be accompanied by an
application for a preliminary plat for the first phase of development.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for a subdivision master plan shall be submitted to the
City Manager. The City Manager shall review the application for
completeness in accordance with SECTION 4B(2),of this UDC. The City
Manager shall forward a copy of the proposed plan to other appropriate
officials or personnel for review and recommendation. The City Manager
shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before
providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate
review, the City Manager shall forward a written recommendation to the
Commission for consideration.
(b) Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission
The Commission shall consider the proposed subdivision master plan.
The Commission shall act on the plat within thirty (30) days after the
date a complete application is filed. The Commission may vote to
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed subdivision
master plan. The applicant may appeal the decision of the Commission
to the City Council for consideration. The City Council shall act on an
appeal within thirty (30) days after the date of the Commission’s action.
(c) Acceptance of Subdivision Master Plan
Approval of a subdivision master plan by the Commission shall be
deemed as an expression of the approval of the layout submitted on the
master plan as a guide to the final design of streets, water, sewer and
other required improvements and utilities and to the preparation of a
preliminary plat in accordance with the requirements of this UDC.
(4) Criteria for Approval
The Commission, in considering final action on a subdivision master plan,
should consider the following criteria:
(a) The subdivision master plan is consistent with all zoning requirements for
the property or any development regulations approved as part of a
development agreement;
(b) The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater,
drainage and park facilities are adequate to serve each phase of the
subdivision;
July 21, 2011 249
(c) The schedule of development is feasible and prudent, and assures that the
proposed development will progress to completion within the time limits
proposed;
(d) If the land lies within a PD or is part of an approved development
agreement, the proposed subdivision master plan conforms to the PD
regulations and is consistent with the incorporated conceptual plan or any
development regulations contained in the approved development
agreement;
(e) The location, size and sequence of the phases of development proposed
assure orderly and efficient development of the land subject to the plan;
and
(f) No application made under these provisions will receive final approval until
all taxes owed to the City of Crandall on the subject property have been
paid in full.
(5) Expiration and Extension
(a) Expiration
The approval of a subdivision master plan shall remain in effect for a
period of two (2) years from the date the application was approved or
conditionally recommended by the Commission and approved by the
Council, during which period the applicant shall submit and receive
approval for a preliminary plat for any portion of the land subject to the
subdivision master plan. If a preliminary plat has not been approved
within the two (2)-year period, the subdivision master plan approval,
unless extended, shall expire and the plan shall be null and void.
(b) Extension
At the request of the property owners or their representative, the
expiration date for approval of a subdivision master plan may be
extended by the Commission for a period not to exceed one (1) year. A
subdivision master plan is not subject to reinstatement following
expiration.
(6) Revisions Following Approval of Subdivision Master Plan
(a) Minor Changes
Minor changes in the design of the subdivision subject to a subdivision
master plan may be incorporated in an application for approval of a
preliminary plat without the necessity of filing a new application for
approval of a subdivision master plan. Minor changes shall include
adjustment in street or alley alignments, lengths, and paving details, and
adjustment of lot lines that do not result in creation of additional lots,
provided that such changes are consistent with any approved prior
applications.
(b) Amendments
July 21, 2011 250
All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to an
approved subdivision master plan shall be deemed major amendments
that require submittal and approval of a new application for approval of a
revised subdivision master plan before approval of a preliminary plat.
G. PRELIMINARY PLAT
(1) General
Where required by SECTION 8H of this UDC, a preliminary plat shall be
prepared and submitted in accordance with this SECTION 8G.
(2) Submittal Requirements for Preliminary Plat
An application for a preliminary plat shall include the following information and
documents:
(a) Completeness Requirements
1) Appropriate fees;
2) Application signed and notarized by owner;
3) Agent authorization letter;
4) Legal metes-and-bounds description;
5) Preliminary plat checklist;
6) Traffic Impact Analysis Determination form;
7) Tree survey;
8) 15 folded black-line or blue-line copies at 18”X24” or 24”X36”;
9) One (1) folded 11”X17” reduction of each exhibit;
10) One (1) CD containing a digital copy of the plat in PDF format;
11) Completed application for street name approval;
12) Preliminary drainage plan; and
13) Certified copy of a tax certificate for the subject property.
(b) Technical Requirements
1) Location/Vicinity map with north arrow;
2) Title block located in lower right corner, including subdivision name,
acreage, complete legal description including survey name and
abstract number, City, county and preparation date;
3) Legend, if abbreviations or symbols are used;
4) Name, address and phone number of owner, developer, applicant,
and surveyor;
5) North arrow;
6) Graphic and written scale (minimum 1”=100’);
7) Surveyed property boundaries with bearings and distances;
July 21, 2011 251
8) Legal metes-and-bounds description with calls matching boundary
bearings and distances;
9) Lot dimensions including bearing and distances;
10) Provide lot and block numbers for every lot (numbers only);
11) List the total number of buildable lots;
12) Front building setback lines along roadways (provide typical detail of
setbacks, including corner lots);
13) Provide existing zoning;
14) Location of significant natural features, including floodplains, water
courses and wooded areas;
15) Location of significant man-made features, including railroads,
buildings, utilities, or physical features;
16) For residential subdivisions, a minimum of two (2) points of public
access to existing public streets;
17) Areas to be dedicated or reserved for right-of-way including
dimensions, area and providing bearings and distances of centerline;
18) Recording information for any existing easements (water, sanitary
sewer, storm drainage, electric, telephone, gas, cable television, fire
lanes, etc.) and rights-of-way and all bearing and distance information
on proposed easements including easements filed by separate
instrument;
19) Location of existing and proposed FEMA 100-year floodplain limits
with elevations;
20) Existing and proposed topography at five foot (5’) contour intervals
including drainage channels and creeks;
21) Identify all boundary survey monumentation on the plat. Tie proposed
tract to the parent tract monumentation with bearings and distances;
22) Boundary lines and acreage of the land to be dedicated to the City for
public park land;
23) Boundary lines and acreage of land proposed for private parks
including note indicating ownership and maintenance responsibility;
24) Land use, zoning, subdivision name, owner name and address, and
recording information for all adjacent properties;
25) For residential subdivisions, a one-foot (1’) non-access easement
where the rear, front, or side of the property abuts a major or minor
arterial;
26) Location of City limits boundary and/or county boundary if they
traverse the subdivision, form part of the boundary of the subdivision
or are contiguous to such boundary;
July 21, 2011 252
27) For preliminary plats exempt from requirements for subdivision master
plan, designation of each phase of development and the proposed
order of development;
28) Provide the location of proposed water, wastewater and storm
drainage facilities to serve the development including sizes;
29) Show proposed street names;
30) Any additional information as requested to clarify the proposed
development;
31) Provide the following notes:
a) The thoroughfare alignments shown on this exhibit are for
illustration purposes and do not set the alignment. Alignment
is determined at time of final plat;
b) Notice: Selling a portion of this addition by metes and bounds
is a violation of City ordinances and State law and is subject to
fines and withholding of utilities and permits;
c) According to Flood Insurance Rate Map, Panel __________,
dated __________, a 100-year floodplain {does or does not}
exist on this site;
d) If floodplain exists on the property, provide a note stating that
the finished floor elevation (FFE) of any structures shall be
one foot (1’) above the 100-year flood elevation;
e) All private open space, common areas, greenbelts, drainage
easements, etc., are the responsibility of the developer or its
successors and/or assigns;
f) Utility note (where applicable);
g) Any applicable notes required by TxDOT;
h) State any and all waivers requested for the plat; and
i) State any and all approved or requested waivers; and
32) Provide the following acknowledgements and certificates:
a) Owner’s Acknowledgement;
State of Texas
County of _______________
I (we) the undersigned, owner(s) of the land shown on this
plat, and designated herein as the
_________________________ subdivision to the City of
Crandall, Texas and whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby
dedicate for the use of the public forever all streets, alleys,
parks, water courses, drains, easements and public places
thereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein
expressed.
July 21, 2011 253
State of Texas
County of _______________
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally
appeared __________________________, known to me to be
the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing
instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the
same for purposes and considerations therein stated.
Given under my hand and seal of office this ______ day of
_____________________ 20__
(seal) __________________________
Notary Public,
________________ County, Texas
b) Certification by City Engineer
I, the undersigned, City Engineer of the City of Crandall, Texas
hereby certify that this subdivision plat conforms to all
requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City as to
which this approval is required.
_________________________ (seal)
City Engineer
c) Approval of City Planning and Zoning Commission
This plat of the _____________________________
subdivision has been submitted to and considered by the City
Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Crandall,
Texas and is hereby approved by such Commission.
Dated this _____ day of _____________________, 20___
By: Chairperson ____________________________
Secretary ____________________________
d) Certificate of Platting Surveyor
State of Texas
County of _______________
I, the undersigned, a registered professional land surveyor in
the State of Texas, hereby certify that this plat is true and
correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the
property made under my supervision on the ground.
(Surveyor's Seal) __________________________
Registered Professional Land Surveyor
e) Certificate of Platting Engineer
State of Texas
July 21, 2011 254
County of _______________
I, the undersigned, a licensed professional engineer in the
State of Texas, hereby certify that proper engineering
consideration has been given to this plat.
(Engineer’s Seal) __________________________
Licensed Professional Engineer
f) Utility Provider Certification
This proposed subdivision plat has been reviewed and
approved by _________________ for wastewater treatment
plant capacity. All fees due for impact to the system at the
time of connection will be calculated upon the submittal of the
building permit application at the then current fee schedule.
__________________________
Agent for ______________________________
This subdivision plat of the __________________________
subdivision has been submitted to and approved by ONCOR
for easements.
__________________________
Agent for Utility Provider
H. PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCESS
(1) Applicability
(a) The provisions of this section are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and
shall be applicable to all areas within the City’s limits and throughout the
City’s ETJ. A preliminary plat is required to determine the general layout of
the subdivision, the adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the
intended development and the overall compliance of the land division with
applicable requirements of this UDC.
(b) A preliminary plat may be submitted for any phase of development
consistent with an approved subdivision master plan. Where a subdivision
master plan is not required and the area to be platted is part of a larger
tract of land, the preliminary plat must encompass the entire tract of land
under ownership of the subdivider and shall provide a preliminary layout of
streets, lots, blocks, utilities and drainage for the larger tract. A final plat
may be submitted for individual lots to be platted out of the larger parcel.
(2) Application Requirements
(a) Application Required
Any request for a preliminary plat shall be accompanied by an
application prepared in accordance with the Development Standards.
(b) Accompanying Applications
July 21, 2011 255
An application for a preliminary plat may be accompanied by an
application for a final plat for the entire area to be platted or for any
portion of the proposed preliminary plat.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for a preliminary plat shall be submitted to the City
Manager. The City Manager shall review the application for
completeness in accordance with SECTION 4B(2) of this UDC. The City
Manager shall forward a copy of the plat to other appropriate
departments for review and recommendation. The City Manager shall
notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before
providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate
review, the City Manager shall forward a written recommendation to the
Commission for consideration.
(b) Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission
The Commission shall receive the written recommendation of the City
Manager and shall consider the proposed preliminary plat. The
Commission shall act on the plat within thirty (30) days after the date a
complete application is filed. The Commission must approve a
preliminary plat that is required to be prepared in accordance with this
section and that satisfies all applicable regulations of this UDC. The
Commission may vote to approve with conditions or deny a preliminary
plat that does not satisfy all applicable regulations of this UDC. The
applicant may appeal the decision of the Commission to the City Council
for consideration. The City Council shall act on an appeal within thirty
(30) days after the date of the Commission’s action.
(c) Acceptance of Preliminary Plat
Approval of a preliminary plat by the Commission shall be deemed an
expression of the approval of the layout submitted on the plat as a guide
to the final design of streets, water, sewer and other required
improvements and utilities and to the preparation of a final plat in
accordance with the requirements of this UDC.
(4) Criteria for Approval
The Commission, in considering final action on a preliminary plat, should
consider the following criteria:
(a) The plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property or any
approved development agreement;
(b) The plat conforms to the general layout of the subdivision master plan (if
applicable) and is consistent with the phasing plan approved therein;
(c) The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater,
drainage and park facilities conform to the master facilities plans for the
July 21, 2011 256
facilities, including without limitation the water facilities, wastewater
facilities, transportation, drainage and other master facilities plans;
(d) The proposed provision and configuration of roads, water, wastewater,
drainage and park facilities, and easements and rights-of-way are
adequate to serve the subdivision; and
(e) No application made under these provisions will receive final approval until
all taxes owed to the City of Crandall on the subject property have been
paid in full.
(5) Expiration and Extension
(a) Expiration
The approval of a preliminary plat shall remain in effect for a period of
two (2) years from the date the application was approved or conditionally
recommended by the Commission and approved by the City Council,
during which period the applicant shall submit and receive approval for a
final plat for any portion of the land subject to the preliminary plat. If a
final plat has not been approved within the two (2)-year period, the
preliminary plat approval, unless extended, shall expire and the plat shall
be null and void.
(b) Extension
At the request of the property owners or their representative, the
expiration date for approval of a preliminary plat may be extended by the
Commission for a period not to exceed six (6) months. A preliminary plat
is not subject to reinstatement following expiration.
(6) Revisions Following Approval of Preliminary Plat
(a) Minor Changes
Minor changes in the design of the subdivision subject to a preliminary
plat may be incorporated in an application for approval of a final plat
without the necessity of filing a new application for approval of a
preliminary plat. Minor changes shall include adjustment in street or
alley alignments, lengths, and paving details, and adjustment of lot lines
that do not result in creation of additional lots, provided that such
changes are consistent with any approved prior applications.
(b) Amendments
All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to an
approved preliminary plat shall be deemed major amendments that
require submittal and approval of a new application for approval of a
preliminary plat before approval of a final plat. Approval of major
revisions to an approved preliminary plat shall occur prior to the date any
approved subdivision master plan would have expired for the same land.
I. FINAL PLAT
(1) General
July 21, 2011 257
Where required by SECTION 8J, a final plat shall be prepared and submitted
in accordance with this SECTION 8I.
(2) Submittal Requirements for Final Plat
An application for a final plat shall include the following information and
documents:
(a) Completeness Requirements
1) Appropriate fees;
2) Application signed and notarized by owner;
3) Agent authorization letter;
4) Letter of approval from the City Engineer approving all public
infrastructure construction plans;
5) Legal metes-and-bounds description;
6) Final plat checklist;
7) Traffic Impact Analysis Determination form;
8) Tree survey;
9) 15 folded black-line or blue-line copies at 18”X24” or 24”X36”;
10) One (1) folded 11”X17” reduction of each exhibit;
11) One (1) CD containing a digital copies of the plat in CAD .dxf or dwg
and .pdf format;
12) Completed application for street name approval; and
13) Certified copy of a tax certificate for the subject property.
(b) Technical Requirements
1) Location/Vicinity map with north arrow;
2) Title block located in lower right corner including subdivision name,
acreage, complete legal description including survey name and
abstract number, City, county and preparation date;
3) County recording block;
4) Legend, if abbreviations or symbols are used;
5) Name, address and phone number of owner, developer, applicant,
and surveyor;
6) North arrow;
7) Graphic and written scale (minimum 1”=100’);
8) Surveyed property boundaries with bearings and distances;
9) Legal metes-and-bounds description with calls matching boundary
bearings and distances;
10) Lot dimensions including bearing and distances;
July 21, 2011 258
11) Provide lot and block numbers for every lot (numbers only);
12) List the total number of buildable lots;
13) Front building setback lines along roadways (provide typical detail of
setbacks, including corner lots);
14) Show proposed street names;
15) Location of significant natural features, including floodplains, water
courses and wooded areas;
16) Provide recording information for any existing easements (water,
sanitary sewer, storm drainage, electric, telephone, gas, cable
television, fire lanes, etc.) and rights-of-way. Provide all bearing and
distance information on proposed easements including easements
filed by separate instrument;
17) For residential subdivisions, a minimum of two (2) points of public
access to existing public streets;
18) Areas to be dedicated or reserved for right-of-way including
dimensions, area and providing bearings and distances of centerline;
19) Location of existing and proposed FEMA 100-year floodplain limits
with elevations;
20) Identify all boundary survey monumentation on the plat. Tie proposed
tract to the parent tract monumentation with bearings and distances;
21) Boundary lines and acreage of the land to be dedicated to the City for
public park land;
22) Boundary lines and acreage of land proposed for private park
including note indicating ownership and maintenance responsibility;
23) Subdivision name, owner name and address, and recording
information for all adjacent properties;
24) For residential subdivisions, a one-foot (1’) non-access easement
where the rear, front, or side of the property abuts a major or minor
arterial;
25) Location of City limits boundary and/or County boundary if they
traverse the subdivision, form part of the boundary of the subdivision
or are contiguous to such boundary;
26) Provide letter from TxDOT regarding drainage and access adjacent to
TxDOT right-of-way;
27) Any additional information as requested to clarify the proposed
development;
28) Provide the following notes:
a) Notice: Selling a portion of this addition by metes and bounds
is a violation of City ordinances and State law and is subject to
fines and withholding of utilities and permits;
July 21, 2011 259
b) According to Flood Insurance Rate Map, Panel __________,
dated __________, a 100-year floodplain {does or does not}
exists on this site;
c) If floodplain exists on the property, provide a note stating that
the finished floor elevation (FFE) of any structures shall be
one foot (1’) above the 100-year flood elevation;
d) All private open space, common areas, greenbelts, drainage
easement, etc., are the responsibility of the developer or its
successors and/or assigns;
e) Utility note (where applicable);
f) Any applicable notes required by TxDOT;
g) Note stating that proposed park land to be dedicated to the
City will be dedicated by a general warranty deed upon
acceptance of the subdivision by the City;
h) State any and all waivers requested for the plat; and
i) State any and all approved or requested waivers; and
29) Provide the following acknowledgements and certificates:
a) Owner’s Acknowledgement
State of Texas
County of _______________
I (we) the undersigned, owner(s) of the land shown on this
plat, and designated herein as the
_________________________ subdivision to the City of
Crandall, Texas and whose name is subscribed hereto, hereby
dedicate for the use of the public forever all streets, alleys,
parks, water courses, drains, easements and public places
thereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein
expressed.
State of Texas
County of _______________
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day personally
appeared __________________________, known to me to be
the person whose name is subscribed to the foregoing
instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the
same for purposes and considerations therein stated.
Given under my hand and seal of office this ______ day of
_____________________ 20__
(seal) __________________________
Notary Public,
________________ County, Texas
July 21, 2011 260
b) Certification by City Engineer
I, the undersigned, City Engineer of the City of Crandall, Texas
hereby certify that this subdivision plat conforms to all
requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City as to
which this approval is required.
(seal) _________________________
City Engineer
c) Approval of City Planning and Zoning Commission
This plat of the _____________________________
subdivision has been submitted to and considered by the City
Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Crandall,
Texas and is hereby approved by such Commission.
Dated this _____ day of _________________, 20___
By: Chairperson ____________________________
Secretary ____________________________
d) Certificate of Platting Surveyor
State of Texas
County of _______________
I, the undersigned, a registered professional land surveyor in
the State of Texas, hereby certify that this plat is true and
correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the
property made under my supervision on the ground.
(Surveyor's Seal) __________________________
Registered Professional Land Surveyor
e) Certificate of Platting Engineer
State of Texas
County of _______________
I, the undersigned, a licensed professional engineer in the
State of Texas, hereby certify that proper engineering
consideration has been given to this plat.
(Engineer’s Seal) __________________________
Licensed Professional Engineer
f) County Recording Block
State of Texas
County of _______________
I, __________________________, County Clerk of Kaufman
County, do hereby certify that this plat was filed for record in
my office on the _____day of __________________________
July 21, 2011 261
AD ______ at _______ ___M, and duly recorded the
_____day of __________________________ AD_____ at
______ __M, in the records of ___________ county, in book
volume ________ page ____________ in testimony whereof,
witness my hand and official seal of office, this _____day of
__________________________ AD, 20___.
County Clerk, Kaufman County, Texas
By: __________________________
g) Utility Provider Certification
This subdivision plat of the
__________________________subdivision has been
submitted to and approved by ____________________ for
sewer service availability.
__________________________
Agent for ___________________
This subdivision plat of the __________________________
subdivision has been submitted to and approved by ONCOR
for easements.
__________________________
Agent for Utility Provider
J. FINAL PLAT PROCESS
(1) Applicability
(a) The provisions of this section are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and
shall be applicable to all areas within the City’s limits and throughout the
City’s ETJ. A final plat is required to assure that the division or
development of the land subject to the plat is consistent with all standards
of this UDC pertaining to the adequacy of public facilities, that public
improvements to serve the subdivision or development have been installed
and accepted by the City or that provision for such installation has been
made, that all other requirements and conditions have been satisfied or
provided for to allow the plat to be recorded, and to assure that the
subdivision or development meets all other standards of this UDC to
enable initiation of site preparation activities for any lot or tract subject to
the plat. Approval of a final plat shall be required prior to any non-exempt
division of land and prior to any site preparation activities for a lot or tract of
land that requires installation of public improvements on or adjacent
thereto.
(b) A final plat may be submitted for any phase of development consistent with
an approved preliminary plat.
(2) Application Requirements
(a) Application Required
July 21, 2011 262
Any request for a final plat shall be accompanied by an application
prepared in accordance with the Development Standards.
(b) Accompanying Applications
An application for a final plat shall be accompanied by a letter of
approval from the City Engineer and/or the City Manager approving the
public infrastructure improvement construction plans showing details of
streets, alleys, culverts, bridges, storm sewers, water mains, sanitary
sewers and other engineering details of the proposed subdivision. Such
plans shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and shall
conform to the standard specifications established by the City. Approval
of any public infrastructure improvement plans is required prior to final
plat application.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for a final plat shall be submitted to the City Manager. The
City Manager shall review the application for completeness in
accordance with SECTION 4B(2) of this UDC. The City Manager shall
forward a copy of the plat to other appropriate City employees or
consultants for review and recommendation. The City Manager shall
notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before
providing a recommendation on the application. After appropriate
review, the City Manager shall forward a written recommendation to the
Commission for consideration.
(b) Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission
The Commission shall receive the written recommendation of the City
Manager and shall consider the proposed final plat. The Commission
shall act on the plat within thirty (30) days after the date a complete
application is filed. The Commission must approve a final plat that is
required to be prepared in accordance with this section and that satisfies
all applicable regulations of this UDC. The Commission may vote to
approve with conditions or deny a final plat that does not satisfy all
applicable regulations of this UDC. The applicant may appeal the
decision of the Commission to the City Council for consideration. The
City Council shall act on an appeal within thirty (30) days after the date
of the Commission’s action.
(4) Criteria for Approval
The Commission, in considering final action on a final plat, should consider
the following criteria:
(a) The final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat, except for minor
changes that may be approved without the necessity of revising the
approved preliminary plat;
July 21, 2011 263
(b) The plat is consistent with the phasing plan approved with the preliminary
plat (where applicable); and
(c) The final layout of the subdivision or development meets all standards for
adequacy of public facilities contained in this UDC.
(5) Expiration and Extension
(a) Expiration
The approval of a final plat shall remain in effect for a period of two (2)
years from the date the application was approved or conditionally
recommended by the Commission and approved by the City Council,
during which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for
approval and recordation of the plat. If the final plat has not been
recorded within the two (2) year period, the final plat approval, unless
extended, shall expire and the final plat shall be null and void.
(b) Extension
At the request of the property owners or their representative, the
expiration date for approval of a final plat may be extended by the
Commission for a period not to exceed six (6) months. A final plat is not
subject to reinstatement following expiration.
(6) Revisions to Final Plat
(a) Approved Final Plat
An applicant may make minor changes to an approved final plat to
reflect changes arising from installation of public improvements
thereafter, provided that the approved final plat has not been recorded
and that approval of the revised final plat occurs prior to expiration of
approval of the initial final plat application. The City Manager is
authorized to approve minor changes to an approved final plat. If the
approved final plat has been recorded, an amending plat or replat must
be approved and recorded.
(b) Conditionally Approved or Denied Plat
Following conditional approval or denial of a final plat application, the
applicant may submit a revised final plat application, together with any
revised public infrastructure improvement construction plans, for
approval. The City Manager is authorized to approve revisions required
for conditional approval of the final plat. Revisions to a plat which was
denied by the City Manager shall be reviewed by the Commission.
Approval of a revised plat is required prior to the original expiration date
of any approved preliminary plat for the same land.
1) Filing of security in lieu of completing construction shall be in
accordance with this UDC. Where public infrastructure improvements
have been installed prior to recording of the plat, the property owner
shall submit a maintenance bond from each contractor, three (3)
sealed sets of “as built” plans or record drawings, and one (1) CD
July 21, 2011 264
containing a digital copy of all plans (in a format as determined by the
Department of Public Works), together with a letter stating the
contractors' compliance with this UDC, and bearing sealed
certification by the design engineer that all public improvements have
been constructed in compliance with all City construction standards.
The property owner also shall submit copies of the approved final plat
with any required revisions on mylars and in the format and number
required by the Building Official. Where public improvements have yet
to be completed in connection with an approved final plat, the property
owner shall submit in the format and number required by the City
Manager, copies of the approved final plat with any required revisions
on mylars and in the format and number required by the City Manager
for signing and recording.
(c) Upon notification of acceptance of required public improvements or filing of
security in lieu of infrastructure construction, the City Manager shall
procure the signature of the chair of the Commission on the plat and shall
promptly cause the plat to be recorded.
K. MINOR PLAT PROCESS
(1) Applicability
The provisions of this section are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and
shall be applicable to all areas within the City’s limits and throughout the
City’s ETJ. A minor plat may be submitted for approval where the proposed
division of land involves four (4) or fewer lots fronting onto an existing street
and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal
facilities.
(2) Application Requirements
Any request for a minor plat shall be accompanied by an application prepared
in accordance with the Development Standards.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for a minor plat shall be submitted to the City Manager.
The City Manager shall review the application for completeness in
accordance with SECTION 4B(2) of this UDC. The City Manager may,
at his/her option, forward a copy of the plat to other appropriate
departments for review and recommendation. The City Manager shall
notify the applicant of items requiring correction or attention before
providing a recommendation on the application.
(b) Minor Plat Approval
In accordance with LGC Section 212.0065, the City Manager may
approve a minor plat. The City Manager may, for any reason, elect to
present the plat for approval to the Commission. The City Manager shall
not disapprove a minor plat and shall be required to refer any plat for
July 21, 2011 265
which approval is refused to the Commission. If a minor plat is referred
to the Commission, the Commission shall act on the plat within thirty (30)
days after the date of the City Manager’s determination.
(c) Contents of Minor Plat
An application for a minor plat shall include the same information and
documents required for approval of a final plat in accordance with
SECTION 8I of this UDC.
(4) Criteria for Approval
The City Manager in considering final action on a minor plat should consider
the following criteria:
(a) The minor plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property,
all other requirements of this UDC that apply to the plat, and any
regulations contained in an approved development agreement;
(b) All lots to be created by the plat already are adequately served by all
required City utilities and infrastructure; and
(c) The plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve
any lot within the subdivision;
(5) Expiration and Extension
(a) Expiration
The approval of a minor plat shall remain in effect for a period of two (2)
years from the date the application was approved or conditionally
approved by the City Manager or the Commission on appeal, during
which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for
approval and recordation of the plat. If the minor plat has not been
recorded within the two (2)-year period, the minor plat approval shall
expire and the minor plat shall be deemed null and void.
(b) Extension
At the request of the property owners or their representative, the
expiration date for approval of a minor plat may be extended by the
Commission for a period not to exceed six (6) months. A minor plat is
not subject to reinstatement following expiration.
(6) Plat Recordation
The property owner shall submit the approved minor plat, following any
required revisions, to the City Manager, who shall cause the plat to be
recorded in the Kaufman County Deed Records.
L. AMENDING PLAT PROCESS
(1) Applicability
The provisions of this section are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and
shall be applicable to all areas within the City’s limits and throughout the
City’s ETJ. An amending plat may be filed in accordance with the procedures
July 21, 2011 266
and requirements set forth in LGC Section 212.016 and may be recorded and
is controlling over the preceding plat without vacation of that plat and without
notice and hearing, if the amending plat is signed and acknowledged by the
owners of the property being replatted and is solely for one or more of the
following purposes:
(a) To correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat;
(b) To add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat;
(c) To correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding
plat;
(d) To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from
practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments;
(e) To show the location or character of a monument which has been changed
in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or
character on the preceding plat;
(f) To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission
previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for approving
plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of
adjacent recorded plats;
(g) To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two (2)
adjacent lots if:
1) Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat;
2) Neither lot is abolished;
3) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or
restrictions; and
4) The amendment does not have a materially adverse effect on the
property rights of the other owners in the plat;
(h) To relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building
or other improvement on a lot line or easement;
(i) To relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if:
1) The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the
plat;
2) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or
restrictions; and
3) The amendment does not increase the number of lots;
(j) To make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six (6) or fewer
lots in the subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding
plat if:
1) The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of
the municipality;
July 21, 2011 267
2) The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or
restrictions; and
3) The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the
Commission or City Council has approved, after a public hearing, as a
residential improvement area; or
(k) To replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if:
1) The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the
plat;
2) The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or
restrictions;
3) The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
4) The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new
street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities.
(2) Application Requirements
Any request for an amending plat shall be accompanied by an application
prepared in accordance with the Development Standards.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for an amending plat shall be submitted to the City
Manager. The City Manager shall review the application for
completeness in accordance with SECTION 4B(2) of this UDC. The City
Manager may, at his/her option, forward a copy of the plat to other
appropriate departments for review and recommendation. The City
Manager shall notify the applicant of items requiring correction or
attention before providing a recommendation on the application.
(b) Amending Plat Approval
In accordance with LGC Section 212.0065, the City Manager may
approve an amending plat. The City Manager may, for any reason, elect
to present the plat for approval to the Commission. The City Manager
may not disapprove an amending plat and shall be required to refer any
plat for which approval is not given to the Commission. If an amending
plat is referred to the Commission, the Commission shall act on the plat
within thirty (30) days after the date of the City Manager’s determination.
(c) Commission Review of Administratively Approved Plats
The City Manager shall provide a quarterly report to the Commission
containing a summary of plats that have been administratively approved
during that quarter and shall include a copy of the approved plat for
review by the Commission.
(4) Contents of Amending Plat
July 21, 2011 268
An application for an amending plat shall include the same information and
documents required for approval of a final plat in accordance with SECTION
8I of this UDC.
(5) Expiration and Extension
(a) Expiration
The approval of an amending plat shall remain in effect for a period of
two (2) years from the date the application was approved or conditionally
approved by the City Manager or the Commission on appeal, during
which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for
approval and recordation of the plat. If the amending plat has not been
recorded within the two (2)-year period, the plat approval shall expire
and the plat shall be deemed null and void.
(b) Extension
At the request of the property owners or their representative, the
expiration date for approval of an amending plat may be extended by the
Commission for a period not to exceed six (6) months. An amending
plat is not subject to reinstatement following expiration.
(6) Plat Recordation
The property owner shall submit the approved amending plat, following any
required revisions, to the City Manager, who shall cause the plat to be
recorded in the Kaufman County Deed Records.
M. REPLAT PROCESS
(1) Applicability
The provisions of this section are authorized under LGC Chapter 212 and
shall be applicable to all areas within the City’s limits and throughout the
City’s ETJ. A replat is any plat that complies with LGC Sections 212.014,
212.0145, and 212.015, as amended, which is generally submitted to replat a
subdivision or part of a subdivision without vacation of the original plat.
Replatting a portion of a recorded lot is not permitted. A replat does not itself
constitute approval for development of the property.
(2) Application Requirements
Any request for a replat shall be accompanied by an application prepared in
accordance with the Development Standards.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for a replat shall be submitted to the City Manager. The
City Manager shall review the application for completeness in
accordance with SECTION 4B(2) of this UDC. The City Manager shall
forward a copy of the plat to other appropriate departments for review
and recommendation. The City Manager shall notify the applicant of
items requiring correction or attention before providing a
July 21, 2011 269
recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City
Manager shall forward a recommendation to the Commission for
consideration.
(b) Notification Requirements
An application for a replat requires notification in accordance with LGC
Section 212.015. Published notice and written notice to property owners
within two hundred feet (200’) who are also within the original
subdivision shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
LGC.
(c) Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission
The Commission shall hold a public hearing and receive the
recommendation of the City Manager and shall consider the proposed
replat. The Commission shall act on the plat within thirty (30) days after
the date a complete application is filed. The Commission must approve
a replat that is required to be prepared in accordance with this section
and that satisfies all applicable regulations of this UDC. The
Commission may vote to approve with conditions or deny a replat that
does not satisfy all applicable regulations of this UDC. The applicant
may appeal the decision of the Commission to the City Council for
consideration. The City Council shall act on an appeal within thirty (30)
days after the date of the Commission’s action.
(4) Contents of Replat
An application for a replat shall include the same information and documents
required for approval of a final plat in accordance with SECTION 8I of this
UDC.
(5) Criteria for Approval
The Commission, in considering final action on a replat, should consider the
following criteria:
(a) The replat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, all
other requirements of this UDC that apply to the plat, and any regulations
contained in an approved development agreement;
(b) The replat is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property
being replatted;
(c) A public hearing was held and parties in interest and citizens have had an
opportunity to be heard; and
(d) The replat does not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or
restrictions.
(6) Protests
If the replat application is accompanied by a variance petition and is protested
in accordance with this section, approval of the replat shall require the
affirmative vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the
July 21, 2011 270
Commission present at the meeting. For a legal protest, written instruments
signed by the owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of the lots
or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the replat application and
extending two hundred feet (200’) from that area, but within the original
subdivision, must be filed with the Commission prior to the close of the public
hearing. In computing the percentage of land area under this section, the
area of streets and alleys shall be included.
(7) Expiration and Extension
(a) Expiration
The approval of a replat shall remain in effect for a period of two (2)
years from the date the application was approved or conditionally
recommended by the Commission and approved by the Council, during
which period the applicant shall submit any required revisions for
approval and recordation of the plat. If the replat has not been recorded
within the two (2)-year period, the plat approval shall expire and the plat
shall be deemed null and void.
(b) Extension
At the request of the property owners or their representative, the
expiration date for approval of a replat may be extended by the
Commission for a period not to exceed six (6) months. A replat is not
subject to reinstatement following expiration.
(8) Plat Recordation
The property owner shall submit the approved replat, following any required
revisions, to the City Manager, who shall cause the plat to be recorded in the
property records of the county in which the land is located.
N. SITE PLAN PROCESS
(1) Purpose and Applicability
(a) Purpose
This section establishes a site plan review process for certain proposed
residential, nonresidential, and mixed-use developments. The purpose of
site plan approval is:
1) To ensure compliance with the requirements of this UDC;
2) To promote better site design;
3) To integrate projects more effectively into their surrounding
environment;
4) To prevent the impairment or depreciation of property values;
5) To improve internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
6) To encourage quality and innovative site-planning techniques;
7) To project and enhance the overall general public health, safety and
welfare;
July 21, 2011 271
8) To ensure efficient and safe land development;
9) To ensure harmonious use of land;
10) To ensure compliance with the Comprehensive Plan and other
appropriate design standards; and
11) To ensure adequate parking and loading, water supply, drainage and
storm water management, sanitary sewer facilities, and other utilities
and services.
(b) Applicability
Site plan review and approval shall be required as follows:
1) For any development that contains two (2) or more residential
dwelling units on a single tract, lot, or parcel of land;
2) For any development that contains single-family attached dwelling
units;
3) For any nonresidential development;
4) Any increase in an existing nonresidential structure or a residential
structure that contains two (2) or more residential dwelling units that is
greater than twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing building square
footage;
5) For any PD or SUP;
6) For any single-family residential development that includes a private
amenity or facility or a golf course; and
7) No building permit shall be issued for any of the above developments
until a site plan and all other required engineering/construction plans
are first approved by the City. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until all construction and development conforms to the
approved site plan and associated engineering/construction plans.
The site plan review process shall include, but not be limited to, the
following steps:
a) Pre-application conference;
b) Site plan review and approval; and
c) Construction of project (after City approval of required site
plan and other associated plans, including platting and
engineering plans).
(c) Exempted Uses
The following land use activities are exempted from the requirements of
this SECTION 8N:
1) Construction of one- or two-family dwellings, ordinary accessory
structures and related land use activities;
2) Ordinary repair and maintenance of existing structures or uses;
July 21, 2011 272
3) Agricultural land use;
4) Incidental landscaping or grading;
5) Individual manufactured homes; and
6) Interior alterations that do not substantially change the nature or use
of the structure.
(2) Application Requirements
Any request for site plan approval shall be accompanied by an application
prepared in accordance with the Development Standards.
(3) Processing of Application and Decision
(a) Submittal
An application for a site plan shall be submitted to the City Manager.
The City Manager shall review the application for completeness in
accordance with SECTION 4B(2) of this UDC. The City Manager may,
at his/her option, request a recommendation from any other City
Department or consultant. The City Manager shall notify the applicant of
items requiring correction or attention before providing a
recommendation on the application. After appropriate review, the City
Manager shall forward a recommendation to the Commission for
consideration.
(b) Decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission
The Commission shall receive the recommendation of the City Manager
and shall consider the proposed site plan. The Commission may vote to
recommend approval, recommend approval with conditions or
recommend to deny the proposed site plan. The City Council shall act
on an appeal within thirty (30) days after the date of the Commission’s
action.
(4) Contents of a Site Plan
An application for a site plan shall include the following information and
documents:
(a) Completeness Requirements
1) Appropriate fees;
2) Application signed and notarized by owner;
3) Agent authorization letter, as required;
4) Legal metes-and-bounds description;
5) Site plan checklist;
6) Traffic Impact Analysis Determination form;
7) Tree survey;
8) 15 folded black-line or blue-line copies at 18”X24” or 24”X36” as
required in the development application;
July 21, 2011 273
9) One (1) folded 11”X17” reduction of each exhibit;
10) One (1) CD containing a digital copy of the plan in PDF format; and
11) Completed application for street name approval.
(b) Technical Requirements
1) Location/Vicinity map with north arrow;
2) North arrow;
3) Graphic and written scale (minimum 1”=20’);
4) Approximate distance to the nearest cross street;
5) Site boundaries, bearings and dimensions, lot lines, site acreage and
square footage;
6) Title block located in lower right corner including subdivision name
with lot and block number, acreage, complete legal description
including survey name and abstract number, City, county and
preparation date;
7) Legend, if abbreviations or symbols are used;
8) Name, address and phone number of owner, developer, applicant,
and surveyor;
9) Parking areas and structures with typical parking detail;
10) Site data summary table providing the following information:
a) Zoning;
b) Proposed use;
c) Building area (gross square footage);
d) Building height (feet and number of stories);
e) Square footage of impervious surface;
f) Total parking: required/provided (e.g., 44 required/45
provided);
g) Number of handicap spaces: required/provided (per ADA
standards); and
h) Number of dwelling units and number of bedrooms for multifamily
development (if applicable);
(c) Existing improvements within seventy-five feet (75’) of the subject property;
(d) Land use, zoning, subdivision name, recording information and owner of
adjacent unplatted property;
(e) Building locations, size and dimensions, dimensions between buildings on
the same lot, building lines and setbacks and use;
(f) Dimensions of all drive lanes;
July 21, 2011 274
(g) FEMA 100-year floodplain with elevation including finished floor elevation.
Include floodplain note provided as part of plat;
(h) Public streets, private drives and fire lanes with pavement widths, rights-ofway,
median openings, turn lanes, existing driveways of adjacent property
and driveways shown on approved plans for adjacent property with
dimensions, radii and surface type;
(i) Distances between existing and proposed driveways;
(j) Loading and unloading areas, the location of ramps, crosswalks, sidewalks
and barrier free ramps with typical dimensions;
(k) Location of off-street loading areas, dumpsters and trash compactors with
height and material of screening;
(l) Size, location, dimensions and details of all signs and exterior lighting of
signs, including type of standards, locations and radius of light and intensity
of foot-candles, subject to approval by the Building Official;
(m) Location of existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer mains and
service lines with sizes, valves, fire hydrants, manholes and other
structures on site and adjacent to the site;
(n) Show traffic flow arrows and dimensions of drive isles;
(o) Inlets, culverts and other drainage structures on-site and adjacent to the
site;
(p) Existing and proposed easements (utility, floodway and drainage, access,
visibility and maintenance, fire lane, etc.);
(q) Provide an elevation of all four (4) sides of the building including building
materials, colors and dimensions at an architectural scale of ¼” = 1’ 0”; and
(r) Landscape plan provided on separate sheet and including the following:
1) Natural features including tree masses and anticipated tree loss,
floodplains, drainage ways and creeks;
2) Screening walls, fences, living screens, retaining walls, headlight
screens and service area screens, including height and type of
construction and/or planting specification;
3) Existing/preserved trees including location, size and species;
4) Landscaping materials including location, size, etc.;
5) Proposed plant materials including locations, species, spacing (if
applicable) and size (at time of planting and at maturity); and
6) Note irrigation, sprinkler or water systems, including placement of
water sources, including the following note: “All green space and
landscaping will be maintained by (type) watering system”; and
(s) Any additional information as requested to clarify the proposed
development.
(5) Criteria for Approval
July 21, 2011 275
The Commission, in considering action on a site plan, should consider the
following criteria:
(a) The site plan is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the
applicable zoning district regulations;
(b) The site plan is compatible with adjacent developments and neighborhoods
and includes improvements to mitigate development-related adverse
impacts;
(c) The site plan does not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic, which will be
hazardous or conflict with the existing traffic patterns in the area;
(d) The site plan incorporates features to minimize adverse effects on adjacent
properties;
(e) Adequate capacity of public or private facilities for water, sewer, electricity
and transportation to and through the development are provided to the site;
(f) The proposed use and associated site plan promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the City and the safe, orderly, efficient and healthful
development of the City.
(6) Revisions to Approved Site Plan
Changes to an approved site plan shall be processed in the same manner as
the original approved site plan; however, changes of details within a site plan
which do not alter the basic physical relationship of the property to adjacent
property, alter the use permitted, increase the density, floor area or height, or
reduce the yards provided at the boundary of the site as indicated on the
approved site plan, may be authorized by the City Manager. An aggrieved
party may appeal the decision of the City Manager to the BOA in accordance
with the provisions of this UDC.
(7) Expiration of Site Plan
A site plan shall expire if any of the following occurs:
(a) A building permit, if any, for the use has not been approved within two (2)
years of the approval of a SUP;
(b) A building permit has not been approved within two (2) years of the
approval of a site plan as part of a PD;
(c) A building permit has not been approved within two (2) years of the
approval for the construction of any building on the property for which the
site plan was approved; or
(d) A building permit that was approved as a result of an approved site plan
expires within two (2) years of approval of the site plan.
O. WAIVERS
(1) General
The Commission may recommend and the City Council may authorize
waivers from the provisions of this section when, in its opinion, undue
July 21, 2011 276
hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a waiver, the
City Council shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary or
desirable to the public interest. In making its findings, the City Council shall
take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved and
existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or
work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such waivers
upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience, and
welfare in the vicinity. Waivers shall not be granted unless the City Council
finds that:
(a) The granting of the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area; and
(b) The granting of the waiver will not have the effect of preventing the orderly
subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of
this UDC. Such findings of the City Council, together with the specified
facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the
official minutes of the City Council meeting at which such waiver is granted.
Waivers may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this UDC so that the public health, safety, and welfare may be
secured and justice done.
(2) The City Council may establish a time period for execution of each granted
waiver.
(3) Such findings together with the specific facts on which such findings are based
shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the City Council meeting at
which such exception is granted.
(4) The City Council shall not authorize a waiver that would constitute a violation of
a valid code or ordinance of the City.
SECTION 9 - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS
A. GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS
(1) Conformity with Comprehensive Plan
All subdivisions shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan for orderly and
unified development of streets, utilities, neighborhood design, and public land
and facilities, as well as other provisions of this and other present ordinances
and codes. Standards and design criteria contained and incorporated herein
represent minimum values considered necessary for the health, safety and
welfare of the community. The design engineer and developer are required to
meet or exceed the requirements of these standards by providing more
conservative design criteria. However, they shall not permit their design to fall
below the standards of this UDC. Where there is a conflict between the
regulations contained within this section and regulations or standards
contained within any other ordinance or code of the City, the more restrictive
regulation shall apply. Approval of plans and specifications by the City shall
not be construed as relieving the design engineer/developer of responsibility
July 21, 2011 277
for compliance with this UDC, nor with any other local, county or state
authority having jurisdiction. The City Council shall approve no plat and no
completed improvements shall be accepted unless they conform to standards
and detailed specifications as contained in this UDC.
(2) Provision for Future Subdivision
All subdivisions shall be so arranged as to allow logical further subdivision
and opening of future streets and shall coordinate with adjoining existing
and/or future subdivisions.
(3) Standards for Site Improvements
All streets, alleys, sidewalks, utility installations and other site improvements
required to be installed by the subdivider under the provisions of these
regulations shall conform to the requirements of this section and to the City of
Plano Water and Sewer Design Manual, dated 1997, and Erosion and
Sediment Control Manual, 1997, as attached hereto as Appendix “A” and
incorporated by reference for all purposes herein (“Design Standards”).
B. BLOCKS
(1) The length, width and shape of blocks will be determined with due regard to:
(a) Provisions of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the
type of use contemplated (note that the Commission may require that the
block and lot size bear reasonable relation to the planned use of the land);
(b) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; and
(c) Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
(2) In general, intersecting streets shall be used to determine the block lengths and
widths, and shall be provided at such intervals as to serve cross traffic
adequately, and to meet existing streets or customary subdivision practices.
(3) In general, block lengths along minor or secondary streets shall not exceed one
thousand feet (1,000’) or be less than five hundred feet (500’) and along major
streets shall not exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200’) or be less than
nine hundred feet (900’).
(4) A waiver of the standards of this section may be allowed in cases where
physical barriers, property ownership or adjacent existing subdivisions create
conditions where a waiver is appropriate. The length of a block may be
increased or decreased to meet the existing conditions having due regard for
connecting streets, circulation of traffic and public safety.
C. LOTS
(1) Lot sizes and dimensions shall conform to the minimum requirements of the
appropriate zoning district. The lot area shall be computed including all
easements. Changes in the required lot sizes and dimensions may only be
allowed through rezoning or through the granting of a variance by the BOA. No
lot shall be approved which does not meet the minimum requirements of the
appropriate zoning district.
July 21, 2011 278
(2) In residential subdivisions not served by public sewer, the Commission shall
require the developer to cause a percolation test to be made. In no case will the
lot size in such subdivision be less than one acre (43,560 square feet).
(3) Depth and width of properties laid out for commercial or industrial purposes shall
be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by
the type of use and development contemplated.
(4) Corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit the required building setback
and proper orientation to both streets.
(5) Where a residential lot backs up to a railroad right-of-way, high-pressure gas
line, industrial area or any other land use which may create a dangerous
condition, and where no marginal access street or other street is provided at the
rear of such lot, an additional depth of twenty-five feet (25’) shall be required.
Where a lot sides to any of the above, an additional width of fifteen feet (15’)
shall be required. A planting screen or non-access easement of at least ten feet
(10’) shall be provided along the line of lots abutting a railroad right-of-way, highpressure
gas line, industrial area or any other land use which may have a
dangerous effect on residential property.
(6) Residential lots located on a cul-de-sac shall be at least fifty feet (50’) wide at
the building line.
(7) Residential lots shall be oriented to take advantage of topography; the best
relationship to the overall design of the neighborhood; and to minimize the
effects of any surrounding depreciating land uses.
(8) There shall be no residential lots facing directly upon a major thoroughfare as
depicted on the Thoroughfare Plan.
(9) All side lines of lots shall be perpendicular to straight street lines and radial to
curved street lines except where a waiver to this rule will provide a better street
and lot layout.
(10) Every lot shall be provided with adequate access to a public street, either by
direct frontage on such street. Rear and/or side driveway access to major
streets shall be prohibited.
(11) Minimum front and side building setback lines at streets and crosswalks shall be
shown on all plats and shall conform to the restrictions, if any, imposed on the
subdivision by the subdivider, but in no event shall such setback lines be less
than those required by the applicable zoning district. The front-line setback shall
be measured from the point where the public right-of-way ends to the front face
to the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building.
D. MONUMENTS AND LOT MARKERS
(1) Permanent Survey Reference Monuments
Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curve,
and all corners of boundary lines of the subdivision. A monument shall be
made of an iron stake one-half inch (1/2”) in diameter and twenty-four inches
(24”) long. The iron stake should be left one-half inch (1/2”) above the grade
July 21, 2011 279
with a surveyor’s aluminum or plastic cap, stamped with the surveyor’s
registered number or firm. Monuments shall be identified on the plat with
elevations. Benchmarks and corners of the subdivision must be tied to the
closest U.S. National Geodetic Survey GPS monument.
(2) Other Markers
All other survey markers, such as lot corners, shall have an iron stake onehalf
inch (1/2”) in diameter and twenty-four inches (24”) long and shall be
placed flush with the ground, or below ground, if necessary, to avoid being
disturbed.
(3) Benchmarks
A minimum of two (2) benchmarks shall be established in each subdivision.
Benchmarks shall be established on iron rods embedded in concrete
monuments six inches (6”) in diameter and set in the ground to a depth of
three feet (3’) and set to U.S. National Geodetic Survey datum. Using tops of
manholes, fire hydrants, risers or other man-made objects as a benchmark is
not acceptable.
(4) Monument Placement and Verification
Monuments and lot markers shall be set immediately after completion of utility
installations and street construction. Prior to acceptance of subdivision
improvements by the City, the developer’s surveyor or engineer shall certify
that all monuments, benchmarks and markers are in place and correctly
positioned and shown on “as-built” drawings.
E. EXTERIOR CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS
(1) Intent
The purpose of these design criteria is to provide guidelines for new
construction and substantial renovation in order to provide an aesthetically
pleasing appearance as well as to ensure sound construction quality.
(2) Applicability
The provisions of this section are deemed to be minimum standards and shall
be applicable to all new buildings and to buildings undergoing substantial
renovation where the cost of the renovation exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the
appraised value of the structure, as shown on the latest tax roll, within the
corporate limits of the City.
(3) Multi-family and Nonresidential Exterior Material Requirements
(a) At least thirty percent (30%) of the front façade shall provide, on the ground
level floor, windows and doors that allow for visibility into the commercial
building or store. Industrial buildings located within the M-1 and M-2 zoning
districts may have fifteen percent (15%) of the front façade as windows and
doors.
(b) All structures shall have a minimum of one-hundred percent (100%)
masonry, excluding doors and windows on all facades.
July 21, 2011 280
(c) Masonry material shall be defined as that form of exterior construction
material consisting of brick, stone, stucco, cemetatious fiberboard, split
face concrete masonry units and faux stone or brick.
(4) Multi-family and Nonresidential Façade Articulation
The structure shall include articulation in the walls and roof design. Single,
uninterrupted surface planes shall be prohibited. The roof of the structure
may be a flat roof construction, but shall provide a variation of the roofline,
which may include a pitched roof for architectural relief.
(a) Horizontal Articulation
No building wall shall extend for a distance equal to two (2) times the
wall’s height without having an offset of fifteen percent (15%) of the
wall’s height, and that new plane shall extend for a distance equal to at
least twenty-five percent (25%) of the maximum length of the first plane.
(b) Vertical Articulation
No horizontal wall shall extend for a distance greater than two (2) times
the height of the wall without changing height by a minimum of fifteen
percent (15%) of the wall’s height.
(5) Residential Exterior Material Requirements
For all new residential buildings, excluding multi-family structures, the total
exterior surface area of the structure, excluding doors, windows, and roofs,
shall be constructed of a minimum eighty percent (80%) masonry.
F. PROTECTION OF NATURAL FEATURES
The Commission may deny a plat if subdivision design and construction does not
meet the minimum requirements of this UDC with respect to preservation of natural
features such as large trees, water courses, scenic points, historical spots and
similar community assets.
G. LANDSCAPING
(1) Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish landscaping requirements to
enhance the community’s ecological, environmental, and beautification efforts
as well as its aesthetic qualities; to reduce the negative effects of glare, noise,
erosion, and sedimentation caused by expanses of impervious and unvegetated
surfaces within the urban environment; to preserve and improve
the natural and urban environment by recognizing that the use of landscaping
elements can contribute to the processes of air purification, oxygen,
regeneration, groundwater recharge, noise abatement, glare and heat, and
the provision of habitats for wildlife; and to enhance the overall beauty of the
City.
(2) Enforcement
If at any time after the issuance of a CO or letter of acceptance, the approved
landscaping is found to be in nonconformance with standards and criteria of
July 21, 2011 281
this section, notice by the City may be issued to the owner, citing the violation
and describing what action is required to comply with this section. The
owner, tenant or agent shall have forty-five (45) days after the date of said
notice to restore landscaping as required. The City may extend the time of
compliance based on weather conditions. If the landscaping is not restored
within the allotted time, such person shall be in violation of this UDC.
(3) Installation and Maintenance
(a) Prior to issuance of a CO for any building or structure, all screening and
landscaping shall be in place in accordance with the landscape plan
approved as part of the site plan.
(b) The property owner, HOA or property owners association shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all landscape areas. The areas shall be
maintained so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at all
times.
(c) Should any of the plant material used in any landscaping required under
this section die, the owner of the property shall have ninety (90) days after
notification from the City to obtain and install suitable replacement plant
material. Synthetic or artificial lawn or plant material shall not be used to
satisfy the requirements of this UDC.
(d) In any case in which a CO is sought at a season of the year in which the
City determines that it would be impractical to plant trees, shrubs or grass,
or to lay turf, a CO may be issued notwithstanding the fact that the
landscaping required by the landscape plan has not been completed,
provided the applicant posts fiscal surety in a form acceptable to the City in
the amount of the estimated cost of such landscaping. Such surety shall
be conditioned upon the installation of all landscaping required by the
landscape plan within six (6) months of the date of the application and shall
give the City the right to draw upon the surety to install or complete the
landscaping if the applicant fails to do so.
(e) Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds, and other
material or plants not a part of the landscaping.
(f) All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as
is appropriate for the season of the year.
(g) All landscape materials shall be installed according to American
Association of Nurserymen (“AAN”) standards.
(h) All landscaped areas shall be irrigated with an approved automatic
underground irrigation system, designed by an irrigation contractor licensed
by the State of Texas, unless the landscaped area has been designed
utilizing xeriscaping methods. All irrigation systems shall be designed and
sealed in accordance with the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(“TCEQ”), or as may be applicable, its successor entity, and shall be
professionally installed. No irrigation shall be required for undisturbed
natural areas or undisturbed existing trees.
July 21, 2011 282
(4) General Landscaping Requirements
(a) Trees planted shall be a minimum of three inches (3”) measured at 10
inches (10”) above ground level at the time of planting.
(b) All trees planted to meet the minimum landscaping, mitigation or
preservation requirements of this section shall be planted so as to provide
for no impervious material within the drip line of the tree. For the purposes
of determining the drip line to meet the requirements of this section, the
drip line radius shall be measured as being ten (10) times the caliper of the
tree. For example, a six inch (6”) tree will have a sixty inch (60”) or five foot
(5’) radius or a ten foot (10’) diameter. Tree wells or tree grates may be
utilized to meet the requirements of this section. The City, at its option,
may require certification by a registered arborist that adequate space has
been provided for pervious cover beneath the drip line of a tree.
(c) Shrubs, vines and ground cover planted pursuant to this section should be
good, healthy nursery stock. Shrubs shall be a minimum of one-gallon
container size at the time of planting.
(d) Grass areas are encouraged to be planted in species normally grown as
permanent lawns in the City, including Bermuda, Buffalo Grass, Zoysia, or
other drought-tolerant grass. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged,
sprigged or seeded, except in swales or other areas subject to erosion,
which shall require installation of solid sod.
(e) New landscaped areas shall be prepared so as to achieve a soil depth of at
least six inches (6”). The six-inch (6”) soil depth shall consist of seventyfive
percent (75%) topsoil blended with twenty-five percent (25%) compost.
(f) The use of architectural planters in nonresidential districts may be
permitted in fulfillment of landscape requirements subject to
recommendation from the Commission and approval of the City Council at
the time of site plan approval.
(g) Developers and homebuilders are encouraged to use xeriscape plant
materials on model homes to promote use of water-wise landscaping.
(h) Landscape planting shall not be erected or installed in such a manner as to
interfere with traffic view or to impose a safety hazard.
(i) Not less than forty percent (40%) of the total required landscaping shall be
located in the designated front yard.
(5) Landscape Installation Required
(a) A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of the total land area of any proposed
multi-family or nonresidential development shall be landscaped and shall
be comprised of trees, shrubs, sod or other ground cover. In the event of
the construction of a phased development, the minimum twenty percent
(20%) requirement shall apply to each phase as it is developed.
(b) All properties shall provide shade trees at a ratio of nine (9) trees per acre
(43,560 square feet) of gross lot area. Industrial property shall provide
July 21, 2011 283
shade trees at a ratio of nine (9) trees per acre, calculated at sixty percent
(60%) of the gross lot area or by exclusion of the main enclosure structure
ground floor area from the gross lot area, whichever is less. Existing trees
may be counted toward meeting the requirements of this section.
1) Every single family residential lot shall provide a minimum of three (3)
shade trees which shall include a minimum of one (1) tree in the front
yard and one (1) tree in the rear yard. Existing trees that comply with
this regulation can be counted towards the required tree planting,
provided these trees were adequately protected during construction.
2) Any property that is unable to satisfy the tree requirements of this
section shall be required to pay tree mitigation fees in accordance
with SECTION 9I(4) of this UDC.
(c) The use of native and adapted, drought-tolerant plants is encouraged to
meet the requirements of this section.
(d) Artificial plants or turf shall not be counted towards meeting the
requirements of this SECTION 9G.
(6) Landscape Plan Required
A landscape plan shall be submitted to the City for approval. The landscape
plan will be submitted as a part of the site plan. The landscape plan must be
prepared by a landscape architect licensed by the State of Texas and shall
contain the following information:
(a) Location of all existing trees with indication as to those to be preserved;
(b) Location of all plants and landscaping material to be used including paving,
benches, screens, fountains, statues, or other landscaping features;
(c) Species of all plant material to be used;
(d) Size of all plant material to be used;
(e) Spacing of plant material where appropriate;
(f) Layout and description of irrigation, sprinkler, or water system, including
placement of water sources;
(g) Description of maintenance provisions of the landscaping plan; and
(h) Persons responsible for the preparation of the landscape plan.
(7) Nonresidential and Multi-Family Landscape Buffer Requirements
In addition to any screening requirements of SECTION 9H of this UDC, a
nonresidential or multi-family use adjacent to a residential use or residentially
zoned property shall provide a minimum twenty-foot (20’) landscape buffer
adjacent to the property line of the residential use or residentially zoned
property. A minimum of one (1) shade tree shall be planted for each thirty
(30) linear feet of landscape buffer. A minimum of ten (10) shrubs shall be
planted for each fifty (50) linear feet of landscape buffer. All other areas
within the landscape buffer shall be covered with grass or another solid
vegetative cover approved at the time of site plan approval.
July 21, 2011 284
(8) Parking Area Landscaping
Parking lots, vehicular use areas and parked vehicles are to be effectively
screened from the public view and adjacent property. Both the interior and
perimeter of such areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the following
criteria. Areas used for parking or vehicle storage that are under, on or within
buildings are exempt from these standards.
(a) Interior Landscaping
A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the parking areas shall be devoted to
living landscaping, which includes grass, ground covers, plants, shrubs
and trees. Gross parking area is to be measured from the edge of the
parking and/or driveway and sidewalks. The following additional criteria
shall apply to the interior of parking lots:
1) Interior landscape areas shall be protected from vehicular
encroachment of overhang through appropriate wheel stops or curbs.
2) There shall be a minimum of one (1) shade tree and five (5) shrubs
planted for each four hundred (400) square feet, or fraction thereof of
required interior landscape area.
3) Interior areas of parking lots shall contain planting islands located so
as to best relieve the expanse of paving. Planter islands must be
located no farther apart than every twelve (12) parking spaces and at
the terminus of all rows of parking. Such islands shall be a minimum
of 200 square feet (ten feet (10’) by twenty feet (20’)) in size.
4) Planter islands shall contain a combination of trees, shrubs, lawn,
ground cover and other appropriate materials provided such
landscaping does not cause visual interference within the parking
area.
(b) Perimeter Landscaping
All parking lots and vehicular use areas shall be screened from all
abutting properties with a wall, fence, hedge, berm or other durable
landscape barrier. All parking lots and vehicular use areas shall be
screened from all abutting public rights-of-way with a wall, berm or
combination of hedge and berm. Any living barrier shall be established
in a minimum five-foot (5’) planting strip. Plants and materials used in
living barriers shall be at least thirty inches (30”) high at the time of
planting and shall be of a type and species that will attain a minimum
height of three feet (3’) within one (1) year after planting. Any landscape
barrier not containing live plants or trees shall be a minimum of three
feet (3’) high at time of installation. Perimeter landscaping shall be
designed to screen off-street parking lots and other vehicular use areas
from public rights-of-way and adjacent residential properties.
1) Whenever an off-street parking or vehicular use area abuts a public
right-of-way, except a public alley, a perimeter landscape area of at
least fifteen feet (15’) in width shall be maintained between the
July 21, 2011 285
abutting right-of-way and the off-street parking or vehicular area. An
appropriate landscape screen or barrier shall be installed in this area
and the remaining area shall be landscaped with at least grass or
other ground cover. Necessary access ways from the public right-ofway
shall be permitted through all such landscaping.
2) Whenever an off-street parking or vehicular use area abuts an
adjacent residential property line, a perimeter landscape area of at
least ten feet (10’) in width shall be maintained between the edge of
the parking area and the adjacent property line. Access ways
between lots may be permitted through all perimeter landscape areas.
Landscaping shall be designed to visually screen the parking area.
Whenever such property is zoned or used for single-family residential
purposes, a landscape buffer shall include a masonry wall and hedge,
or berm. The screening mechanism shall be a minimum of three feet
(3’) in height and a maximum of eight feet (8’) in height.
3) Perimeter landscape areas shall contain at least one (1) shade tree
for each fifty (50) linear feet, or fraction thereof, of perimeter area.
(9) Approved Landscaping Plant List
(a) Approved Trees
Table 9-1
Approved Shade Trees
Common Name Scientific Name
American elm Ulmus Americana
Anaqua Ehretia anacua
Arizona cypress Cupressus arizonica
Bald cypress Taxodium distichum
Bigtooth maple Acer grandidentatum
Black walnut Juglans nigra
Bur oak Quercus macrocarpa
Canby's oak Quercus canbyi
Carolina basswood Tilia caroliana
Cedar elm Ulmus crassifolia
Chinkapin or Chinquapin oak Quercus muhlenbergii
Chisos red, Graves Quercus gravesii
Durand oak Quercus durandii
Fragrant ash Fraxinus cuspidate
Green ash Fraxinus Pennsylvania
July 21, 2011 286
Common Name Scientific Name
Lacey oak Quercus glaucoides
Little, Texas walnut Juglans microcarpa
Mexican live or Monterrey oak Quercus polymorpha
Mexican sycamore Platanus mexicana
Nuttall Oak Quercus nuttallii
Pecan Carya illinoensis
Red oak Quercus texana
Shin oak Quercus mohriana
Southern live oak Quercus virginiana
Texas ash Fraxinus texansis
Texas red oak Quercus buckleyi (texana)
Texas sycamore Platanus occidentalis
Vasey oak Quercus pungens var.vaseyana
Table 9-2
Approved Ornamental, Evergreen and Palm Trees
Common Name Scientific Name
Aleppo pine Pinus halepensis
Anacacho orchid tree Bauhinia congesta
Bradford Pear Pyrus calleryana
California fan (exotic) Washingtonia filifera
Carolina buckthorn Rhamnus caroliniana
Condalia, brazil Condalia hookeri
Crepe myrtle, etc. (exotic) Lagerstroemia indica, fauriei, and
X's
Desert willow Chilopsis linearis
Dwarf Palmetto Sabel minor
Eastern red cedar Juniperus virginiana
Escarpment live oak Quercus fusiformis
Evergreen Sumac Rhus virens
Flameleaf sumac Rhus lanceolata
Goldenball leadtree Leaucaena retusa
Lavender tree Vitex agnus-castus
July 21, 2011 287
Common Name Scientific Name
Mediterranean fan palm (exotic) Chamaerops humilius
Mexican buckeye Ungnadia speciosa
Mexican Palmetto, sable Sabal mexicana
Mexican pinyon pine, Remote
pine
Pinus cembroides
Mexican redbud Cercis reniformis
Mountain laurel or mescal bean Sophora secundiflora
Possum-haw holly Ilex deciduas
Rusty blackhaw Viburnum rufidulum
Texas Crabapple Mollis texana
Texas or Oklahoma redbud Cercis canadensis var. texensis
Texas Palmetto, sable Sabal texana
Texas persimmon Diospyrus texana
Texas Pistache Pistacia texana
Texas sophora or Eve's
Necklace
Sophora affinis
Wild olive, Mexican wild olive Cordia boissieri
Yaupon holly Ilex vomitoria
(b) Approved Shrubs, Vines, Perennials & Ground Cover
Table 9-3
Approved Shrubs, Vines, Perennials and Ground Cover
Common Name Scientific Name
Agarita, Agarito Berberis (Mahonia) trifoliata
Agarita, Tx. Barberry Berberis spp.
Althea, Rose-of-Sharon Hibiscus syriacus
American Beauty Callicarpu americana
Artemesia Artemesia spp.
Asian Jasmine Trachelospermum asiaticum
Asparagus Fern Asparagus sprengeri
Aster Aster spp.
Autumn Sage Salvia greggii
Bird of Paradise Caesalpinia gilliesi
Blue Sage, Mealy Sage Salvia farenaceae
Blue Shrub Sage Salvia ballotaeflora
Bottlebrush Callistemon spp.
July 21, 2011 288
Common Name Scientific Name
Bougainvilla Bougainvillea
Brazilian Sky Flower Duranta repens
Buckley Yucca Yucca constricta
Bush Morning-Glory Ipomea fitulosa
Butterfly Bush Buddleia spp.
Butterfly Vine Mascagnia spp.
Orchid Vine Stigmaphyllon littorale
Cape Honeysuckle Tecoma capensis
Caroline Jessamine Gelsemium sempervirens
Cat Claw Mimosa, Fragrant
Mimosa
Mimosa bluncifera
Century Plant Agave americans
Cigar Plants Cuphea spp.
Columbine Aquilegia spp.
Confederate Jasmine, Star
Jasmine
Trachelospermum jasminoides
Coppertone Loquat Eriobotrya x "Coppertone"
Coral Honeysuckle Lonicera sempervirens
Coral Vine, Rosa-De-Montana,
Queens Wreath
Antigonon leptopus
Coralberry Symphoricapus orbiculatus
Dwarf Nandina Nandina domestics "nana," etc.
Dwarf Yaupon Ilex vomitoria nana
Elderberry Sambucus Canadensis
Evening Primrose Oenothera speciosa
Fern Acacia Acacia hirta
Firecracker Plant Russelia equisetiformis
Fireman's Cap, Coral Tree Erythina crista-galli
Four-nerve Daisy Hymenoxys scaposa
Frogfruit Phyla humilis
Gayfeather Liatris spp.
Giant Liriope Liriope gigantea
Golden Shrub Daisy Euryops pecinatus
African Bush Daisy Gamolepis chrysanthemoides
Guara Gaura spp.
Hawthorn Crataegus spp.
Heartleaf Hibiscus Hibiscus cardiophyllus
Hibiscus, Texas Star Hibiscus coccineus
Hummingbird Bush Anisacanthus spp.
Illinois Bundleflower Desmanthus illinoensis
Iris Iris spp.
Italian Jasmine Jasminium floridum
Juniper Juniper spp.
Lady Banksia Rose Rosa Banksiae
July 21, 2011 289
Common Name Scientific Name
Lantana Lantana spp.
Lily Turf, Liriope (Std., "Big Blue") Liriope muscari vars
Lindheimer Senna Cassia lindheimeriana
Mexican Bird of Paradise Caesalpinia mexicana
Mexican Butterfly Weed Asclepias tuberosa
Mexican Flame Vine/Love Vine Senecio confuses
Mexican Marigold Tagetes llucida
Mexican Oregano Poliomentha longiflora
Mexican Shrimp Plant Justicia suberecta
Mist Flower Eupatroium spp.
Mondo Grass, Monkey Grass Ophiopogon japonica
Mountain Sage Salvia regla
Nandina Nandina domestics spp.
Narrow-leaf Yucca Yucca agustifolia
Passion Vine Passiflora allatocaerrulea (P.
pfordtii)
Passionflower Passifloria incarnate
Pigeonberry Rivina humilis
Pink Skullcap Scutelleria spp.
Pomegranate (Regular and
Dwarf)
Puncia granatum
Prairie Phlox Phlox spp.
Primrose Jasmine Jasminum mesnyi
Primrose Primrose spp.
Prostrate Rosemary Rosemarinus officinales vars.
Purple Coneflower Echinacea purpurea
Red Yucca Hesperaloe parviflora
Rock Rose Pavonia lasiopetala
Rosemary Rosemarinus spp.
Salvia Salvia spp.
Santolina Santolina spp.
Shrimp Plant Justicia spp.
Silk Tassel Garrya ovata lindheimer
Softleaf Yucca Yucca pendula
Sotol Dasylirion spp.
Spanish Dagger Yucca treculeana
St. John's Wort Hypericum spp.
Texas Clematis, Scarlet
Leatherflower
Clematis texensis
Texas Elbow Bush Foresteriera pubeseebs
Texas Silverleaf, Sage, Cenizo Leucophyllum frutescens
Texas Wisteria Wisteria macrostachya
Thompson Yucca Yucca thompsonia
Trumpet Vine,Trumpet Creeper Campsis radicans x "Madame
July 21, 2011 290
Common Name Scientific Name
Galen"
Turk's Cap Malvaviscus drummondii
Twisted-leaf Yucca Yucca rupicola
Verbena Verbena spp.
Virginia Creeper Parthenocissus quinquefolia
Wax Myrtle - Dwarf, Standard Myrica cerifera
White Bush Honeysuckle Lonicera albiflora
Winecup Callirhoe involuerata
Wisteria, evergreen Wisteria millettia veticulata
Witchhazel Hamamelis virginiana
Yarrow Achillea millefolium
Yew Podocarpus macrophyllus
Yucca Yucca spp.
(c) Approved Ornamental Grasses
Table 9-4
Approved Ornamental Grasses
Common Name Scientific Name
Bamboo Muhly Muhlenbergia dumosa
Big Bluestern Andropogon gerardii
Deer Muhly Muhlenbergia rigens
Eastern Gama grass Tripsacum dactyloides
Gulf Muhly Muhlenbergia capillaris
Indian Grass Sorghastrum natums
Inland Sea Oats Chasmanthium latifolium
Lindheimer Muhly Muhlenbergia lindheimer
Little Bluestem Schizaachyrium scoparium
Mexican Feathergrass Stipa tenuissima
Pine Muhly Muhlenbergia dubia
Seep Muhly Muhlenbergia reverehonii
Sideoats grama Bouteloua curtipendula
Switch Grass Panicum virgatum
Weeping Muhly Muhlenbergia dubioides
Western Wheatgrass Agropyron smithii
(d) Approved Turf Grasses
Table 9-5
Approved Turf Grasses
Common Name Scientific Name
Bermuda grass Cynodon dactylon var. dactylon
July 21, 2011 291
Buffalograss Buchloe dactyloides
Blue Grama Bouteloua gracilis
Zoysia Grass Varieties Zoysia sp.
Tall Fescue Festuca arundinacea
(e) Undesirable Trees
Table 9-6
Undesirable Trees
Common Name Scientific Name
Arizona Ash Fraxinus velut
Ashe-Juniper or Mountain Cedar Juniperus ashei
Box Elder Acer negundo
Chinaberry tree Melia azedarach L.
Chinese Loquat or Loquat Eriobotrya japonica
Chinese Parasol/Varnish Tree Firmiana simplex
Chinese Tallow Sapium sebiferum
Golden-Rain Tree Koelrenteria paniculata
Huisache or Sweet Acacia Acacia farnesiana
Japanese Plum Prunus salicina
Ligustrum or Privet Ligustrum japonicum
Lombardy Popular Populus nigra "italica"
Mesquite Prosopis glandulosa
Mimosa Albizia julibrissin
Paper Mulberry Broussonetia papyrifera (L.) L=(Her.
ex. Vent.)
Saltcedar Tamarix ramosissima Ledeb.
Sugarberry or Hackberry Celtis laevigata
Tree of Heaven Ailanthus altissima
H. SCREENING
(1) Fences and Screening in Residential Areas
(a) Height
No fence, screen, or wall shall exceed eight feet (8’) in height. No fence,
screen or wall shall be constructed in the front yard.
(b) Permitted Materials
1) Fences may be constructed of pressure-treated wood, decorative
metal, poly-coated chain link or similar woven wire mesh, stone, brick,
or other materials traditionally used in private fence construction.
2) Decorative fences shall be constructed of pressure-treated wood
picket, decorative metal, stone or brick, or a combination thereof.
July 21, 2011 292
Solid surface area of any decorative fence shall not exceed fifty
percent (50%) of the total surface area.
(c) Prohibited Materials
Above-ground electrical fencing, uncoated galvanized chain link fabric,
wire mesh (such as hog wire or chicken wire), and barbed wire are
prohibited, except on parcels or lots one (1) acre or greater in size in
conjunction with the containment of livestock or farm animals.
(d) Fences within Public Easements
Fences within a public easement shall have a gate or removable panel
to allow for maintenance access to such easement. The City shall not
be responsible for damage to any fence that may occur as a result of
maintenance of any utility within the easement.
(2) Fences and Screening in Nonresidential and Multi-Family Areas
(a) Height
No fence, screen, or wall shall exceed eight feet (8’) in height. No fence,
screen, or wall within a required front yard shall exceed eight feet (8’) in
height. Fences constructed in the front yard shall be non-opaque and
shall not interfere with the sight visibility triangle as required by this UDC
or any other applicable City ordinances.
(b) Permitted Materials
Fences may be constructed of pressure-treated wood, decorative metal,
chain link or similar woven wire mesh, stone, brick, or other materials
traditionally used in private fence construction.
(c) Prohibited Materials
Above-ground electrical fencing and wire mesh (such as hog wire or
chicken wire) are prohibited except on parcels or lots of one (1) acre or
greater in size in conjunction with the containment of livestock or farm
animals. A security fence not less than six feet (6’) in height may be
topped by barbed wire or razor wire in areas zoned Limited Industrial
District or Industrial Park District upon recommendation by the
Commission and approval by the City Council at the time of site plan
approval.
(d) Fences Adjacent to Residential Property
Where any nonresidential or multi-family use, lot or parcel is adjacent to
or separated by only a local street or alley from a lot or parcel that is
zoned for single family residential use, the nonresidential or multi-family
use shall have constructed on it a masonry screening wall that is a
minimum of eight feet (8’) in height. The screen shall be located no
closer to the street than the property line. Such screening wall shall be
maintained in good condition. Any sections of this UDC or any other City
ordinances concerning sight obstructions of intersections shall be
applicable to the screen where it is intersected by a right-of-way. Where
July 21, 2011 293
any nonresidential or multi-family use, lot or parcel is located in such a
manner so as to be at a higher elevation than an adjacent lot or parcel
that is zoned for single-family residential use, the required masonry
screening wall shall be constructed on the higher elevation so as to
mitigate the adjacent residential property from the impacts of the
adjacent use.
(e) Screening of Trash Receptacles
All trash receptacles shall be screened from public view by a solid
screening wall, which must be a minimum of eight feet (8’) in height and
constructed of a masonry material. Gates for a trash receptacle screen
shall be opaque and of solid metal and shall be closed at all times
except when loading and unloading.
(f) Fences within Public Easements
Fences within a public easement shall have a gate or removable panel
to allow for maintenance access to such easement. No solid fencing or
any other type of fence or structure that restricts the flow of water may
be placed across a drainage easement without the written permission of
the City Engineer. The City shall not be responsible for damage to any
fence that may occur as a result of maintenance of any utility within the
easement.
(g) Gates for Vehicular Access
Gates designed for vehicular access shall be set back from the property
line a minimum of twenty-four feet (24’).
(3) Screening Along Arterial Roadways
(a) Requirement Criteria
Where subdivisions are platted so that the rear or side yards of lots are
adjacent to a principal or secondary arterial roadway as described in
SECTION 13A of this UDC, or are separated from a principal or
secondary arterial roadway by an alley, the developer shall provide, at its
sole expense, a minimum eight-foot (8’) tall masonry screening wall. All
screening shall be placed at least five feet (5’) behind the right-of-way
line and the area between the fence and the right-of-way must be
landscaped. Any section of this UDC or any other City ordinance
concerning sight obstructions of intersections shall be applicable to the
screen where it is intersected by a right-of-way.
(b) Parcels or lots one (1) acre or greater in size located in the A zoning district
and used in conjunction with the containment of livestock or farm animals
are exempt from the screening wall requirements of this SECTION 9H.
(c) Screening Alternatives
An alternative form of screening, in lieu of the masonry wall, may be
approved by the Commission with the preliminary plat application.
Alternatives that may be considered include:
July 21, 2011 294
1) A living/landscaped screen in conjunction with decorative metal (e.g.,
decorative iron) fence sections with masonry columns;
2) A combination of berms and living/landscaped screening;
3) A combination of berms, decorative masonry walls and
living/landscaped screening, either with or without a decorative metal
or “FenceCrete” type of fence with masonry columns; or
4) Some other creative screening alternative if it meets the spirit and
intent of this section, if it is demonstrated to be long-lasting and
generally maintenance-free, and if the Commission finds it to be in the
public interest to approve the alternative screening device.
(d) Time Required for Opacity
Any required screening device shall be, or shall achieve, at least six feet
(6’) in height and at least ninety percent (90%) opacity within three (3)
years of initial installation/planting.
(e) Maintenance Easement
A wall/screening maintenance easement at least five feet (5’) in width
shall be dedicated to the homeowners association on the private lot side
and adjacent to the entire length of the screening wall or device for
maintenance and repair of the screening wall.
(f) Installation
The screening/wall/device shall be installed prior to final acceptance of
the subdivision public improvements. All landscape materials, if utilized,
shall be installed in accordance with SECTION 9G. Failure to properly
install all components of a required screening wall or device within the
prescribed time frame shall constitute a violation of this UDC, and shall
authorize the City Manager to refuse acceptance of the subdivision
public improvements.
(g) Design of Walls
All masonry, wrought iron, steel or aluminum screening wall plans and
details must be designed and sealed by a licensed professional
engineer, and must be approved by the City. Use of chain-link, chickenwire,
hog-wire fencing, and any other material similar in appearance and
quality is expressly prohibited for meeting the requirements of this
section.
(h) Height of Screening
The height of required screening devices, including spans between
columns, shall be a minimum of six feet (6’) and shall be no more than
eight feet (8’). Decorative columns, pilasters, stone caps, sculptural
elements, and other similar features may exceed the maximum height by
up to two feet (2’) for a total maximum height of ten feet (10’) for these
features.
July 21, 2011 295
(i) Other Easements
Screening fences, walls and devices shall not be constructed within any
portion of a utility or drainage easement unless specifically authorized by
the City and by any other applicable utility provider(s).
I. TREE PRESERVATION AND MITIGATION
(1) Purpose and Intent
(a) The purpose of this SECTION 9I is to conserve, protect and enhance
existing healthy trees and natural landscape. It is recognized that the
preservation of existing trees contributes to the overall quality and
environment of the City. Trees can and do contribute to the processes of
purification, oxygenation, regeneration, groundwater recharge, reduction of
pollution and contaminants in aquifers, erosion and dust control, abatement
of noise, provision of wildlife habitat and enhancement of property values.
Indiscriminate clearing or stripping of natural vegetation on any parcel is
prohibited.
(b) It is hereby declared that the intent of the City is to encourage the
preservation of all trees within the City limits. While the layout of a property
with respect to the placement of buildings, parking facilities and other site
requirements is at the discretion of the developer of the property, it is the
policy of the City to promote site layout and design in a manner which
preserves the maximum amount of Protected and Heritage Trees, as
defined in paragraph (2)(b) of this section, possible.
(2) Applicability and Exemptions
(a) The provisions of this section are applicable to the following:
1) All new residential and nonresidential development within the City;
2) Redevelopment of any residential or nonresidential property within the
City that results in an increase in the building footprint or the total
destruction and reconstruction;
3) Any grading, filling or clearing of land in the City limits; and
4) Any selective or individual removal of any Protected or Heritage Tree
in the City limits.
(b) The following definitions shall be applicable to the provisions of this
section:
1) Protected Trees
Trees having a DBH (diameter at breast height, which is measured
four feet (4’) above existing ground level) that is between eight
inches (8”) and less than twenty-four inches (24”) are designated as
“Protected Trees.”
2) Heritage Trees
Trees having a DBH greater than or equal to twenty-four inches
(24”) are designated as “Heritage Trees.”
July 21, 2011 296
3) Damage
Damage shall be considered any injury to a tree including, but not
limited to:
a) Uprooting;
b) Severance of the root system or main trunk;
c) Storage of topsoil, construction materials, debris or chemicals
within the drip line area;
d) Compaction of soil within the drip line area;
e) A grade change that exceeds six inches (6”) over more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of a drip line area in the natural
grade above a root system or within the drip line area;
f) Pruning or removal of more than twenty-five percent (25%) of
the living tissue; or
g) Paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious material
within the drip line area. Tree grates or tree wells may be
provided to preserve pervious surface within the drip line area.
(c) The following are exempt from the preservation, mitigation and permitting
requirements of this section:
1) Trees located on a platted single-family lot;
2) Protected Trees located within ten feet (10’) of and inside of the
building footprint;
3) Protected Trees located within the area of a proposed on-site sewage
facility (“OSSF”);
4) Protected Trees located within a right-of-way to be dedicated to and
maintained by the City and shown on the City’s Thoroughfare Master
Plan;
5) Protected Trees located within any utility easement;
6) Trees damaged or destroyed by floods, fire, wind or other natural
causes;
7) Trees that have been determined by a registered arborist to be dead
or dying; and
8) The following tree species:
Table 9-7
Exempted Trees
Common Name Scientific Name
Hackberry Celtis occidentalis
Eastern Red Cedar Juniperus virginiana
Common Ashe Juniper Juniperis ashei
Chinaberry Melia azedarach
July 21, 2011 297
Bois d’Arc Maclura pomifera
Honey Locust Gleditsia triancanthos
Mesquite Prosopis spp.
Ligustrum Ligustrum spp.
(d) All Heritage Trees to be removed shall be mitigated in accordance with the
provisions of this SECTION 9I.
(3) Tree Preservation
The existing natural landscape character, especially native oaks, elms, and
pecan trees, shall be preserved to the maximum extent reasonable and
feasible. Except as otherwise exempted in this SECTION 9I, a tree removal
permit (“TRP”) is required for the removal of any tree with a DBH greater than
eight inches (8”).
(a) Protected Trees
A Protected Tree not exempt from preservation in paragraph (2)(c)
above may be removed upon the approval of a TRP by the Building
Official authorizing such action. Any decision of the Building Official
regarding a TRP may be appealed to the BOA in accordance with
SECTION 3D(3)(a) of this UDC.
(b) Heritage Trees
A Heritage Tree may be removed upon the approval of a TRP by the
Commission authorizing such action. Any decision of the Commission
regarding a Tree Removal Permit may be appealed to the City Council.
The removal of a Heritage Tree shall be mitigated in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
(4) Tree Mitigation
Any trees that are removed or damaged as a result of the approval of a TRP
shall be mitigated on the same site as the proposed development. The
species of trees planted for mitigation purposes may not include those listed
as exempt in paragraph (2)(c) above nor any of the undesirable trees
identified in Table 9-6. All trees planted for mitigation purposes must be a
species of shade tree identified in Table 9-1. In the event that mitigation is
not feasible on the same site as the proposed development, an applicant may
request to donate trees, meeting the mitigation requirements of this section,
to be planted at public parks, schools, or other approved public facilities
throughout the City or provide a payment-in-lieu of park land dedication,
which will be used to place trees at public parks, schools, or other approved
public facilities throughout the City. Tree mitigation funds may also be utilized
to install irrigation, shrubs, or other landscaping facilities, for maintenance of
existing landscaped areas, for repair or removal of damaged or destroyed
trees, for preservation and protection of existing Protected and Heritage
Trees, and for the purchase of equipment to be utilized for the preservation or
protection of existing trees. Mitigation requirements are:
July 21, 2011 298
(a) Protected Trees
Protected trees shall be mitigated at a one-to-one (1:1), DBH-inch ratio
for every tree removed. Replacement trees shall have a minimum DBH
of three inches (3”) measured ten inches (10”) above the ground.
(b) Heritage Trees
Heritage trees shall be mitigated at a three-to-one (3:1) DBH-inch ratio
for every tree removed. Replacement trees shall have a minimum DBH
of three inches (3”) measured ten inches (10”) above the ground.
(c) Damaged Trees
Any trees that are designated for preservation and are damaged during
the construction process or that die within two (2) years of issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall be mitigated in accordance with SECTION
9I(4)(a) and (b) above.
(d) Mitigated Trees
Trees planted and counted towards the necessary mitigation
requirements that are damaged after planting or that die within two (2)
years of issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be mitigated at a
one-to-one (1:1), DBH-inch ratio for every tree damaged or that dies.
(5) Tree Protection Standards
(a) All trees to be preserved on site shall be protected from damage caused by
site excavation or construction in accordance with the following:
1) All trees shall be protected by a fence, frame or box constructed
around the drip line of the preserved tree. Protection measures may
not be removed until construction is complete.
2) A minimum of three inches (3”) of mulch or compost shall be spread
beneath the drip line of the preserved tree.
3) No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, or trenches, place any
paving material or place any drive or parking area within the drip line
of any Protected or Heritage Tree without prior written approval of the
City Manager at the time of site plan approval.
4) No person shall attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or
other apparatus to any Protected or Heritage Tree.
(b) The Building Official shall determine the health of oak trees within the City
to determine if a tree is threatened by fatal diseases including, but not
limited to, Oak Wilt. It is further declared that the loss of oak trees growing
on private and public property substantially depreciates the value of
property within the City and impairs the safety, good order, general welfare
and convenience of the public. It is the intent of the City to control and
prevent the spread of Oak Wilt.
July 21, 2011 299
1) If any oak tree is wounded by intentional damage or pruning or as a
result of natural causes, the damaged area shall be immediately
treated with tree wound dressing.
2) All necessary and reasonable efforts shall be given during the
permitted removal of any trees to utilize best known practices to
prevent the spread of Oak Wilt disease to any other surrounding
trees.
(6) Tree Preservation Credits – Nonresidential and Multi-Family Developments
(7) To encourage the preservation of existing Protected or Heritage Trees contained
within a proposed development, the following minimum tree preservation credits
may be provided. Caliper is the diameter of the tree in inches measured at ten
inches (10”) above the ground.
(a) Protected Trees shall receive a credit against the minimum required
landscaping or mitigation standards at a one-to-one (1:1), caliper-inch ratio;
(b) Heritage Trees shall receive a credit against the minimum required
landscaping or mitigation standards at a three-to-one (3:1), caliper-inch
ratio; or
(c) Protected and Heritage Trees located within a required buffer area shall
receive a credit against the minimum buffer requirements at a one-to-one
(1:1), DBH-inch ratio.
(8) Tree Survey Required
Every application for a final plat for residential development or site plan for
nonresidential and multi-family development shall be accompanied by a tree
survey that includes the following information:
(a) Total number of caliper inches on the site;
(b) Total number of caliper inches to be removed; and
(c) Total number of caliper inches to be preserved.
(9) Tree Removal Permit
A tree removal permit is required for the removal of any Protected or Heritage
Trees not exempt in SECTION 9I(2)(c) above. A TRP shall be submitted with
the final plat for residential development or site plan for nonresidential and
multi-family development. In order to obtain a tree removal permit, the
applicant must submit an application, which shall contain a tree preservation
plan showing the following:
(a) Existing/proposed topography;
(b) Location of property lines, easement, rights-of-ways, setbacks, parking
areas and sidewalks;
(c) Location, species and size (in DBH) of each Protected and Heritage Tree,
except those trees exempted by SECTION 9I(2)(c) above;
(d) A tree inventory that summarizes the following:
July 21, 2011 300
1) Total number of caliper inches on the site;
2) Total number of caliper inches to be removed;
3) Total number of caliper inches to be preserved;
4) Location of any proposed tree mitigation; and
5) Any proposed tree preservation credits; and
(e) A summary of the tree protection methods to be utilized.
(10) Criteria for Tree Removal Permit
In order to receive approval of a TRP, the Building Official or the Commission,
as applicable, or the City Council on appeal, must make certain findings as
outlined in this section. The Building Official or the Commission, or the City
Council on appeal, may require submittal of a report from a registered arborist
to verify reasons for removal or to determine alternatives to tree removal.
Each application for a TRP shall be reviewed and a decision rendered on
approval or denial based on the following criteria:
(a) The condition of the tree with respect to disease, danger of falling,
proximity to existing or proposed structures, interference with existing or
proposed private or public facilities or services, or if the tree presents a
clear public safety hazard.
(b) The tree is dead or is physically damaged to the degree that it is clear it is
likely to fall and injure persons or property.
(c) The tree is located within, or within proximity to, existing or proposed public
rights-of-way and is causing damage to existing public or private facilities
or services or may cause damage to proposed public or private facilities,
and such facilities or services cannot reasonably be relocated or the
damage alleviated.
(d) The condition or location of the tree presents a clear public safety hazard
or the foreseeable danger of property damage to an existing or proposed
structure, and such hazard or danger cannot reasonably be alleviated by
treatment or pruning.
(e) The tree is proposed for removal in order for the property to achieve
compliance with other applicable City requirements and standards (i.e., site
design or use standards) or the property is the location for future
construction.
(f) Removal of the tree will not have a significant negative impact on erosion,
soil stability, flow of surface waters, protection of adjacent trees, or
windbreaks.
(g) Removal of the tree will not have a significant negative impact on the tree
densities, sizes, canopies and the diversity of the species of existing trees
in the area; provided, however, consideration shall be given when
alternatives to tree removal have been considered and no reasonable
July 21, 2011 301
alternative exists to allow the property to be used as permitted in the
zoning district.
J. PARK AND OPEN SPACE DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS
(1) Purpose
(a) The purpose of this section is to provide for the adequate provision of park
land and open space to meet the needs of a growing citizen population;
improvements to existing park land; the establishment, maintenance and
operation of a park land dedication fund; the establishment of requirements
and procedures for governing required dedications of park land or
improvements to existing park land by subdividers of land; and the
provision of cash payments-in-lieu of park land dedication by subdividers of
land in certain cases.
(b) It is hereby declared by the City Council that recreational areas in the form
of parks and open spaces are necessary and in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare, and that the only adequate procedure to
provide for park land and park improvements is to integrate such a
requirement into the procedure for planning and developing property or
subdivisions in the City, whether such development consists of new
residential construction on vacant land or the addition of new dwelling units
on existing residential land. It is the City’s policy to require subdividers of
residential subdivisions and lots to provide for park land and park facilities
at the time of development approval in proportion to the need for such
improvements created by the developments and in proportion to the
benefits received from contribution of such facilities.
(2) Applicability
The park land dedication and park development requirements of this section
shall be applicable to every residential subdivision developed under the
provisions of this Code, whether such subdivision consists of new residential
construction on vacant land or the addition of new dwelling units on existing
residential land, within the City limits or the City’s ETJ.
(3) Submittal Requirements
(a) Prior to submittal of a subdivision master plan or preliminary plat, a general
parks plan shall be submitted and shall contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
1) Location and size of any proposed parks to be dedicated to the public
or to be retained as private park land;
2) A statement of the suitability of the park land in meeting the criteria in
SECTION 9J(9) of this UDC;
3) A general park development plan including any proposed
improvements; and
4) A phasing plan.
July 21, 2011 302
(b) Prior to submittal of a final plat, a detailed parks plan shall be submitted
and shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
1) Location and size of proposed park(s);
2) A statement of the suitability of the park land in meeting the criteria in
SECTION 9J(9) of this UDC; and
3) A detailed plan of any proposed improvements, including cost.
(c) The Commission shall review the general parks plan prior to approval of a
subdivision master plan or preliminary plat. Review should be based upon
the Comprehensive Plan, as adopted by the City, and the standards and
provisions contained herein regarding the amount and location of park land
and payments-in-lieu of park land dedication.
(d) All park land to be dedicated to the City shall meet the suitability
requirements of SECTION 9J(9).
(4) Park Land Dedication Requirements
(a) Land Dedication
A final plat establishing a residential subdivision either within the City or
within the ETJ of the City shall contain the dedication of an area of land
for park purposes meeting the requirements set out in this section, or a
notation signed by the Building Official of receipt of an approved cash
payment-in-lieu of park land dedication. The subdivider of a residential
subdivision shall dedicate to the City developed park land in the amount
as established within the fee schedule adopted by the City Council. A
proposed plat submitted for approval must:
1) Show the location and dimensions of the area proposed to be
dedicated for park land;
2) Show the number of dwelling units to be located within the proposed
subdivision (whether single- or multi-family units);
3) Tell whether all or any part of the property to be dedicated as a park is
located in a special flood hazard area, as such areas are defined in
this UDC; and
4) Show the proposed streets and utilities to serve the parcel to be
dedicated as park land.
(b) Development of Areas Smaller Than Five (5) Acres
The development of park areas smaller than five (5) acres for public park
purposes is deemed to be impractical. If fewer than five (5) acres are
proposed to be created by a plat, then prior to filing the plat, the
subdivider shall be required to pay to the City the applicable cash
payment-in-lieu of park land dedication. No plat showing a dedication of
fewer than five (5) acres for a public park shall be recommended by the
Commission or approved by the City Council. While dedication of park
land to the City in an amount of fewer than five (5) acres is deemed
July 21, 2011 303
impractical, it is the City’s policy to encourage the development of private
park land in accordance with SECTION 9J(10) below and to provide
credit for development of these private park lands accordingly.
(c) Dedication Procedures
The owner of property for a residential subdivision shall be required at
final plat approval to dedicate park land. Dedication of park land shall be
evidenced by a formal dedication on the plat to be recorded. The land so
dedicated and conveyed shall not be subject to any reservations of
record, encumbrances of any kind, or easements, which in the opinion of
the City will interfere with or materially increase the cost of making such
land available for parks or recreational purposes.
(d) Development of Subdivision in Phases
If a subdivision is to be developed in phases and the final platting of the
park area to be dedicated is to be included in a future phase, the
subdivider shall be required to provide a notation on the plat which
acknowledges that dedication of park land to serve said subdivision will
occur with the platting of future phases.
(e) Right to Accept/Reject Land
If the City determines that sufficient park area is already in the public
domain within proximity of the proposed development, or if the recreation
needs for the area would be better served by expanding or improving
existing parks, the City has the right to accept the dedication or to refuse
same and require a cash payment-in-lieu of park land dedication.
(5) Payment-in-Lieu of Park Land Dedication Requirements
(a) Right to Request Waiver of Dedication Requirements
A subdivider obligated to make a dedication of park land may request
that the City waive the required dedication of park land, in whole or in
part, and accept a cash payment-in-lieu of park land dedication. Any
request for a waiver to the park land dedication requirements shall be
subject to review and recommendation by the Commission and approval
by the City Council.
(b) Required Payment-in-Lieu of Park Land Dedication
Any subdivider who is required to make a cash payment-in-lieu of park
land dedication or who is granted a waiver in accordance with SECTION
9J(5)(a) above shall make a cash payment-in-lieu of park land dedication
in accordance with this section. The amount of such cash payment-inlieu
of park land dedication shall be calculated by multiplying the number
of dwelling units proposed to be established by the plat times the amount
per dwelling unit as established by the fee schedule set from time to time
by resolution of the City Council. A cash payment-in-lieu of park land
dedication shall be made prior to the recordation of the final plat.
(6) Park Land Development Agreements
July 21, 2011 304
As an alternative to park land dedication in accordance with SECTION 9J(4)
and payment-in-lieu of park land dedication in accordance with SECTION
9J(5), a subdivider and the City (within the sole discretion of the City) may
enter into a community facilities agreement or development agreement to
structure other arrangements for the development of parks and park systems
in the City in accordance with this UDC. Such agreements must further the
City's overall park land development goals.
(7) Park Development
(a) A subdivider who elects to dedicate park land in accordance with SECTION
9J(4) above shall improve all dedicated public park land with improvements
approved by the City Manager. Design, specification, and construction of
the improvements shall be subject to review and approval by the City.
Construction of the improvements must be completed within one (1) year of
the approval of the final plat of the subdivision. No final plat shall be
recorded for any subdivision in which completion of the required park land
improvements has not been accepted by the City; however, in the event a
subdivider requests that a final plat be approved prior to completion of the
required improvements, surety for construction of improvements may be
provided in the same manner as required of other subdivision and siterelated
construction in accordance with SECTION 4N(7) of this UDC.
(b) In lieu of constructing the improvements required in SECTION 9J(7)(a)
above, the subdivider may elect to make a cash payment-in-lieu of
construction to the City to meet the City’s current or future recreational
needs. If a developer who has dedicated land in accordance with
SECTION 9J(4) above elects to make a payment-in-lieu of park
development, the City shall utilize those funds for improvement of park land
within the subdivision in which the funds are collected. In the event there
are remaining funds after development of said park land, the City may
utilize the remaining funds to complete improvements in any public park
within the City.
(c) If the subdivider elects payment-in-lieu of park land dedication in
accordance with SECTION 9J(5) above, then the subdivider shall make a
cash payment-in-lieu of construction to the City for the required
improvements in addition to the payment-in-lieu of park land dedication.
Cash payments made in accordance with this paragraph may be utilized to
complete improvements in any public park within the City.
(d) Cash payments-in-lieu of required improvements shall be calculated by
multiplying the number of dwelling units times the price per dwelling unit as
established by the fee schedule set from time to time by resolution of the
City Council.
(8) Park Land Dedication Fund
(a) Special Fund
The City shall reserve all payments-in-lieu of park land dedication and
any accrued interest from the payments-in-lieu of park land dedication in
July 21, 2011 305
a separate account from the general funds of the City. This fund shall be
known and identified as the “Park Land Dedication Fund.”
(b) Deposit/Expenditure of Park Land Dedication Fund
The City shall deposit sums collected as cash payments-in-lieu of park
land dedication and cash payments-in-lieu of improvements in the Park
Land Dedication Fund. The City shall expend such funds collected for
the acquisition of land or for the improvement of existing parks on a firstin,
first-out basis.
(c) Records and Method of Expenditure
The City shall maintain records detailing the receipts and expenditures
for the Park Land Dedication Fund. All funds deposited as credit for
payments-in-lieu of park land dedication may be utilized for the
acquisition and/or development of park land within the City. All funds
collected as payments-in-lieu of park land development shall be utilized
for the development of park land in accordance with SECTION 9J(8)(b)
above.
(9) Park Land Design Criteria
(a) Location
Any land to be dedicated to meet the requirements of this section shall
be reasonably located and adaptable for use as park land and/or
recreation facility, consistent with the most recent edition of the
Comprehensive Plan, as adopted by the City Council.
(b) Land Suitability
The Commission shall review the suitability of proposed park land. The
location, access, size, shape, topography, natural drainage, utilities,
parking facilities, and wooded areas and other vegetative cover of the
parcel or tract of land to be dedicated shall be appropriate for public
parks and recreation purposes. All such park land shall be designated
and located so as to satisfy the requirements of this section.
(c) Usable Land
At least fifty percent (50%) of proposed park land dedication site shall be
level, well drained and suitable for open play. Such land shall be located
outside of any 100-year floodplain or any other special flood zone
identified on the most recently approved FEMA FIRM map and shall not
exceed five percent (5%) slope.
(d) Access
Access to park land designated on a subdivision plat shall be provided
by the dedication of at least two hundred feet (200’) of street frontage in
a manner satisfactory to the City, preferably at the corner of two (2)
intersecting streets. When the land abutting the designated park land is
developed, the subdivider of such abutting land shall furnish and pay for
all paving of all abutting street frontage.
July 21, 2011 306
(e) Utilities
Potable water and wastewater connections shall be readily available at
the park site with water and wastewater lines located along the street
frontage and stubbed out at the park land site. The applicant must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that sufficient living unit
equivalents that are not otherwise committed to other property are
available to serve the park within these water and wastewater lines.
(f) Drainage Improvements
Any detention ponds and/or other drainage facilities to be constructed in
areas that are to be dedicated as park land must be designed and
constructed to also allow for recreational use. The subdivider may be
required to demonstrate that the design, placement and construction of
such ponds meet the requirements of the City.
(g) Floodplain
The following standards shall apply to all land proposed for dedication or
park land which is located in a FEMA-designated floodplain or other
special flood hazard area:
1) Amount of Credit
Every one (1) acre of proposed dedicated park land that is located
within the floodplain or other special flood-hazard area shall count as
one-half (1/2) acre of land towards the total park land dedication
requirement.
(h) Criteria for Park Land
Floodplain areas will be considered for eligibility as park land to be
dedicated based on the following criteria:
1) The floodplain area is easily accessible and has adequate street
frontage.
2) There has been minimal alteration of the natural character of the
waterway, the floodplain area and the associated riparian habitat;
however, some improvements may be necessary for City access and
maintenance.
3) In no case will floodplain areas be accepted which are less than one
hundred feet (100’) in width.
4) The configuration and topography of the area is suitable for the
placement of low-impact facilities such as playgrounds, picnic facilities
and open play fields.
(i) Disturbed Area
Any disturbed park land shall be restored and the soil stabilized by a
vegetative cover by the subdivider.
(j) Disclosures
July 21, 2011 307
Prior to dedication of park land, the subdivider shall make full disclosure
of the presence of any hazardous substances and/or underground
storage tanks (“USTs”) of which the subdivider has knowledge. The
City, at its discretion, may proceed to conduct such initial environmental
tests and surveys on the land as it may deem appropriate, and the
subdivider shall grant to the City and its agents and employees such
reasonable access to the land as is necessary to conduct such surveys
and tests. If the results of such surveys and tests indicate a reasonable
possibility of environmental contamination or the presence of USTs, the
City may require further surveys and tests to be performed at the
subdivider’s expense as the City may deem necessary prior to its
acceptance of the dedication, or in the alternative, the subdivider may be
required to identify alternative property or pay the payments-in-lieu of
such park land dedication.
(k) Trash and Debris
The park site shall be free of trash and debris. No vehicles, equipment,
materials or supplies shall be parked, staged, stocked, stacked or stored
within and about the park site or under the canopy of or within the drip
line of any trees, bushes or shrubs during the construction of subdivision
improvements. If the condition of the dedicated park land is disturbed
during construction of subdivision improvements, the subdivider shall be
responsible for returning the dedicated land to its previous condition prior
to or at the time of final plat filing. The public improvements to be
constructed per the applicable subdivision plat will not be accepted by
the City until such time as the above conditions have been met.
(l) Areas Not Meeting the Minimum Requirements
In the event that areas proposed for dedication do not meet the grade,
slope, or other requirements for park land dedication found in this
section, but are known to contain sensitive environmental features, the
City Council may, at its discretion and after review by the Commission,
waive the standards of this section subject to the following limitations
that such areas shall:
1) provide recreational or educational opportunities for the surrounding
community in lieu of park land dedication;
2) be given a partial credit against the requirement of park land
dedication and/or payment of fees; and
3) meet any additional standards deemed necessary by the Commission
pertaining to the dedication of park land containing sensitive
environmental features.
(10) Private Parks
(a) Private Park Land Required
It is the intent of the City to provide for adequate areas of park land
within every subdivision as deemed practical by the City. All residential
July 21, 2011 308
subdivisions developed after the effective date of this UDC that do not
dedicate park land in accordance with SECTION 9J(4),shall be required
to dedicate an area as private park land or open space. The amount of
private park land dedicated and amenities provided shall be
recommended by the Commission and approved by the Council.
(b) Credit for Private Park Land
Up to fifty percent (50%) in area of a subdivision's total park land
dedication requirement may be satisfied through the dedication of a
private park within the subdivision. Up to fifty percent (50%) of the park
land development fee may be satisfied through the development of a
private park within the subdivision.
(c) Maintenance of Private Parks
The subdivider must submit a condominium declaration, homeowners
covenants, conditions and restrictions (“CCRs”) or a similar document
that establishes the private ownership and maintenance responsibility
relating to any private park areas, together with a mechanism for funding
the maintenance of the park that is established to meet the requirements
of this section. In addition, a plat note must be included on the
preliminary plat and final plat stating the ownership and maintenance
responsibility relating to all private park areas as belonging to the
condominium regime or HOA.
(d) Requirement of Continued Use
A restrictive covenant shall be recorded at the time of the recording of
the plat, which covenant shall run with the land subdivided. The
covenant shall restrict use of private parks and facilities to park and
recreational purposes and must be submitted for approval by the City
prior to final plat acceptance.
(e) Security for Performance
The City may require financial assurances from the subdivider that the
private park will be developed and completed, with assurances that a
failure by the subdivider to timely complete the improvements to the park
shall result in dedication of the private park to the City and the proceeds
of the financial assurances as offered become the property of the City for
use in completing the park.
SECTION 10 - PARKING STANDARDS
A. PURPOSE
The purpose of this section is to establish the number of required off-street
vehicular parking spaces so as to provide for the needs of occupants, customers,
visitors or others involved in the use or occupancy of any building or structure, to
eliminate the undue use of the surface street system for parking purposes, to
require allocation of sufficient off-street/on-site loading facilities by business and
July 21, 2011 309
industry, which ensures that the loading and unloading of vehicles will not interfere
with traffic flow or block roadways and/or fire lanes, to promote and protect the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, and to grant and
define the administrative powers and duties necessary to enforce this section.
B. GENERAL PROVISIONS
(1) Required off-street parking in residential districts shall be provided on the same
site, lot or tract as the main use for which the parking is provided.
(2) Required off-street parking in nonresidential districts may be located on the
same site, lot or tract as the main use for which the parking is provided or on a
site, lot or tract located within the same zoning district and within one hundred
fifty feet (150’) of the main use.
(3) If specific requirements for off-street parking result in a fraction of a parking
space, the next larger whole number of spaces is required.
(4) Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of
this UDC is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of dwelling units, seating
capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase in the minimum number
of required parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided to accommodate the
enlargement or change.
(5) All driveways and all required off-street parking spaces shall be on a paved
concrete surface. All drive approaches shall be of paved concrete. If an existing
drive on a residentially zoned lot is constructed of asphalt, the drive may
continue to be asphalt. Parking on an unpaved surface is strictly prohibited.
(6) Parking spaces provided within a public right-of-way shall not be counted as
meeting the minimum requirements of this section.
(7) In the event of the construction of a phased development, the minimum number
of parking spaces provided shall apply to each phase as it is developed.
(8) Recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor homes, boats, semi-trailers, trailers,
or truck-tractors may not be used for on-site dwelling purposes, and shall be
parked and stored behind the front building façade of the main structure (i.e., the
house). Parking on an unpaved surface is strictly prohibited.
(9) In computing the parking requirements for any building or development with
multiple uses, the total parking requirements shall be the sum of the specific
parking requirements for each individual use included in the building or
development.
C. SIZE OF SPACE
(1) Each standard off-street surface parking space shall measure not less than ten
feet (10’) by twenty feet (20’), exclusive of access drives and aisles, and shall be
of usable shape and condition.
(2) Wheel Stops
Wheel stops shall be required for all areas of head-in parking adjacent to a
landscaped area required in SECTION 9G(8)(a)1). Wheel stops shall be
July 21, 2011 310
designed so that the overhang of vehicles is contained totally within the
parking space. If wheel stops are not provided at locations where vehicles
extend over the sidewalk areas, a minimum of five feet (5’) of free walking
area, exclusive of vehicle overhang width, must be provided.
(3) Each parking space designed for parallel parking shall have a minimum
dimension of eight feet (8’) by twenty-two feet (22’).
(4) Handicap Accessible Parking
(a) The number and size of the handicap parking spaces required must follow
the federal Americans with Disabilities Act (“ADA”) and Texas Accessibility
Standards (“TAS”). The number of handicap parking spaces required is
based on the total number of spaces provided. Accessible spaces for cars
must have at least a sixty-inch (60”)-wide access aisle located adjacent to
the designated parking space. Van parking spaces need to have a wider
access aisle of ninety-six inches (96”) to accommodate a wheelchair lift
and vertical clearance to accommodate van height.
Table 10-1
Minimum Number of Handicap Accessible Parking Spaces
Total number of parking spaces
provided (per lot)
Total minimum number of
accessible parking spaces
1 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total parking provided in
lot
1,001 and over 20 plus 1 for each 100 over
1,000
(b) Location. Accessible parking spaces must be located on the shortest
accessible route of travel to an accessible facility entrance. Where
buildings have multiple accessible entrances with adjacent parking, the
accessible parking spaces must be dispersed and located closest to the
accessible entrances and at the most level ground close to the accessible
entrance.
(c) An accessible route must always be provided from the accessible parking
to the accessible entrance. An accessible route never has curbs or stairs,
must be at least three feet (3’) wide, and must have a firm, stable, slipJuly
21, 2011 311
resistant surface. The slope along the accessible route should not be
greater than 1:12 in the direction of travel.
(d) Accessible parking spaces may be clustered in one (1) or more lots if
equivalent or greater accessibility is provided in terms of distance from the
accessible entrance, parking fees, and convenience. Van-accessible
parking spaces located in parking garages may be clustered on one floor
(to accommodate the ninety-eight inch (98”), minimum vertical height
requirement).
(e) Signage
A sign with the international symbol of accessibility must be mounted in
accordance with applicable state and federal laws marking each
disabled parking space. Each van-accessible space must have a sign
with “van accessible” on it in addition to the international symbol of
accessibility.
D. SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided in sufficient quantities to provide the
following ratio of vehicle spaces for the uses specified in the districts
designated:
Table 10-2
Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Type Parking Requirement
Amusement, Commercial (Indoor) 10 spaces, plus 1 space for each
100 square feet of total floor area
over 1,000 square feet
Amusement, Commercial (Outdoor) 1 space per 500 square feet of
outdoor site area plus 1 space per
each 4 fixed spectator seats
Bank, Savings and Loan, or Other
Financial Institution
1 space for each 250 square feet
of gross floor area
Bed and Breakfast 1 space for each rented room plus
1 space per employee
Community Center 1 space for each 100 square feet
used for assembly
Day Care Center 1 space per 250 square feet of
gross floor area
Family Home 4 spaces
Hospital 1 parking space for each bed
Hotel or Motel 1 space for each sleeping room or
suite plus 1 space for every 200
square feet of common area not
designated as sleeping rooms
July 21, 2011 312
Use Type Parking Requirement
Industrial and Manufacturing 1 space for each 2 employees or 1
space for each 1,000 square feet
of total floor area, whichever is
greater
Medical or Dental Clinic 1 space for each 200 square feet
of total floor area
Mini-Warehouse/Public Storage 1 space for each 300 square feet
of office floor area plus 1 space for
each 3,000 square feet of storage
area
Mortuary/Funeral Home 1 parking space for each 50
square feet of floor space in
service rooms or 1 space for each
3 seats, whichever is less based
on maximum design capacity)
Multi-Family, Duplex, Two-Family,
Condominium or Other Similar Use
1.5 spaces per bedroom
Offices 1 space for each 250 square feet
of gross floor area
Restaurants 1 parking space for each 100
square feet of gross floor area, or 1
space for each 4 seats, whichever
is less (based on maximum design
capacity)
Retail Sales and Service 1 space for each 250 square feet
of gross floor area
Schools, Elementary 1 space for each classroom plus 1
space for every four (4) seats in
any auditorium, gymnasium or
other common place of assembly
Schools, Middle, High School and
Vocational
1 space for every three (3)
students, faculty and staff plus 1
space for every four (4) seats in
any auditorium, gymnasium or
other common place of assembly
(based on maximum design
capacity)
Single-Family Attached and Detached
Dwelling Units
2 parking spaces per dwelling unit
Theaters, Auditoriums, Churches,
Assembly Halls, Sports Arenas,
Stadiums, Conference Centers,
Convention Centers or Other Places of
Public Assembly
1 space for each 4 seats or 1
space for every 100 square feet of
gross floor area, whichever is less
(based on maximum design
capacity)
July 21, 2011 313
Use Type Parking Requirement
Vehicle Sales 1 space for each 3,000 square feet
of sales area (open and enclosed)
devoted to the sale, display or
rental of vehicles
Vehicle Service, Repair, Garage 1 space for each 200 square feet
of total floor area
Warehouses 1 space for each 2 employees or 1
space for each 1,000 square feet
of total floor area, whichever is
greater
(2) New and Unlisted Uses
When a proposed land use is not classified in this section, the parking
requirements will be based on the minimum standard applicable to a specified
use which most closely resembles the proposed land use, as determined by
the City Manager.
(3) Mixed Uses
In the event that several users occupy a single structure or parcels of land,
the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the
requirements for the several uses computed separately unless it can be
shown that the peak parking demands are offset, for example, with retail and
residential, or theater and office uses. In such case the City Manager may
reduce the total requirements accordingly, but not more than twenty-five
percent (25%).
(4) Joint Use of Facilities
Required parking facilities of two (2) or more uses, structures, or parcels of
land may be satisfied by the same parking facility used jointly, to the extent
that it can be shown by the owners or operators that the need for the facilities
does not materially overlap and provided that such right of joint use is
evidenced by a deed, lease, contract, or similar written instrument
establishing the joint use.
E. STRIPING
(1) All parking lots shall be striped in a manner that clearly delineates parking
spaces, fire lanes and pedestrian crosswalks.
(2) Directional arrows shall be provided in all drive lanes and driveways.
F. SHARED ACCESS AND CROSS-LOT ACCESS EASEMENTS
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this UDC, unless otherwise approved by
the City, to reduce the number of curb cuts and access driveways, the dedication
of joint-use, private access driveway easements and cross-lot access easements
shall be required for all commercial development.
G. STACKING REQUIREMENT FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES
July 21, 2011 314
(1) A stacking space shall be an area on a site measuring eight feet (8’) by twenty
feet (20’) with direct forward access to a service window or station of a drivethrough
facility which does not constitute space for any other circulation
driveway, parking space, or maneuvering area.
(2) All stacking spaces shall be located entirely within the lot and shall be outside of
any right-of-way, fire lane or similar access.
(3) For financial institutions with drive-through facilities, each teller window or
station, human or mechanical, shall be provided with a minimum of five (5)
stacking spaces.
(4) For each service window of a drive-through restaurant, a minimum of seven (7)
stacking spaces shall be provided.
(5) For kiosks, a minimum of three (3) stacking spaces for each service window
shall be provided.
H. OFF-STREET LOADING/UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS
All retail, commercial, industrial and service structures shall provide and maintain
off-street facilities for receiving and loading merchandise, supplies and materials
within a building or on the lot or tract. Such off-street loading space may be
adjacent to a public alley or private service drive or may consist of a truck berth
within the structure. Such off-street loading space or truck berth shall consist of a
minimum area of ten feet (10’) by forty feet (40’) and the spaces or berths shall be
provided in accordance with the following schedule:
Table 10-3
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Square Feet of Gross Floor Area in
Structure
Minimum Required Spaces or Berths
0 – 5,000 None
5,000 – 15,000 1
15,000 – 50,000 2
50,000 – 100,000 3
100,000 – 150,000 4
Each Additional 50,000 over 150,000 1
I. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS AND ILLUSTRATIONS
(1) Handicapped Ramps
July 21, 2011 315
(2) Handicap Parking Space Dispersal
(3) 90° Parking Dimensions
July 21, 2011 316
(4) Angle Parking Dimensions
(5) Drive Aisle Dimensions
July 21, 2011 317
(6) Separation of Right-of-Way and Parking Areas
(7) Landscaping and Fencing
July 21, 2011 318
SECTION 11 - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES
A. PURPOSE
The City recognizes the safety, commercial, emergency, and informational needs
for signs. This section has been adopted to protect the health, safety, and welfare
of the citizens by regulating the location, construction, duration, size, height,
installation, and maintenance of all signs within the jurisdiction of the City, including
its ETJ in accordance with LGC Chapter 216. Additionally, this section is intended
to enhance property values, maintain aesthetic attractiveness, and promote
commercial opportunity in the City, and to support and further the objectives of the
City’s Comprehensive Plan.
B. APPLICABILITY
All signs shall be erected, displayed, altered or reconstructed in conformity with
this section. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a
specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.
(1) Other Laws: The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to nullify any
other provisions of federal or state law.
(2) Partial Invalidity: In the event any part or provision of this section is held to be
illegal or void by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not have
the effect of making void or illegal any of the other parts or provisions.
(3) Existing Signs: All signs legally existing on or before the effective day of this
UDC shall be permitted to continue without change.
C. ADMINISTRATION
(1) General
The City Manager is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions
of this section and other laws and ordinances applicable thereto. The City
Manager shall have the authority to render interpretations of this section and
other laws and ordinances applicable thereto, and to adopt policies and
procedures to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations,
policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of
this section and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically
provided for herein.
July 21, 2011 319
(2) Applications
The City Manager shall receive applications, review plans and documentation
and issue permits for the erection, installation, enlargement, alteration, and
repair of all signs within the City and its ETJ.
(3) Inspection
The City Manager shall make all inspections necessary to ensure compliance
with all state and local requirements governing signage.
(4) Notices and Orders
The City Manager shall issue all necessary citations, notices or orders to
ensure compliance with this section.
(5) Right of Entry
Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this
section, or where the City Manager has reasonable cause to believe that
there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to
or in violation of this section, the City Manager is authorized to enter such
premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by
this section, provided that if such premises are occupied credentials must be
presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such premises are
unoccupied, the City Manager shall first make a reasonable effort to locate
the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises and
request entry. If entry is refused, the City Manager shall have recourse to the
remedies provided by law to secure entry.
(6) Department Records
The City Manager shall keep official records of applications received, permits
issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and citations, notices and
orders issued. Such records shall be retained in the official records for the
period required by the State of Texas for the retention of public records.
(7) Liability
The City Manager, members of the BOA, or other City employees charged
with the enforcement of this section, while acting in the scope of their official
duties for the City in good faith and without malice in the discharge of the
duties required by this section or other pertinent laws or ordinances, shall not
be rendered personally liable and are hereby relieved of personal liability for
any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of any act or by
reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties. Any suit
instituted against an officer or employee because of an act performed by that
officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions
of this section shall be defended by a legal representative of the City until the
final termination of the proceedings. No City official shall be liable for cost in
any action, suit, or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions
of this section.
July 21, 2011 320
D. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
(1) Permit Required
(a) No person shall erect, alter or display any sign or allow the erection,
alteration, or display of any sign upon any property within the City or its
ETJ owned or controlled by them without first obtaining a sign permit to do
so from the Building Official, except as hereinafter provided. No sign
permit shall be released by the Building Official until after the building
permit for the principal building on the site has been issued.
(b) No person shall install and connect electrical systems for a sign within the
City or its ETJ without first obtaining an electrical permit to do so from the
Building Official, except as hereinafter provided. The Building Official shall
not issue an electrical permit for a sign until after the principal sign permit
for such work has been issued.
(2) Application
The following information shall be required for each application for a permit:
(a) Completed building permit application obtained from the Building Official.
(b) A site plan which includes or reflects:
1) The location of all buildings, structures or tracts to which or upon
which the sign is to be attached or erected.
2) The position of the sign in relation to rights-of-way, easements,
buildings or structures and other existing signs.
3) Plans that illustrate height, length, width and all other dimensions
associated with the sign. Plans shall include all electrical elements of
the sign.
4) Letter or copy of a contract signed by the owner of the property stating
that the applicant has permission to erect such sign.
(3) Fees
All fees for a sign permit shall be in accordance with the current fee schedule
adopted by City Council.
(a) A permit shall not be valid until such fee has been paid. An amendment to
a permit shall not be released until the additional fees, if any, have been
paid.
(b) Where work for which a permit is required by this section has been started
prior to obtaining a permit, the fees established by City Council shall be
doubled. Payment of such double fees shall not relieve any person(s) from
any other penalties prescribed under SECTION 1K, of this UDC, or any
other applicable law or ordinance.
(4) Action on Application
The Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined applications for
permits and amendments thereto within fifteen (15) business days after a
July 21, 2011 321
complete application is filed. If the application or the construction documents
do not conform to the requirements of this section and other pertinent laws or
ordinances, the Building Official shall reject such application in writing, stating
the reasons therefor. If the Building Official is satisfied that the proposed
work conforms to the requirements of this section and other laws and
ordinances applicable thereto, the Building Official shall issue a permit
therefor as soon as practical.
(5) Time Limitation of Application
An application for a permit for any proposed work for which a permit has not
been issued shall be deemed abandoned six (6) months after the date of
filing. The City Manager may, at his/her discretion, grant one extension for
additional time not exceeding ninety (90) days. The extension shall be
requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Permits issued
under this section are non-transferable from one person to another.
(6) Condition of Permit
A permit issued under this section shall be construed to be a license to
proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set
aside any of the provisions of this section or other law or ordinances
applicable thereto. Nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the Building Official
from thereafter requiring correction of errors in plans, construction, or
removing violations of this section or other laws or ordinances applicable
thereto. Every permit issued shall become invalid six (6) months after its
issuance if the work is not completed unless otherwise stated in this section.
(7) Suspension or Revocation
The Building Official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under
this section whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect,
inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of this section or any
other laws or ordinances applicable thereto.
(8) Public Rights-of-Way, Alleys and Easements
A permit shall not be given by the Building Official for the placement of a sign
that will encroach upon any public right-of-way, alley or utility or drainage
easement.
(9) Placement of Permit
The permit or copy thereof shall be kept on the site until the work permitted is
completed.
(10) Appeal
An individual who has been denied a permit or had a permit revoked may
appeal in writing along with the established filing fee to the BOA within ten
(10) days after the date of denial or revocation.
E. EXEMPTED SIGNS
July 21, 2011 322
The following types of sign or sign work are exempt from the permit requirements
of this section; provided, however, that the exemption from the permit requirements
of this section shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done
in violation of the provisions of this section or any other laws or ordinances of the
City:
(1) Official Government Signs
(2) Political Signs
(a) Political signs may be erected in accordance with this section upon private
premises. Political signs are not allowed on utility poles, in public
easements, on public fences or buildings, or on any City property or City
right-of-way. A political sign located on private property, which is not the
property of the owner of the sign, may only be placed on the property with
permission from the property owner.
(b) Political signs may not:
1) have an effective area greater than thirty-six (36) square feet;
2) be more than eight feet (8’) high;
3) be illuminated; or
4) have any moving elements.
(3) Railway Signs
Any sign within the railway right-of-way placed and maintained by the railway
company in reference to the operation of such railway.
(4) Utility Signs
Any sign marking utility or underground communications or transmission
lines.
(5) Vehicle Signs
Any sign, less than two (2) square feet in area, placed on or affixed to
vehicles and/or trailers, where the sign is incidental to the primary use of the
vehicle or trailer as a form of transportation and which identifies the business,
products, or services with which the vehicle and/or trailer is related.
(6) Flags
Official flags of governmental jurisdictions or non-profit organizations.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the display of a
national or state flag or to limit flags, insignias, legal notices or informational,
directional or traffic signs which are legally required and necessary to the
essential functions of governmental agencies.
(7) Warning Signs
Signs warning the public of the existence of danger but containing no
advertising material.
(8) Street Address Signs
July 21, 2011 323
Address signs containing only numeric address and street or complex names.
(9) Holiday Signs
Any temporary sign promoting the celebration of a holiday and containing no
commercial advertising.
(10) Plaques
Any commemorative sign of a recognized historical society or organization.
F. PROHIBITED SIGNS
(1) Obscene Signs
No person shall erect or display on any site a sign in which the dominant
theme of material taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interest in sex, and
is patently offensive because it affronts current community standards relating
to the description or representation of sexual matters, and is utterly without
redeeming social literary, artistic, political, and scientific value, according to
contemporary community standards.
(2) Obstructing Doors, Windows or Fire Escapes
No person shall erect or display on any site any sign that prevents or
obstructs free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape.
(3) Obstructing Vision/Sight Triangle
No person shall erect or display on any site any sign in such a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision of moving vehicles at any location, street
intersection, or driveway. All signs placed at any intersection shall prevent
such problem by observing a visibility triangle (see definition of visibility
triangle).
(4) Interference with Traffic
No sign shall be permitted which interferes with vehicular or pedestrian traffic
as a result of the position, size, shape, movement, color, fashion, manner, or
intensity of illumination, or any other characteristics causing such
interference. No person shall erect or allow to be displayed any sign in such
a manner as to interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal, or device, including, signs making use of the
words “stop”, “go”, “look”, “slow”, “danger”, or any other similar word, phrase,
symbol or character. No person shall employ any red, yellow, green, or other
colored lamp or light in such a manner as to cause confusion or otherwise
interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(5) Over Public Property or Public Right-of-Way
No person shall erect or display any type of sign on or over public ROW or
other public property, unless the same is erected by the City, county, state or
other authorized governmental agency, or with the permission of the City
Council (in its sole discretion), for public purposes.
(6) Signs on Utility Poles
July 21, 2011 324
No person shall erect or display any sign except as specifically authorized by
SECTION 11E on any utility pole located upon any public right-of-way or
utility easement.
(7) Private Property
No sign shall be located on private property without the consent of the owner
of the premises, including signs located on trees, light poles or mail boxes.
(8) Dilapidated Signs
No sign shall be permitted which is deteriorated, dilapidated, in danger of
falling or otherwise unsafe.
(9) Signs In Violation
No sign shall be permitted that does not comply with any applicable
provisions of the building code, this UDC, or any other applicable codes or
ordinances of the City.
(10) Home Occupation Signs
No exterior home occupation signs shall be permitted unless otherwise
specifically authorized in this UDC.
(11) Non-Motorized or Portable Signs
No trailer-type, non-motorized signs using wheels and axles as the primary
support shall be permitted.
(12) Off Premise Signs
Except as set forth elsewhere in this section, all off-premise signs not legally
existing on the date this UDC is adopted are prohibited.
(13) Signs in the Right-of-Way
Except as set forth elsewhere in this section, all signs in the right-of-way are
prohibited except that the following signs may be permitted provided they
otherwise meet the applicable requirements of this section:
(a) Official Government Signs
(b) Historical Markers and Plaques
(c) Traffic Signs
(14) Bandit Signs
(15) Painted Signs
No sign shall be permitted which is painted on the wall of any building or on
any part of a building.
(16) Other Signs
Except as set forth elsewhere in this section, any signs not specifically
permitted by this ordinance are prohibited within the City and its ETJ.
G. REMOVAL OF SIGNS
(1) Damaged Signs
July 21, 2011 325
Signs which are determined by the City Manager to be a public hazard or in a
state of disrepair shall be repaired or removed within ten (10) days of written
notification to the property owner.
(2) Abandoned Signs
Signs which are determined by the City Manager to be abandoned shall be
removed or otherwise painted over and neutralized within thirty (30) days of
written notification to the property owner.
(3) Extensions
The City Manager shall have the authority, but not the obligation, to grant
extensions as necessary to resolve a damaged or abandoned sign. The
extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.
(4) Signs in Right-of-Way and/or Public Property
Any sign that is erected, constructed, or otherwise located within or upon
public right-of-way, easement(s) or on other public property may be removed
by City personnel and disposed of immediately. The City is not required to
notify the owner of the sign of its removal and disposal.
(5) Relocation of Certain Detached On-Premise Signs
(a) Legal or non-conforming, detached on-premise signs located on or
overhanging a parcel of land acquired by a governmental entity may be
relocated subject to the restrictions in this section. The owner of the sign
and the governmental entity must sign an application requesting the
relocation. The relocation must be completed within one (1) year of the
date the governmental entity becomes the owner of the property. All
relocated signs must fully comply with spacing, setbacks, and other
restrictions in this section. All signs must be relocated on the remainder of
the tract from which the parcel of land was acquired unless:
1) There is no remainder; or
2) The remainder is not of sufficient size or suitable configuration to allow
the relocated sign to fully comply with the spacing, setback, and other
restrictions in this section.
(b) No relocated, detached on-premise sign may have a greater effective area
or increased height than it had at its original location, or contain new
materials that are more than five feet (5’) above grade.
(c) No detached on-premise sign may be relocated until demolition and other
required permits have been applied for and approved by the City.
(d) No new electrical or mechanical properties may be added to a relocated,
detached on-premise sign, e.g., a non-illuminated sign may not be
converted to an illuminated sign.
(6) Illegally Erected Temporary Sign
July 21, 2011 326
Any temporary sign, as defined in SECTION 15 of this UDC, that is erected,
constructed or otherwise displayed, without a permit or in direct violation of
this section shall be removed by City personnel and disposed of immediately.
The City is not required to notify the owner of the sign of its removal and
disposal.
(7) Illegally Erected Permanent Sign
Any permanent sign installed without a permit or in direct violation of this
section shall be removed by the owner of the sign or property within ten (10)
days after written notification by the City Manager.
(8) Filing of Liens against the Property
The City is authorized to file a lien against any property which is not otherwise
exempt to recover reasonable expenses incurred by the City for the removal
of a sign or portion of a sign.
(9) Appeal
Any decision rendered by the City Manager or other City personnel or
consultant in the enforcement of this section may be appealed to the BOA by
any person, agent, or representative affected by such decision. Such appeal
must be in writing and received within ten (10) days after a decision rendered
along with the established fee.
H. GENERAL SIGN PROVISIONS
The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all signs hereafter erected,
constructed, displayed, altered or repaired on any premise under the jurisdiction of
the City.
(1) Height of Signs
The vertical height of a sign shall be measured from ground level at the base
of the sign to the highest part of the sign or its structure.
(2) Wind Load and Dead Load Requirements
All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind load of not
less than thirty-two (32) pounds per square foot of area and shall be
constructed to receive dead loads as required by building codes adopted by
the City. The sign application must include a statement signed by the
applicant that states compliance with this requirement.
(3) Location of Business/Residential
All business and residential locations shall be identified by an address, which
is clearly visible from the street.
(4) Illumination of Signs
No sign shall be illuminated to such intensity to exceed a maximum of .25
foot-candle measured at the property line. No lighted sign shall be erected or
displayed within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of a single-family residential
zoned property unless the lighting is shielded from view.
July 21, 2011 327
(5) Building and Electrical Codes Applicable
All signs shall be constructed and maintained in conformity with all applicable
provisions of the building code, electrical code or other applicable ordinances
of the City.
(6) Maintenance of Signs
Every sign shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times. All
signs shall be kept neatly painted including all metal parts and supports that
are not galvanized or of rust-resistant material. On undeveloped parcels of
land, the area between any sign and the street or highway to which the sign is
oriented and the area within twenty-five feet (25’) of such sign must be kept
free and clear of debris, trash, and weeds or other refuse and shall be
maintained by the mowing or trimming of any vegetation.
(7) Structural Sign Elements
The structural elements of permanent signs shall be constructed of materials
that are noncombustible and may be supported by noncombustible materials
only and finished in a presentable manner. Wood or unpainted steel supports
are prohibited. Heavy timber and other materials may be used only if
approved by the Building Official.
(8) Sign Clearance
Notwithstanding any other provision of this UDC, all signs shall maintain a
clearance of at least ten feet (10’) when located over a public sidewalk and at
least fourteen feet (14’) when located over a driveway, and shall extend no
closer than eighteen inches (18”) from the curb line of a public street, unless
painted or mounted flat on the surface of an existing awning or canopy.
I. SIGNS IN OLD TOWN CRANDALL
(1) General
Signs in the district defined as OTC-Old Town Crandall must reflect the
historic nature of the downtown area. The signage should be simple and
advertise the name of the business only. Simple, bold lettering with sufficient
contrast is encouraged.
(2) Maximum Area
The maximum area of a sign in the Old Town Crandall District shall not
exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the front façade area, which shall not exceed
forty (40) square feet of effective area.
(3) Maximum Number of Signs
Each building, or tenant space, is allowed two (2) signs: one (1) primary and
one (1) secondary.
(4) Location
Primary business signs must be located in the traditional sign band located on
the front façade of the building, above the main entrance to the building. The
sign must be located in such a manner that it does not obscure any
July 21, 2011 328
architectural features of the building. The primary sign can be a wall sign or a
window sign. The secondary sign can be a window sign or a blade sign.
(5) Roofline Limitations
In no case shall a wall sign project above the roofline of any building, nor shall
it extend above the parapet wall if attached thereto. Wall signs shall be no
closer vertically to the eave of the roofline or overhang than the predominant
letter height. Wall signs may be attached to a continuous plane fascia if the
sign does not extend above or below the projection of the fascia. Signs
attached to fascia are only allowed when attached to structural canopy
supported to the ground by columns constructed of similar masonry material
as the primary structure.
(6) Illumination
Wall signs shall be illuminated utilizing only external fixtures and such fixtures
must be approved by the Building Official. A preferred external fixture is a
gooseneck lamp.
(7) Projection
Wall signs shall not project farther than eighteen inches (18”) from the
building, excluding signs attached to canopies.
J. WALL SIGNS
(1) General
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the regulations set forth in this section
shall be applicable to all wall signs. Wall signs may not be attached to light
fixtures, poles, or trees.
(2) Maximum Area
The maximum area of a wall sign shall not exceed the following:
Table 11-1
Maximum Area of Wall Signs
Sign Location Maximum Sign Area
Areas with Limited Access 15% of the façade area or 250 square
feet, whichever is less
Areas with Unlimited Access 12% of the façade area or 125 square
feet, whichever is less
All Other Streets 10% of the façade area or 80 square
feet, whichever is less
(3) Maximum Number of Signs
The maximum number of signs permitted for single occupancy or single
tenant buildings shall be limited to one (1) per wall with a maximum of three
(3) signs. Each sign in excess of the primary wall sign shall be a maximum
seventy-five percent (75%) of the area of the primary wall sign.
July 21, 2011 329
The maximum number of signs permitted for multi-tenant buildings shall be
limited to one (1) per tenant or lease space except for those spaces located
on the ends of buildings which may have one (1) additional wall sign to be
located on the side wall of the structure and being a maximum of seventy-five
percent (75%) of the area of the primary wall sign. Tenants located in a multitenant
building with the rear of the building directly adjacent to a public or
private street or access drive may have one (1) additional wall sign located on
the rear wall of the structure and being a maximum of twenty-five percent
(25%) of the area of the primary wall sign. In no case shall the number of wall
signs permitted for any single tenant within a multi-tenant development
exceed a maximum of two (2) signs.
(4) Roofline Limitations
In no case shall a wall sign project above the roofline of any building or
extend above the parapet wall if attached thereto. Wall signs shall be no
closer vertically to the eave of the roofline or overhang than the predominant
letter height. Wall signs may be attached to a continuous plane fascia if the
sign does not extend above or below the projection of the fascia. Signs
attached to fascia are only allowed when attached to structural canopy
supported to the ground by columns constructed of similar masonry material
as the primary structure.
(5) Illumination
Wall signs shall be illuminated utilizing only internal lighting except for signs in
the Old Town Crandall District, which may be illuminated with gooseneck
lamps.
(6) Projection
Wall signs shall not project farther than eighteen inches (18”) from the
building, excluding signs attached to canopies.
(7) Adjacent Residential
Wall signs shall not be located on any façade (other than the main front of the
building) which faces property zoned for single-family residential uses if the
sign is within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of the property line of said
residential property.
K. FREESTANDING GROUND SIGNS
(1) General
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the regulations set forth in this section
shall be applicable to all freestanding ground signs.
(2) Minimum Setback
The minimum setback of all freestanding ground signs shall be fifteen feet
(15’) from any property line.
(3) Maximum Height
July 21, 2011 330
The maximum height of a freestanding ground sign shall conform to the
following:
Table 11-2
Maximum Height of Freestanding Ground Signs
Sign Location Maximum Height
Areas with Limited Access 50 feet
Areas with Unlimited Access 40 feet
All Other Streets 20 feet
Exception: Freestanding ground signs located on properties along roadways
identified as Principal Arterials and Secondary Arterials in accordance with
SECTION 13A of this UDC shall have a maximum of eighteen feet (18’) in
height.
(4) Maximum Area
Freestanding ground signs shall conform to the following:
Table 11-3
Maximum Area of Freestanding Ground Signs
Sign Location Maximum Sign Area
Areas with Limited Access 250 square feet
Areas with Unlimited Access 100 square feet
All Other Streets 32 square feet
Exception: Freestanding ground signs located on properties along roadways
identified as Principal Arterials and Secondary Arterials in accordance with
SECTION 13A of this UDC shall have a maximum of ninety (90) square feet
in area.
(5) Number of Signs
The maximum number of freestanding ground signs shall be limited to one (1)
per lot, per street frontage. Developments consisting of shopping centers or
other multi-tenant type developments shall be required to construct multitenant
signage in accordance with SECTION 11L of this UDC except that any
primary or anchor store greater than 50,000 square feet may be allowed one
(1) freestanding sign in accordance with this section.
L. MONUMENT SIGNS
(1) General
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the regulations set forth in this section
shall be applicable to all monument signs that are allowed under this section.
(2) Maximum Height
The maximum height of a monument sign shall be five feet six inches (5’-6”).
(3) Maximum Area
July 21, 2011 331
The maximum area of a monument sign shall not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet with a maximum area per sign face of fifty (50) square feet.
(4) Number of Signs
The maximum number of monument signs shall be limited to one (1) per lot
per street frontage. Developments consisting of shopping centers or other
multi-tenant type developments shall be required to construct multi-tenant
signage in accordance with SECTION 11M of this UDC.
(5) Minimum Setback
The minimum setback of all monument signs shall be fifteen feet (15’) from
any property line.
(6) Material Requirements
All monument sign bases shall be constructed of masonry material consisting
of brick, stone or split face concrete block. The monument sign structure
must be constructed or covered with the same masonry material as the
principal building or shall be constructed of brick, stone or split face concrete
block. Sculpted aluminum sign panels will be allowed. All sign text and
graphic elements shall be limited to a minimum of six inches (6”) from the
outer limits of the sign structure.
(7) Illumination
Monument signs shall only be illuminated utilizing internal lighting for sculpted
aluminum panels or a ground lighting source where the light itself and
supporting sign structure are not visible from public right-of-way.
M. MULTI-TENANT SIGNS
(1) General
The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all signs located within
developments consisting of shopping centers, as defined within this UDC, and
all other similar multi-tenant developments. All multi-tenant signs shall be
monument signs meeting the requirements of this section.
(2) Maximum Height
The maximum height of a monument sign within a multi-tenant development
shall not exceed the following:
Table 11-4
Maximum Height of Multi-Tenant Signs
Sign Location Maximum Height
Areas with Limited Access 20 feet
Areas with Unlimited Access 18 feet
All Other Streets 15 feet
The monument base shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18”) in height
measured from ground level at the center of the base to the top of the base.
July 21, 2011 332
The overall height shall not exceed the maximum heights listed above,
including monument base.
(3) Maximum Area
The maximum area of a multi-tenant monument sign shall be equivalent to
one percent (1%) of the gross building square footage within the shopping
center with a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
(4) Maximum Number
The maximum number of multi-tenant monument signs shall be limited to one
(1) per platted lot per street frontage.
(5) Monument Sign Design
Each multi-tenant monument sign shall be designed so as to provide
adequate sign spaces for each tenant within the development except for the
primary, or anchor, store within the development, which shall be prohibited
from advertising on the monument sign. The developer shall be responsible
for determining the adequacy and size necessary to meet the requirements of
this section.
(6) Minimum Setback
The minimum setback of all multi-tenant monument signs shall be fifteen feet
(15’) from any property line.
(7) Material Requirements
All multi-tenant monument signs shall be constructed of masonry material
consisting of brick, stone or split face concrete block which shall be consistent
in nature with the overall theme of the development. Sculpted aluminum sign
panels will be allowed. All sign text and graphic elements shall be limited to a
minimum of six inches (6”) from the outer limits of the sign structure.
(8) Illumination
Monument signs may only be illuminated utilizing internal lighting for sculpted
aluminum panels or a ground lighting source where the light itself and
supporting sign structure are not visible from public right-of-way.
N. ELECTRONIC SIGNS
(1) General
Electronic signage shall be permitted in lieu of any permitted freestanding or
monument signs on a property. In the event that an electronic sign is
permitted for a property, no other additional freestanding or monument sign
shall be permitted.
(2) Maximum Height
The maximum height of an electronic sign shall be eighteen feet (18’).
(3) Maximum Area
The maximum area of an electronic sign shall not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet with a maximum area per sign face of fifty (50) square feet.
July 21, 2011 333
(4) Number of Signs
The maximum number of electronic signs shall be limited to one (1) per
platted lot. No other on-premise freestanding signs shall be permitted.
(5) Minimum Setback
The minimum setback of all electronic signs shall be fifteen feet (15’) from any
property lines.
(6) Material Requirements
All electronic sign bases shall be constructed of masonry material consisting
of brick, stone or split face concrete block. The electronic sign structure must
be constructed or covered with the same masonry material as the principal
building or shall be constructed of brick, stone or split face concrete block. All
sign text and graphic elements shall be limited to a minimum of six inches (6”)
from the outer limits of the sign structure.
(7) Illumination
Electronic signage shall not exceed a maximum of 0.25 foot-candle
illumination at the property line.
(8) Location Restrictions
No electronic signs shall be permitted within one hundred fifty feet (150’) of a
residentially zoned property or property used for residential purposes.
(9) Additional Restrictions
(a) Any change of pictures or information on the electronic sign shall not
produce the illusion of moving objects, expanding or contracting shapes,
rotation or any similar effect of animation.
(b) Any change of pictures or information on the message board sign shall not
change more often than once every four (4) seconds.
(c) Any sign picture or information shall not have a solid white background
between the time period of thirty (30) minutes after sunset and thirty (30)
minutes before sunrise.
O. DIRECTIONAL SIGNS
(1) General
This section shall be applicable to any on-premise sign that directs the
movement of traffic on private property within developments, warns of
obstacles or overhead clearances, or controls parking.
(2) Maximum Height
Directional signs shall have a maximum height of three feet (3’).
(3) Maximum Area
Directional signs shall not exceed a maximum area of twelve (12) square feet.
(4) Maximum Number
July 21, 2011 334
The maximum number of directional signs permitted within a development
shall be based on the square footage of building space constructed within the
development. Directional signs shall be permitted at a rate of one (1) sign for
every 10,000 square feet of building area.
(5) Location Restrictions
Directional signs shall be located in a manner where they will not interfere
with the safe movement of vehicles or pedestrians and shall not be located
within any visibility triangle.
P. SUBDIVISION ENTRY SIGNS
(1) General
The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all subdivision entry signs
identifying a residential or mixed use development.
(2) Maximum Height
Subdivision entry signs shall be monument signs and shall have a maximum
height of six feet (6’) in height.
(3) Maximum Area
The maximum area of a subdivision entry sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet per sign face.
(4) Maximum Number of Signs
No more than one (1) subdivision entry sign shall be permitted at the primary
subdivision entrance. Secondary entrances may have one (1) subdivision
entry sign per entrance which shall be a maximum of seventy-five percent
(75%) of the size of the primary entrance sign.
(5) Placement of Sign
A subdivision entry sign may be located on a median at the street entrance if
approved in writing by the City Manager.
(6) Subdivision Entry Feature
A subdivision entry feature which is appropriate in scale to the size of the
development and incorporating masonry walls, berms and/or decorative
fencing in combination with the subdivision entry sign may be constructed at
the primary subdivision entrance; provided, however, that the maximum area
containing the subdivision sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per
sign face.
Q. PRICE-PER-GALLON DISPLAY
(1) General
All price-per-gallon displays must be an integral part of the general permitted
sign for the site. Displays, whether electronic or manual, shall not scroll or
flash.
(2) Minimum Letter Height
July 21, 2011 335
The minimum height allowed for price-per-gallon display signs shall be six
inches (6”) for the fuel classification, i.e., “unleaded,” “diesel,” etc.
(3) Maximum Area
Price-per-gallon displays shall not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the permitted
gross surface area per face of the general permitted sign.
(4) Number of Signs
Only one (1) price-per-gallon sign shall be permitted per site.
(5) Illumination
Only internal illumination may be utilized for price-per-gallon signs.
R. TEMPORARY SIGNS
(1) General
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, this section shall be
applicable to all temporary signs identified in this section.
(2) Maximum Area
The maximum area permitted for temporary signs shall conform to the
following:
Table 11-5
Maximum Area of Temporary Signs
Sign Location Maximum Sign Area
Areas with Limited Access 32 square feet per face or 10% of the
building façade, whichever is less
Areas with Unlimited Access 24 square feet per face or 7% of the
building façade, whichever is less
All Other Streets 16 square feet per face or 5% of the
building façade, whichever is less
(3) Maximum Height
The maximum height permitted for temporary signs shall conform to the
following:
Table 11-6
Maximum Height of Temporary Signs
Sign Location Maximum Sign Height
Areas with Limited Access 6 feet
Areas with Unlimited Access 4 feet
All Other Streets 3 feet
(4) Minimum Setback
July 21, 2011 336
The minimum setback for all temporary signs shall be fifteen feet (15’) from
any property line.
(5) Time Limitations
Temporary freestanding signs shall be permitted for a maximum of one
hundred eighty (180) days per calendar year. No additional temporary sign
permit shall be issued for the same property or business for a period of
fourteen (14) days from the expiration of the previous permit. There shall be
no limit to the number of temporary sign permits that may be issued for a
particular property or business. The cumulative total number of days for which
all temporary sign permits issued for a property or business shall not exceed
one hundred eighty (180) calendar days.
(6) Number of Signs
No more than two (2) types of temporary signs shall be permitted per
business or tenant at any given time.
S. DEVELOPMENT SIGNS
(1) Maximum Area
Development signs shall not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet maximum,
thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face.
(2) Maximum Height
Development signs shall not exceed six feet (6’) in height.
(3) Number of Signs
Each development shall be permitted no more than one (1) sign per
commercial development, or one (1) sign per entry of a residential subdivision
not to exceed two (2) signs.
(4) Duration
Development signs shall be installed at any time after the issuance of the
building permit for a commercial development or after approval of the final
plat for a residential subdivision. The development sign must be removed
within six (6) months or upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for
commercial developments, and upon three (3) years or seventy-five percent
(75%) of development of a residential subdivision, whichever is less.
T. REAL ESTATE SIGNS
(1) Applicability
Real estate signs meeting the requirements of this section shall be exempt
from the permitting requirements of this section.
(2) Maximum Height
The maximum height for commercial real estate signs shall not exceed five
feet (5’) for freestanding ground signs and must be below the roof line for wall
signs.
(3) Maximum Area
July 21, 2011 337
The maximum area of a commercial real estate sign shall not exceed sixtyfour
(64) square feet, thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face. Residential
real estate signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in size.
(4) Maximum Number of Signs
The maximum number of real estate signs shall be limited to one (1) per lot
per street frontage.
U. BANNERS OVER PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
(1) General
Banners may be erected over public rights-of-way within the City with the
approval of the City Manager. The applicant shall be responsible for securing
any and all necessary permits to erect a banner over a TxDOT right-of-way
and shall provide such information to the City with the application for a banner
permit.
(2) Restrictions
Banners over public rights-of-way shall be permitted only for non-commercial
or charitable events that are of general interest to the community as a whole
and shall be restricted to non-profit or governmental entities.
(3) Responsibility
The applicant shall be responsible for the erection of any banner over public
rights-of-way. The banner shall be inspected by the City to ensure the banner
is adequately secured. The applicant shall be responsible for removal of any
banner erected over public rights-of-way.
(4) Maximum Banner Size
The maximum area of a banner shall not exceed one hundred forty-four (144)
square feet. The standard banner size shall be four feet (4’) wide by thirty-six
feet (36’) long. Variations to the standard banner size may be approved by
the City Manager when differing variations are necessary to contain the entire
message within the banner. In no case shall the area exceed the maximum
area identified in this section.
V. NONCONFORMING SIGNS
(1) General
A sign, including its supporting structure, shall be considered nonconforming
when it does not conform to all or part of the provisions of this section and it:
(a) Was in existence and lawfully located prior to the adoption of this section;
(b) Was in existence and lawfully located and used in accordance with the
provisions of the prior ordinance applicable thereto or which was
considered legally nonconforming thereunder and has since been in
continuous or regular use;
July 21, 2011 338
(c) Was in existence, located and used on the premises at the time it was
annexed into the city and has since been in continuous use; or
(d) Was in existence and lawfully located and used as an off-premise sign prior
to or on the date this UDC was adopted. .
W. LICENSES
(1) Licenses Required
(a) Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, place, locate,
reconstruct, repair, replace or service any sign for compensation without
first obtaining a license to do such work from the Building Official.
(b) License
1) It is unlawful for any person to perform construction work subject to
this section unless the person is licensed as a sign contractor or is
exempt under the following:
a) A maintenance person who performs maintenance work only
upon property owned by the person’s employer.
b) A maintenance person who performs work upon a property
with more than one property owner is deemed to be
performing work for the general public and shall be licensed as
a sign contractor.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(a) Display a permit, cause a permit to be displayed, or to have in one’s
possession any license to conduct construction work, knowing it to be
fictitious or to have been canceled, suspended or altered;
(b) Lend or permit the use of any license for doing any construction work to
any person not entitled to it;
(c) Fail or refuse to surrender to the City Manager any license for any
construction work that has been suspended or canceled;
(d) Apply for or have in one’s possession more than one current City
construction license of the same type;
(e) Use a false or fictitious name or address in any application for any license
provided for in this section or for any renewal or duplicate of any such
license, or to make a false statement or conceal a material fact or
otherwise commit fraud in the making and submission of any application;
(f) Perform any construction work in the City or its ETJ, for which a license is
required without having a valid, current license or while a license is
suspended, expired or canceled;
(g) Perform any construction work for which a permit is required without having
a valid, current permit or after the permit has been suspended, canceled or
expired;
July 21, 2011 339
(h) Fail or refuse to make the necessary repairs or changes as provided in a
written notice issued by the City Manager. A separate offense is deemed to
be committed each day after the expiration of the time for correction
provided in the notice until the work is corrected; or
(i) Place or leave a property in such condition that it injures or endangers
persons or property.
(3) Insurance Required
(a) It is the duty of all sign contractors who practice their craft within the City to
show proof of general commercial liability insurance. A current copy of the
insurance policy must be maintained on file with the Building Official of the
City or the sign contractor’s license may be revoked. The insurance
coverage shall include:
1) A minimum of $300,000 per occurrence (combined for property
damage and bodily injury);
2) A minimum of $600,000 aggregated (total amount the policy will pay
for property damage and bodily injury coverage); and
3) A minimum of $300,000 aggregate for products and completed
operation.
(b) A licensed applicant or licensee shall file with the Building Official a
completed certificate of insurance when applying for an initial license, when
changing a business name, or upon request by the City Manager.
(4) The Building Official, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the completed
application, shall issue the license or give a written refusal setting out the
reason(s) for refusal.
(a) Application
A written application for a sign contractor’s license will be submitted to
the Building Official on a form prescribed by the City along with the
required initial fee and evidence of two (2) years experience. The
application submittal shall include the following:
1) Required initial fee (as established by City Council);
2) Renewal fee (as established by City Council);
3) Completed application;
4) Reference from one (1) financial institution;
5) Reference from two (2) suppliers; and
6) Reference from three (3) customers regarding work performed within
the last two (2) years.
(b) Renewal
All renewal fees shall be due January 1st of each year. Failure to renew
within thirty (30) days after the renewal date will require the applicant to
reapply for a license at the initial fee rate.
July 21, 2011 340
(c) Suspension/Revocation
Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked by
the City Manager for the following:
1) The license of a person convicted two (2) times within a one-year (1)
period of any violation of this section, or other applicable laws and
ordinances, may be suspended by the City Manager.
2) If the City Manager decides to suspend a sign contractor’s license, the
City Manager shall notify the licensee of the suspension by first class
mail to the licensee’s last address on record, or by hand delivery to
the licensee. Notice by mail will be deemed received three (3) days
after posting.
3) The licensee may appeal a suspension decision to the BOA by filing a
written request within ten (10) days of receiving notice of the
suspension. Within 30 days of receiving an appeal, the BOA shall
hold a hearing to determine whether the suspension decision should
be sustained or reversed.
4) If a licensee’s license has been suspended twice in a three (3)-year
period, and the licensee then commits another violation under this
section or other laws and ordinances applicable hereto, the City
Manager shall notify the BOA. The BOA shall then hold a hearing to
consider cancellation of the license.
5) Enforcement actions taken under this section are not exclusive and do
not affect any other remedies for violations of this section or other
applicable laws and ordinances.
(d) Appeal
A person whose license has been denied, suspended or revoked may
appeal in writing, submitting the filing fee then in effect, to the BOA
within ten (10) days of the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
(e) Electrical License
It shall be unlawful for any person to install and connect electrical
systems for a sign within the City and its ETJ without first obtaining a
license to do so from the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation
(“TDLR”) for such work. A sign contractor may subcontract the electrical
portion of a project to someone licensed by TDLR. Someone so licensed
shall obtain all requisite electrical permits from the City, and any other
permitting entity as may be applicable, to do such work.
(f) Electrical License Registration
Electrical contractors shall register with the Building Official as follows:
1) Registration of Company – Each company providing electrical work
shall register with the Building Official and shall provide a copy of
general liability insurance in the amount established by the TDLR for
electrical contractors.
July 21, 2011 341
2) Application – A written application to register a company providing
electrical work, along with the established filing fee, shall be submitted
to the Building Official on a form prescribed by the City.
3) Renewal – All registered electrical companies shall renew their
registrations annually. All renewal applications shall be due March 1st
of each year.
Exception: Licensed sign contractors who hold an electrical license
issued by TDLR and who submit a copy of such license with their
application, and do not work as an independent electrical company, shall
not be required to register as an electrical company.
X. VIOLATIONS
(1) Unlawful Acts
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
alter, extend, repair, move, remove, or demolish a sign regulated by this
section, or cause the same to be done in conflict with or in violation of any of
the provisions of this section.
(2) Notice of Violation
The City Manager is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the
person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair,
moving, removing or demolition of a sign in violation of the provisions of this
section or in violation of a permit issued under the provisions of this section.
Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition
and the abatement of the violation.
SECTION 12 - LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITIES AND DRAINAGE
A. CLEARING AND GRADING
(1) No removal of trees, land clearing or grading shall occur without the required
approvals and permits. Clearing and grading activity shall be limited to the limits
of grading area identified on the approved grading plan. A clearing and grading
permit is required by the City and can be applied for once the final plat has been
recommended by the Commission and approved by the Council.
(2) All clearing and grading permits shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and
Public Works Department and approved by the City Manager.
(3) The following shall be exempt from the requirement for a clearing and grading
permit:
(a) Grading and clearing in emergency situations involving immediate danger
to life and property or substantial fire hazards;
(b) The removal of underbrush, dead trees or diseased or damaged trees
which constitute a hazard to life and property based upon field inspection
verification; and
July 21, 2011 342
(c) Grading and clearing practices associated with normal agricultural crop
operations, excluding timber cutting.
B. DRAINAGE
(1) Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to any capital
improvement project, application for subdivision plat, master development plan,
or building permit approval except as otherwise provided by this chapter. A
stormwater management plan shall be provided as set forth in SECTION 12C.
(2) Stormwater Management Program
(a) System Criteria
1) All stormwater management facilities, or combination of facilities, shall
be designed for ultimate development. Drainage facilities for all
enclosed pipe systems, streets, and rights-of-way shall be designed
for the one hundred-year (100-yr) storm frequency. Channels and
creeks, culverts, small bridges, large bridges and floodways between
building lines shall also be designed for the 100-year (100-yr)
storm frequency. A minimum of one foot of freeboard shall be used
when the structure is designed to pass a design storm frequency of
100 years calculated by the City’s criteria. Detention facilities and
streets are exceptions to the frequency criteria cited above. Detention
facility outflows will be designed for five-year (5-yr), twenty five-year
(25-yr) and one hundred-year (100-yr) frequency storms.
2) Three (3) development conditions shall be analyzed for each
development:
a) Existing Conditions. This refers to current development
conditions in the watershed and on-site. Use as the baseline
analysis for determining the impact of development.
b) Proposed Conditions. This refers to existing conditions with
the proposed development added. Use to determine if the
increased runoff from the proposed development results in an
adverse impact to other properties.
c) Ultimate Conditions. This refers to ultimate development
conditions within the watershed used to design the drainage
facilities. This condition may be used in lieu of subparagraph
b), above, to determine if the increased runoff from the
ultimate watershed development results in an adverse impact
to other properties.
3) Responsibility to Accept Stormwater. The owner or developer of
property to be developed shall be responsible for the conveyance of
all stormwater flowing through the property. This responsibility
includes the stormwater flowing onto the property by any other
developed property as well as the drainage naturally flowing through
the property by reason of topography. Future upstream development
July 21, 2011 343
shall be accounted for by assuming ultimate development when sizing
drainage systems as specified in this section.
4) Positive Overflow Pathways. Stormwater management facilities for
local drainage systems will be designed to ensure that a positive
overflow pathway is provided to the nearest one hundred-year (100-
yr) conveyance facility. Positive overflow is based on a 100% failure
of an enclosed storm system. Downstream structures or proposed lot
pads should not be flooded in this event.
a) Maintenance of publicly owned facilities will be the
responsibility of the City. Maintenance of private facilities is
the responsibility of the property owner or the community
association and must be specified in the maintenance
schedule submitted to the City. A maintenance schedule for
both publicly owned and privately owned facilities must be
approved by the City Engineer prior to the approval of
construction drawings.
b) Authorized personnel from the City shall conduct periodic
inspections of these facilities and structures. Any required
repairs will be consistent with current construction standards.
Maintenance issues identified by the City or state during
inspections shall be the responsibility of the current owner.
5) New Development. Peak stormwater runoff rates from all new
development shall be less than or equal to the peak runoff rates from
the site's predevelopment conditions for the five-year (5-yr), twenty
five-year (25-yr) and one hundred-year (100-yr) design storm events,
except as provided in this SECTION 12B.
6) Redevelopment. Peak stormwater runoff rates from an area of
redevelopment due to zoning or replatting shall be less than or equal
to the peak runoff rates produced by existing development conditions
for the five-year (5-yr), twenty five-year (25-yr) and one hundred-year
(100-yr) design storm events, except as provided in this SECTION
12B.
(3) Method of Computing Runoff
(a) Calculation Methods
1) For drainage areas less than six hundred forty (640) acres, the basis
for computing runoff shall be the rational formula or some other
method provided it is acceptable to the City Engineer. Hydraulic
calculations shall be performed by using the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers HEC-2 "Water Surface Profiles" or HEC-RAS "River
Analysis System" computer models. Normal depth channel
calculations are permissible for constructed open channels with a
uniform geometric cross section where 1) there is no potential for the
water surface elevations to be controlled by backwater, and 2) the
channel is not in a FEMA floodplain.
July 21, 2011 344
2) For drainage areas six hundred forty (640) acres or greater, the basis
for computing runoff shall be a unit hydrograph method, preferably the
Soil Conservation Service (SCS) Dimensionless Unitgraph method as
contained in the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Hydrologic
Engineering Center HEC-1 "Flood Hydrograph Package," which
document shall be maintained on file with the City Manager and is
incorporated herein by reference for all purposes. For the SCS
method, antecedent moisture condition II shall be used in the runoff
model. Design rainfall values listed in Table 12-4 shall be used for
hydrograph calculations.
3) Open channel hydraulic calculations shall be performed by using the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers HEC-2 "Water Surface Profiles" or
HEC-RAS "River Analysis System" computer models, as they may be
amended, which documents shall be maintained on file with the City
Manager and are incorporated herein by reference for all purposes.
4) Certain watersheds have hydrologic and hydraulic models that are
available through and maintained by the City. Developments
proposed within the limits of these watersheds must have the models
updated by the consultant to reflect changes in flow, channel
configuration (including alterations to vegetation) and channel
structures. The consultants' models must use the same computer
program that was used in the existing model, e.g., HEC-RAS models
will not be accepted where the original model used HEC-2. The
updated models shall be submitted to the City Engineer for
incorporation into the master models. The City will periodically update
the master models to reflect current watershed development
conditions. The updated models will be made available for use and
distribution as the latest existing condition models for the watershed.
(b) Time of Concentration
Overland (sheet) flow, shallow concentrated flow and channel flows are
components that need to be considered in the calculation of time of
concentration. The following methods are recommended for time of
concentration calculation:
1) Overland flow - flow over plane surfaces: Maximum allowable time is
twenty (20) minutes, minimum is five (5) minutes. The overland flow
time chart from "Design" by Elwyn E. Seelye may be used to calculate
overland flow times. Note that the minimum time has been reduced to
five (5) minutes.
2) Shallow concentrated flow - overland flow usually becomes shallow
concentrated flow after a maximum of three hundred (300) feet: Use
Manning's Roughness Coefficient equation (“Manning’s equation”) to
estimate travel time for defined swales, bar ditches and street
sections, etc. Figure 3-1 from TR-55 "Urban Hydrology for Small
July 21, 2011 345
Watersheds," SCS 1986, may be used where a geometric section has
not been defined.
3) Channel flow: Use existing computer models where available or
Manning's equation if data is not available. Non-floodplain channel
velocities for ultimate watershed development should not be less than
six (6) fps when estimating time of concentration.
(c) Runoff Coefficients. Runoff coefficients (C value) for use in the rational
formula shall not be less than the values shown in Table 12-1 or Table
12-2, as appropriate.
Table 12-1
Runoff Coefficients (C) - Percentage
Character of Area
SLOPE
0 - 1%
Over
1% up
to 3%
Over
3% up
to 5%
Over
5%
Business, industrial or commercial zoning districts,
Existing Pavement/Buildings
80 80 85 90
Residentially zoned areas and school sites 75 77 80 84
Agriculturally and Residential Estate zoned areas 55 57 62 64
Undeveloped areas * - Existing conditions. Table
12-2
Average residential area 65 67 69 72
Table 12-2
Runoff Coefficients (C) – Percentage
Undeveloped Property
Character of Area
SLOPE
0 - 1%
Over
1% up
to 3%
Over
3% up
to 5%
Over
5%
Cultivated or Range (Grass Cover < 50% of Area) 44 47 53 55
Range (Grass Cover 50-75% of Area) 37 41 49 53
Forest or Range (Grass Cover > 75% of Area) 35 39 47 52
(d) Rainfall Intensity. Use Table 12.2 to determine rainfall intensity.
(e) SCS Curve Numbers. The hydrologic soil groups are listed in the latest
version of the United States Natural Resources Conservation Service
[formerly the Soil Conservation Service], "Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds," Technical Release No. 55 (TR 55), which document is
incorporated herein by reference. Soil types may also be based on a
Geotechnical Engineering Report. SCS Curve 77 will be used unless
evidence is presented to the contrary.
July 21, 2011 346
(f) Percent Impervious Cover. The percent impervious cover for typical land
use types in the City is presented in Table 12-3.
Table 12-3
Impervious Cover
Land Use Category
Average Percent
Impervious Cover
Residential SF-PH and SF-TH Zoned Land 65--85%
SF-6.5 Zoned Land 38%
SF-12.5 and SF-9 Zoned Land 30%
SF-20 Zoned Land 25%
A and SF-E Zoned Land 20%
LI and IP Zoned Land 80%
BP, C, and HB Zoned Land 80%
MF-15 Zoned Land 65--85%
Streets, Roads, and Parking Areas 98%
(g) Design Rainfall. A twenty four-hour (24-hr) rainfall distribution shall be
applied for runoff calculations. Rainfall intensities as adopted for the City
appear in Table 12-4 and should be used for HEC-1 input. The lag value for
a subarea shall be calculated as 0.6 times the time of concentration.
Table 12-4
Design Rainfall Values (inches)
Duration
Frequency
5-year 10-year 25-year 50-year 100-year
5 minute 0.58 0.64 0.73 0.80 0.87
15 minute 1.26 1.39 1.59 1.75 1.91
60 minute 2.53 2.90 3.43 3.84 4.25
2 hour 3.08 3.66 4.42 4.99 5.57
3 hour 3.57 4.23 5.04 5.64 6.23
6 hour 4.26 4.99 5.89 6.52 7.13
12 hour 4.68 5.55 6.58 7.32 8.05
24 hour 5.45 6.55 7.78 8.78 9.91
(h) Routing of Runoff. Routing of the runoff hydrograph through the channel
from one subarea calculation point to the next in the HEC-1 shall be
computed using one of the following methods:
1) Overbank/channel storage not significant: Use normal depth channel
routing.
2) Overbank/channel storage is significant: Use the Muskingum method
where a hydraulic model is not available. Use Modified Puls storage
July 21, 2011 347
method where a hydraulic model is available to develop storage/out
flow relationship.
3) Kinematic wave method for channel reaches where inflow from
overbank runoff or multiple point sources (example: storm sewer
outfalls) is significant and where hydrograph attenuation is
insignificant. Channel routing methodologies currently being applied
in the existing HEC-1 model of the watershed shall not be replaced
with a different methodology without approval or direction from the
City Engineer.
(i) Manning's Roughness Coefficient. Manning's roughness coefficients ("N"
values) for use in routing methods or in hydraulic calculations shall be
consistent with the values listed in Table 12-5.
Table 12-5
Manning's Roughness Coefficient
Channel Description Manning's "N" Value
Concrete-Lined Channel 0.015
Grass-Lined Channel with regular maintenance 0.035
Grass-Lined Channel without recent maintenance 0.050
Vegetated Channel with trees, little or no underbrush 0.055
Natural Channel with trees, moderate underbrush 0.075
Natural Channel with trees, dense underbrush 0.090
Natural Channel with dense trees and dense underbrush 0.100
Overbank Description Manning's "N" Value
Pasture 0.035--0.055
Trees, little or no underbrush, scattered structures 0.060--0.075
Dense vegetation, multiple fences and structures 0.075--0.090
The "N" value to be used in Manning's Formula shall conform to the
following for design purposes:
1) Earth channels--0.035
2) Concrete-lined channels--0.015
3) Reinforced concrete pipe--0.013
4) Concrete box culverts--0.013
5) Corrugated metal pipe:
a) Unpaved 1/2" corrugated--0.024
b) Unpaved one (1)-inch corrugated--0.027
c) Any other "N" value shall be based on generally accepted
engineering principles.
(4) Drainage Easements/Rights-of-Way
July 21, 2011 348
(a) Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, natural
channel or stream, there shall be provided an easement or right-of-way
conforming substantially to the limit of such watercourse, plus additional
width as outlined below.
(b) Easements for natural watercourses shall be the one hundred-year (100-yr)
floodplain or the twenty five-year (25-yr) plus freeboard, whichever is
greater. In floodplain areas where ongoing maintenance is required or the
floodplain will be reserved for use by the public, the drainage easements
shall be maintained by a public entity and the property will be dedicated to
the City as a multi-use drainage easement. A drivable access way shall be
provided in floodplain easements for the length of the easement when
regular maintenance of the floodplain is required. Diversion of stormwater
away from the natural watercourse will not be allowed except within the
boundaries of the property controlled by the developer, provided that the
diverted water is returned to the watercourse within which it would naturally
have been flowing prior to leaving the developer's property. An analysis of
the timing of the diverted hydrograph on watersheds greater than twenty
(20) acres, as it reenters the receiving watercourse, must be performed to
show that the peak flow rate in the receiving watercourse has not been
increased as a result of the diversion.
(c) An unobstructed access right-of-way connecting the drainage easement
with an alley or roadway parallel to or near the easement shall be provided
at a minimum spacing of one (1) access right-of-way at approximately one
thousand-foot (1,000’) intervals. The access right-of-way shall be a
minimum of fifteen feet (15’) in width and shall be maintained clear of
obstructions that would limit maintenance vehicular access. If the flow line
of the designed channel incorporates grade control structures or vehicular
bridges that would prevent maintenance equipment from accessing that
portion of the channel, additional access points may be required. Channel
design, earthen or concrete, shall have ramps in the side slopes near the
access points that allow maintenance equipment to descend to the floor
level of the channel. The maximum allowable ramp slope for vehicular
access is seven to one (7:1). Access points adjacent to roadways or alleys
shall be provided with a post and cable feature with padlock to prevent
unauthorized use.
(d) In those cases where drainage easements cross lot and property lines, a
statement shall be added to the plat that no fencing or structures that will
interfere with adequate drainage flow will be allowed on or across such
lines. Fencing may be allowed across drainage easements only in
accordance with the following restrictions:
1) Bottom of fence shall be a minimum of the flow depth, plus freeboard
above design flow line of channel or drain.
2) A hinged gate will be placed across the entire width of the drainage
easement.
July 21, 2011 349
3) Fence posts located within the easement must be structurally
designed to resist damage from the stormwater flows and impact from
debris.
4) A floodplain development permit shall be required to construct a fence
within an easement that is within the one hundred-year (100-yr)
floodplain.
(e) Interceptor drains shall be constructed prior to the issuance of building
permits on any lot that would be affected by natural drainage being
intercepted.
(f) All developments shall provide for adequate drainage outfall at the lower
end of the site into an existing street, alley, drainage, easement or right-ofway,
or to the centerline of an existing natural drain. Where a proposed
street, storm sewer, or open channel does not discharge into a natural low
or into an existing adequate drainage easement, facilities and drainage
easements of adequate width to contain the design discharge shall be
constructed and dedicated to the centerline of an existing natural low within
the same watershed. However, where the natural low lies within the
developer's property, the developer will be required only to plat an
easement to the centerline of the natural low, provided that the easement is
adequate to accommodate the facilities that will be built in conjunction with
the future development of that property.
(5) Site Design and Grading
(a) All land-disturbing or land-filling activities or soil storage shall be
undertaken in a manner designed to minimize surface runoff, erosion and
sedimentation, and to safeguard life, limb, property and the public welfare
in accordance with the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(“TPDES”) General Permit TXR150000, as amended, which documents are
incorporated herein by reference for all purposes.
(b) Erosion and sedimentation controls, in accordance with the specifications
established by the City Engineer in compliance with the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”) permitting requirements for the
City, are required.
(c) Projects shall not be considered complete until restoration has been made
in accordance with NPDES requirements.
(d) Where possible, multiple uses of drainage facilities and open space shall
be incorporated by the owner or developer into a new subdivision.
Alternative uses such as public recreation, horse/bike/hiking trails, walking
paths, nature preserves, wildlife habitat areas, etc., are encouraged subject
to the approval of the City Manager.
(e) A note must be placed on the plat for residential lots, which states that
finished floor elevations must be a minimum of eight inches (8”) above final
adjacent grade. A grading plan shall be prepared and submitted to the City,
which indicates typical lot grading for all lots in the subdivision using typical
July 21, 2011 350
FHA lot grading types (A, B and C). A more detailed grading plan is also
acceptable.
(6) For projects with an increased impervious area of greater than 0.1 acres,
stormwater detention shall be required for all new developments or
redevelopment of individual parcels of property to mitigate peak flow rates to
predevelopment or existing development conditions as stated in this UDC.
(a) The maximum allowable outflow rate from the detention facility must be
restricted to the flow rate from the undeveloped or existing development
tract for the five-year (5-yr), twenty five-year (25-yr) and one hundred-year
(100-yr) frequency. Best management practices shall be used in the
design of detention facilities in accordance with this section. The timing of
the hydrograph released from the detention facility must be checked
against the timing of the flow rate in the first open watercourse to prevent
any increase in the peak flow rate in the receiving watercourse. For
detention basins constructed in-line on an existing watercourse, the
creation of the basin shall not increase flood elevations in the channel
upstream of the new development boundaries.
(b) On-site detention facilities must be privately owned and shall be maintained
by the community association or property owner. A maintenance schedule
shall be submitted to the City and approved by the City Engineer prior to
approval of construction plans. The City will have the right to do periodic
inspections of privately owned and maintained detention facilities to ensure
that the maintenance schedule is being implemented. Where a detention
facility accepts flows from public facilities such as City rights-of-way, the
detention facility will be considered a detention facility serving a public
purpose and will be dedicated to the City upon completion, and a drainage
easement will be dedicated to provide for access to the facility. When a
regional detention facility accepts flow from an area exceeding three
hundred (300) acres, the facility shall be considered serving a public
purpose and shall be dedicated to the City.
(c) Multi-use facilities are encouraged, but not required (multi-use facilities
allow for water quality, satisfy NPDES requirements, enhance around water
recharge, provide open space, provide recreation or other amenities,
and/or provide habitat) and may be utilized so long as each facility meets
the standards set forth in subsection (a) of this section and does not
increase the rate or volume of erosion above that which would result from
the use of a facility without multiple uses. The use of multi-use detention
facilities to alleviate existing flooding problems, enhance and provide
amenities for older neighborhoods, and support the revitalization of
economically depressed areas is encouraged in public and private
redevelopment initiatives.
(d) Stormwater retention with permanent wet pool or pumped detention
systems will not be acceptable methods of stormwater mitigation unless the
facility will remain privately owned, operated, and maintained. The City will
July 21, 2011 351
approve the use of a pumped facility for private use under the following
conditions:
1) A gravity system is not feasible from an engineering and economic
standpoint;
2) At least two (2) pumps are provided, each of which is sized to pump
the design flow rate;
3) The selected design outflow rate does not aggravate downstream
flooding;
4) Controls and pumps are designed to prevent unauthorized operation
and vandalism; and
5) Adequate assurance is provided so that the system will be operated
and maintained on a continuous basis.
(e) Stormwater detention facilities shall be located in topographically
depressed areas where possible. When necessary, dams may be
constructed to detain flows. All proposed dams shall conform to the
following items:
1) All dams over six feet (6’) above existing natural ground shall be
approved for safety by the Dam Safety Team of the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality (“TCEQ”), or its successor
agency. All other new dams shall be designed in accordance with
acceptable design criteria as approved by the City Engineer.
2) All hydrology and hydraulic properties of a dam will be reviewed by
the City Engineer with regard to spillway design, freeboard hydraulics,
backwater curves and downstream effects due to the dam site.
3) The spillway section of any earthen dam with a height greater than six
feet (6’) shall be large enough to pass a probable maximum
precipitation (“PMP”) flood, as defined by the National Resources
Conservation Service (“NRCS”), without overtopping the crest of the
dam in accordance with TCEQ regulations.
4) A one hundred-year (100-yr) frequency flood shall be routed through
the proposed dam and all land subject to flooding shall be dedicated
as drainage easement or right-of-way. An unobstructed fifteen-foot
(15’) access easement around the periphery of the flooded area shall
be dedicated as drainage easement for facilities that require regular
mowing or other ongoing maintenance, at the discretion of the City
Engineer. An unobstructed fifteen-foot (15’) access right-of-way shall
be established which connects the drainage easement adjacent to the
dam structure to a road or alley.
5) Development below existing dams will take into account the original
design conditions of the existing dam. Dam breach analysis checks
will be required, dependent upon location of development with respect
to dam site.
July 21, 2011 352
6) All spillway discharges shall be adequately routed to the centerline of
the natural low below the dam site. The adequate routing of spillway
discharges pertains to the hydraulic routing of the one hundred-year
(100-yr) frequency flood for dedication of drainage easement limits.
PMP on flood routing or breaches will only be considered for safety
considerations (that is, the placement of building and the setting of
minimum floor slab elevations below the dams). Any proposed
concrete dam structure need not have spillway capable of routing a
PMP flood; however, it shall be shown to be structurally capable of
withstanding any range of flood conditions with regard to possible
failure due to sliding, overturning, and structural integrity, up to and
including the PMP flood.
(7) Streets
(a) Generally
1) Design of streets shall consider public safety and limit potential
conflicts between stormwater conveyance, traffic, parking, pedestrian
access, ADA requirements, and bicycle traffic.
2) Streets draining a watershed greater than one hundred (100) acres
must be designed for the one hundred-year (100-yr) frequency storm.
3) Streets may be used for stormwater drainage only if the calculated
stormwater flow does not exceed the flows outlined in this UDC’s
Table 3-7 or the velocity does not exceed ten feet (10’) per second.
4) Where streets are not capable of carrying stormwater, as outlined
above, inlets or curb openings discharging to drainage channels or
storm sewers shall be provided. Partial flow past the inlet will be
allowed when the capacity of all downstream street systems can
accommodate the flow.
5) Street width shall not be widened beyond the width as determined by
the street classification for drainage purposes.
6) Stormwater conveyance on streets shall be designed to account for
the cumulative impact of peak flows and runoff volumes on the system
as the stormwater progresses downgrade.
7) Curb cuts for driveways on all streets shall be designed for
compatibility with the stormwater conveyance function of streets.
8) Potential flooding problems or conflicts at the connection points where
new or modified drainage systems (including streets, storm sewers,
etc.) and the existing portions of the downstream street system and
stormwater conveyance system shall be identified and resolved either
in the design of the new or modified drainage system or in
modifications to the existing system.
July 21, 2011 353
9) Dwelling units located on the downhill side of a T-intersection with a
street or drainage channel discharging onto the intersection shall be
sited so as to avoid obstruction of the drainage patterns.
(b) An arterial street is a street so designated on the current Thoroughfare
Master Plan. One (1) lane in each direction on arterial streets shall remain
passable with a flow depth not to exceed 0.30 feet during a twenty five-year
(25-yr) storm event. The maximum depth of water in the street section
must not exceed seven inches (7”) (the height of a standard city curb).
(c) A maximum flow depth to the top of curb on a collector street section will be
allowed during a one hundred-year (100-yr) storm event. A collector street
is a street with a width of forty two feet (42’) or more and not shown as an
arterial street on the current Thoroughfare Master Plan.
(d) Local streets shall be designed on a basis of a five-year (5-yr) frequency. A
one hundred-year (100-yr) frequency storm must be contained within the
street right-of-way.
(e) Alleys shall be designed for five-year (5-yr) frequency within the limits of
the alley pavement/curbs and twenty five-year (25-yr) frequency within the
right-of-way/easement to carry stormwater.
(f) All-Weather Crossings
1) Where streets cross existing or proposed watercourses, all weather
crossings shall be required. Culverts or bridges shall be adequate to
allow passage of the design storm identified in SECTION 12B(2)(a).
All crossings, culverts and bridges shall be designed for an H-20-44 or
HS-20 loading.
(8) This section addresses proposed improvements or modifications to drainage
channels and watercourses required to convey stormwater runoff from or
through the proposed development. Refer to SECTION 12B(2)(a) for storm
frequency design criteria.
(a) Except as authorized by a development plan approved by the City
Engineer, no person shall place or cause to be placed any obstruction of
any kind in any watercourse within the City and its ETJ. The owner of any
property within the City, through which any watercourse may pass, shall
keep the watercourse free from any obstruction not authorized by a
development plan.
(b) Channel Modifications
1) Modifications to existing watercourses or newly created open
channels may be designed as earth channels, sod channels or as
concrete-lined channels. Liners other than sod or concrete which
enhance the aesthetics or habitat value of the watercourse and which
reduce future maintenance requirements are encouraged.
Preliminary planning for the applicability of other channel liners shall
be reviewed with the City Engineer prior to the submittal of
construction plans for approval.
July 21, 2011 354
2) Runoff that results from upstream development and is discharged to
an unimproved waterway can cause flood damage to properties
adjacent to the waterway. Natural undeveloped waterways do not
receive regular maintenance. Design of natural waterways shall take
into consideration fluvial geomorphologic principals and practices.
Consulting engineers and development review officials shall work to
resolve potential downstream impact issues.
(c) Design of new channels or alterations to existing channels shall consider
future maintenance requirements. A maintenance schedule for any private
channel shall be submitted to and approved by the City Engineer prior to
approval of construction plans. Maintenance requirements of concrete
channels consist of de-silting activities, prevention of vegetation
establishment in construction joints, and repair of concrete as necessary.
Maintenance of earthen channels includes regular observation and repair,
as necessary, of erosion, scouring, and removal of silt deposits, as
necessary to maintain design parameters. Developers shall be responsible
for maintaining newly planted channels until coverage is established
throughout eighty-five percent (85%) of the area. This area shall include
slopes, floor, and any attendant maintenance easement. New earthen
channels shall be planted with drought-resistant, low-growth, native
species grasses, which will allow unobstructed passage of floodwaters.
Johnson grass, giant tagweed and other invasive species shall not be
allowed to promulgate in channels. Suggested species include, but shall
not be limited to, common Bermuda, coastal Bermuda, buffalo grass,
sideoats grama, Seep Muhly, little bluestem, and Indian grass. Mowing
frequencies vary with the vegetation growth rates, but is required when the
grass exceeds the design roughness coefficient of the channel.
(d) Planned multiple-use of a watercourse, e.g., bike paths or a greenbelt, is
allowed. If multiple use of the watercourse is to be incorporated, the
applicant shall form a property owners' association that shall assume
maintenance responsibility for private amenities. The applicant shall
provide overlay easements for public or private use.
(e) Table 12-6 shall be used to determine maximum permissible channel
velocity.
Table 12-6
Velocity Control
Velocity (fps)
Type of Facility
Required
Hydraulic
Radius (ft.)
Correction
Factor
Maximum
Permissible
Velocity (fps)
1 to 6
(Maximum
Average
Velocity = 6
Vegetated
Earthen
Channel
0--1 0.80 5.00
1--3 0.90 5.50
3--5 1.05 6.30
5--8 1.15 6.90
July 21, 2011 355
fps) 8--10 1.23 7.35
Over 10 1.25 7.50
6 to 8 Concrete
Retards
NA NA NA
> 8 Concrete Lining
or Drop
Structures
NA NA NA
1) Where velocities are in the supercritical range, allowance shall be
made in the design for the proper handling of the water.
2) Ensure that the channel will contain the hydraulic jump (sequent
depth) throughout the extent of the supercritical profile. An exception
to this criterion is where concrete-lined lateral channels discharge
down the side slopes of channels. These channels may be designed
for normal depth plus freeboard provided velocity controls are
established at the main channel flow line.
3) Ensure that the energy grade of the channel will not result in upstream
flooding at existing or proposed lateral facility connections.
(f) Retard spacing shall be computed as follows when using the following
equations:
1 2
L 1.0 feet
S S
=
+
Where: L = Distance required between retards in feet.
S1 = Actual slope of channel in ft./ft.
S2 = Slope of proposed channel for maximum permissible
velocity. and
2
2 2
3
S NV
1.486R
? ?
= ? ?
?? ??
Where: V = maximum permissible velocity established from Table
12-6
N = .035R = area/wetted perimeter
(g) Vegetated Earthen Channels
1) The side slope shall not be steeper than three (3) horizontal to one (1)
vertical.
2) Easements or rights-of-way for improved earthen channels shall
conform to the requirements stated in this UDC and shall extend a
minimum of two feet (2’) on one (1) side and fifteen feet (15’) for an
access road on the opposite side of the extreme limits of the channels
July 21, 2011 356
when such channels do not parallel and adjoin an alley or roadway.
When such channels do parallel and adjoin an alley or roadway, the
easement or right-of-way shall extend a minimum of two feet (2’) on
both sides of the extreme limits of the channel. Where utilities are
installed in the access road of the drainage right-of-way, the right-ofway
shall extend two feet (2’) on one (1) side and seventeen feet (17’)
on the opposite side of the design limits of the channel. These
seventeen feet (17’) are to provide an access way along the channel
with a maximum cross slope of one inch (1”) per foot toward the
channel. Where designed channel bottoms exceed one hundred feet
(100’) in width, the fifteen-foot (15’) extra width shall be provided on
both sides of the channel.
3) Interceptor drainage easements shall extend a minimum of two feet
(2’) on both sides of the extreme limits of the channel. Improved
earthen channels will be vegetated by seeding or sodding. Eighty-five
percent (85%) of the channel surface area must have established
vegetation before the City will accept the channel for maintenance.
(h) Freeboard. Allowance for extra freeboard shall be made when the
centerline radius of the channel is less than three (3) times the bottom
width. Where sharp bends or high velocities are involved, the applicant
shall use the following formula for computing the extra freeboard:
2 ( )
2 1
V T B
d d
2gR
+
- =
Where: d1 = depth of flow at the inside of the bend in feet.
d2 = depth of flow at the outside of the bend in feet.
B = bottom width of the channel in feet.
V = the average approach velocity in the channel in feet per
second.
T = width of flow at the water surface in feet.
g = 32.2 feet/second squared.
R = the centerline radius of the turn or bend in feet.
1) The quantity d2 - d1 divided by two (2) shall be added to the normal
depth of flow before adding the required freeboard in calculating
required right-of-way widths.
2) Where sharp turns are used without curved sections, the depth
required shall be large enough to provide for all head losses.
Allowance shall be made for any backwater head that may result.
3) For normal design conditions no extra freeboard is required. An
accepted rule of thumb to follow is this: The centerline radius of
channel should be at least three (3) times the bottom width.
July 21, 2011 357
(9) Storm Sewers
(a) For all ordinary conditions, storm sewers shall be designed on the
assumption that they will flow full under the design discharge; however,
whenever the system is placed under a pressure head, or there are
constrictions, turns, submerged or inadequate outfall, etc., the hydraulic
and energy grade lines shall be computed and plotted in profile. In all
cases adequate outfalls shall be provided and the system adequately
designed.
(b) No storm sewers shall be less than 18 inches in diameter.
(c) Minimum easement widths for storm sewers will be the greater of fifteen
feet (15’) or six feet (6’) on both sides of the extreme limits of the storm
sewer width (e.g., the easement width for a three (3)-barrel, ten-foot wide
box culvert with six inch (6”) walls would be (3 x 10')+(4 x 0.5')+(2 x 6') =
44').
(10) Inlets and Openings
(a) Drop Curb Openings - Sidewalk Does Not Abut Opening. Where drop curb
openings are used to take stormwater off the streets and into drains, the
length of the curb opening can be calculated from the weir formula using
the coefficient of 3.087 in the weir formula:
3
2
L Q
Ch
=
Where: L = the length of drop curb opening required in feet.
Q = amount of flow in CFS based on twenty five-year design
frequency.
C = 3.087.
h = head of weir in feet.
Gutter line depressions will be permitted where such depressions will not
hamper the flow of traffic. For amount of curb exposure, conform to City
inlet standards.
(b) Curb or Drop Inlets. Where drop inlets are used, the City standard inlets
with adequate reinforcing steel may be used. All other types or designs
shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer. The following
formulas for inlet capacity are based on drop inlets in sag points. Inlet
capacities on grades will be considered less, the amount of which depends
on street grades, deflections, cross slopes, depressions, etc.
(c) Grate Inlets. The flow of water through grate openings may be treated as
the flow of water through a rectangular orifice. The following formula may
be used for determining grate capacity:
( )1
Q = CA 2gh 2
July 21, 2011 358
Where: Q = discharge in cubic feet per second.
C = orifice coefficient of discharge (taken as 0.70).
g = acceleration due to gravity (32.2 ft./sec2).
h = head on the grate in feet.
A = net area of the openings in the grate in square feet.
This formula gives the theoretical capacity of the grate inlet. Since grate
inlets are subject to considerable clogging, capacity of the grate inlet will
be taken as one-half (1/2) on the value given by this formula.
(d) Curb Opening Inlets. The capacity of curb opening inlets will depend on
whether the opening is running partially full or submerged. If the depth of
flow at the curb opening inlet is such as to cause a partially full opening, a
weir effect will develop and the following formula will apply:
( )3
2
Q = CwL h
Where: Q = the discharge of capacity in cubic feet per second.
Cw = the weir coefficient of discharge (3.087).
L = the length of curb opening in feet.
h = the head or depth of water at the opening in feet.
If the depth of flow at the curb opening is such as to fully submerge the
opening, the orifice effect will develop and the formula used shall be
identical to that given under grate inlets, with the exception that the head
(h) on the curb opening orifice shall be taken as the depth from the top of
the water surface to the center of orifice or opening; one hundred
percent (100%) efficiency will be allowed for curb opening inlets.
C. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN
(1) Procedure
(a) Number of Copies. The applicant shall provide two (2) blue-line or blackline
copies of the plat together with two (2) copies of construction drawings.
(b) Format. Plats shall be drawn in India ink on Mylar on sheets eighteen
inches (18”) wide and twenty-four inches (24”) long, with a margin of two
and one-half inches (2½”) on the left side of the sheet, and appropriate
margins on the other three (3) sides. Plats shall be drawn at a scale of one
hundred feet (100’) to one inch (1”) unless a smaller scale is approved by
the City Manager. Plats which include one-half (½) acre or less in area
shall be drawn at a scale of fifty feet (50’) to one inch (1”). Where more
than one (1) sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area to be
subdivided, an index sheet showing the entire subdivision at an appropriate
scale shall be attached to the plat.
(c) Contents. To standardize the review process and minimize the time for
approval by the City during review of the plat and construction drawings for
July 21, 2011 359
a subdivision, a complete submittal regarding the analysis of existing
drainage conditions and the design of modifications or new drainage
facilities is necessary. The owner of the property to be developed is
required by the City Manager to provide, at the owner’s expense and as a
condition of construction plan approval, a stormwater management report
for the total development area to be ultimately constructed. The
stormwater management report shall contain all of the necessary support
data, methodologies used in calculations, and conclusions. A checklist is
below that will be used by the City reviewer as a guide during the
evaluation of all stormwater management reports submitted to the City.
The purpose of the checklist is to expedite the review process for both the
engineer and the City, and to aid the engineer in the preparation of reports
for the City's review. The stormwater management report shall be
submitted to the City Engineer prior to approval of any construction plans.
(d) Report. The stormwater management plan shall include two (2) copies of a
written report that includes the following information, as applicable:
1) A vicinity map of the site and affected reach of the outfall channel;
2) A detailed map of the area and the outfall channel with all pertinent
physiographic information;
3) A watershed map showing the existing and proposed drainage area
boundary along with all sub area delineations and all areas of existing
and proposed development;
4) Discharge calculations specifying methodology and key assumptions
used including a table of discharges at key locations;
5) Hydraulic calculations specifying methodology used, assumptions and
values of the design parameters;
6) Profiles of the affected channels, including water surface elevations
for the specified design frequencies, all existing and proposed bridge,
culvert and pipeline crossings, the location of all tributary and
drainage confluences, and the location of all hydraulic structures;
7) Detention basin design calculations, including those used for design
of the control structure;
8) Right-of-way and easement requirements, and a map showing
locations of all rights-of-way and easements;
9) A soils report which addresses erosion and slope stability of new or
altered channels and detention facilities;
10) A computer diskette of all existing and proposed condition HEC-1 and
HEC-2 models used in analysis; and
11) A checklist for the submittal package is included as paragraph (2)
below. A checklist for the preparation of a HEC-2 model is included as
paragraph (3) below.
(2) Subdivision Drainage Checklist
July 21, 2011 360
(a) ________U.S.G.S. Quadrangle map showing overall drainage areas, runoff
coefficients, time of concentration, intensity and Qs.
(b) ________Subdivision master drainage plan with overall interior drainage
area of subdivision showing drainage area, time of concentration, runoff
coefficients, intensities, and Qs for the street and alley flows and also
channel and underground system design.
(c) ________Subdivision plat showing interior drainage areas, time of
concentration, runoff coefficients, and intensities, Qs for street and alley
flows and also channel and underground system design.
(d) Drainage Calculations Required For:
1) ________Open channel design
2) ________Underground systems
3) ________Box culverts
4) ________Pipe culverts
5) ________Hydraulic jump
6) ________Super elevation in channel bends
7) ________Retard spacing
8) ________Backwater curves with cross sections
9) ________Draw down curves with cross sections
10) ________Energy dissipaters
11) ________Hydraulic grade lines of pipes
12) ________(1) Inlets on grades ________(2) Inlets in sump
13) ________Drop curb openings
14) ________Sidewalk culverts
15) ________AR2/3 calculations with cross sections
16) ________Weir formulas structures
17) ________Orifice formulas
18) ________Grade to drain channels
19) ________Upstream pickup and flared section
20) ________Downstream backwater control and flare to match
downstream condition
21) ________Show required freeboard
22) ________Improper "N" value
23) ________Improper velocity used
24) ________Improper easement width
25) ________Show access road on each sodded channel
July 21, 2011 361
26) ________Improper runoff coefficient used
27) ________Improper time of concentration used
28) ________Improper Qs used
29) ________Steel calculations for box culvert
(e) ________Subdivision plat showing all interior drainage easements, outfall
drainage easements, U.S.G.S. contour map and all other necessary
drainage information
1) ________Show outfall drainage easements to the centerline of
existing natural low
2) ________Show finished fill contours
3) ________Show interceptor drainage easements
(f) ________Typical Details Required on Plans for:
1) ________Box culvert with headwalls or wing walls
2) ________Pipe culverts with headwalls or wing walls
3) ________Culvert headwalls shown with proper safety measures
4) ________Drop curb openings
5) ________(1) Inlets on grade ________(2) Inlets on sump
6) ________Drop structures
7) ________Retards
8) ________Sidewalks over drains
9) ________Guard post installations
10) ________Guard rail on structures
11) ________Header curb
12) ________Energy dissipaters
13) ________Junction boxes
14) ________Concrete lined channels with freeboard
15) ________Earth sodded channels with freeboard
16) ________Other concrete structures:
17) ________ Grade to drain sections
18) ________Transition sections
19) ________Fencing for vertical wall channels greater than 2' deep
20) ________Other: _________
21) ________Side slope
22) ________Note: Adjacent lots shall be graded to provide access and
drainage to adjacent street and drainage systems.
July 21, 2011 362
(g) ________Complete Street Plans and Profiles
(h) ________Complete Drainage Plan and Profile Including the Following
Requirements:
1) ________Proposed flowline slopes with grades and elevations shown
every 50' in profile
2) ________Proposed top of channel profile
3) ________Existing ground right and left profile at property line
4) ________Finished fill profiles
5) ________Locations and size of culverts
6) ________Drop structures
7) ________Retards
8) ________Grade to drain profiles
9) ________Flowline elevations at every 50' station and at each
structure and change in grade
10) ________Junction boxes
11) ________Channel plan views
12) ________Channel sections
13) ________Pipes with hydraulic grade lines on profile
14) ________Cross sections of existing natural channels or lows which
are not to be improved, but left in natural state and dedicated to high
water calculated
15) ________Angles, bearings, distances, etc., for structures, channels,
etc.
16) ________Lot grading layout drains
17) ________Culvert structural details
(i) ________Unit and Storm Hydrographs For Major Streams (Over 2,000
acres)
(j) ________Drainage Easements to the Centerline of Natural Low
(k) ________Cost Estimate
(l) ________Engineer’s Seal
(m) ________Other
(3) HEC-2 Submittal Checklist
Floodplain submittal checklist supersedes this attachment for projects in the
FEMA Floodplain.
Project __________ Engineer __________ Stream __________
Date __________
July 21, 2011 363
The purpose of this checklist is to aid the engineer in the preparation of HEC-
2 studies and reports and to expedite the City of Crandall review procedure.
(a) Submission Package
1) _________ Signed, sealed, and dated by an engineer certified to
practice in the State of Texas
2) _________ Signed checklist
3) _________ 3 1/2" diskette with all input files
4) _________ Copy of condensed printouts
(b) Narrative
1) _________ Table of Contents
2) _________ Abstract or executive summary
3) _________ Introduction
4) _________ Project description and history
5) _________ Location
6) _________ Scope and objective of analysis
7) _________ Previous and related studies that may affect this analysis
8) _________ Methodology
9) _________ Sources of discharges
10) _________ Bridge routines
11) _________ Base or effective models (mention source)
12) _________ Revised-base model
13) _________ Proposed model
14) _________ Summary, conclusions, and recommendations
15) _________ Water surface elevation impacts
(c) Tables
1) _________ Water surface comparison table at each cross section
2) _________ Floodway table
3) _________ Cross section numbering table (if stationing changes)
4) _________ Exhibits
5) _________ Vicinity map
6) _________ Plan view of project reach
7) _________ Water surface profiles for design storm
8) _________ Channel cross sections showing limits of drainage
easements and property lines
9) _________ Bridge cross sections
July 21, 2011 364
10) _________ Plan view of bridge
11) _________ Photographs (if available)
(d) Appendices
1) _________ Pertinent correspondence (meeting notes, etc.)
2) _________ Survey and/or certified "as-built" information for all
revisions to base model
3) _________ Sample calculations
(e) Name of submitter_________ Date_________
Certification. The stormwater management report must include a letter
signed and sealed by a professional engineer with text descriptions,
exhibits, calculations and models.
The stormwater management plan shall include a performance bond
executed as follows:
State of Texas X
County of _______ X
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS:
That we, _________, the undersigned developer as principal, and
_________, as surety, do hereby acknowledge ourselves to be held and
firmly bound unto the City of Crandall, a municipal corporation of the
State of Texas, in the full and just sum of $_________, for the payment
of which will and truly to be made, we hereby bind ourselves and our
respective heirs, administrators, executors and assigns jointly and
severally, firmly by these presents.
WHEREAS, the principal had petitioned the City Manager of the City of
Crandall for permission to _________ within the jurisdiction of the City of
Crandall, which is shown on plans entitled _________, and which is
more particularly described as follows, to wit: _______________.
WHEREAS, plans and a floodplain development permit for such
development were approved by the City Manager; and
WHEREAS, the Code of Ordinances of the City of Crandall requires that
the site improvements set out below be completed by the principal in
conformance with the standards established by that ordinance within
three (3) years of the date on which the floodplain development permit
was approved; and
WHEREAS, the aforesaid ordinance requires that a guarantee of
performance that such site improvements will have been completed and
will have been accepted by the City within three (3) years of the date on
which the floodplain development permit was approved; and
WHEREAS, the undersigned developer has elected to provide to the
City of Crandall such a guarantee of performance.
July 21, 2011 365
NOW, THEREFORE, the condition of this obligation is such that if the
principal shall, on or before the ________ day of _________,
20________, construct or cause to be constructed the above mentioned
improvements in accordance with the requirement of the City of Crandall
Code of Ordinances, then this obligation shall be void; otherwise the
obligations under this bond shall remain in full force and effect.
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, WITNESS OUR HAND AND SEAL this
________ day of _________, 20________.
DEVELOPER AND PRINCIPAL
BY: _________
TITLE: _________
BY: _________
ATTORNEY-IN-FACT
APPROVED AND ACCEPTED THIS ________ day of _________,
20_______.
CITY OF CRANDALL, TEXAS
BY: _________
TITLE: CITY MANAGER
APPROVED AS TO FORM: _________, CITY ATTORNEY
(4) P.E. Registration Number
SECTION 13 - TRANSPORTATION
A. STREETS
(1) Street Layout
The arrangement, extent, character, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the Thoroughfare Plan and the Comprehensive Plan.
Collector streets shall provide adequate circulation within the neighborhood
and yet discourage through traffic. The street layout shall be arranged to
achieve the most desirable development of the entire neighborhood unit with
appropriate consideration of creeks, drainage channels, wooded areas and
other topographical features, which lend themselves to special treatment.
Permits must be obtained from TxDOT for driveways and streets accessing
any state highway. The proposed location of driveways must comply with all
applicable City and State safety requirements.
(2) Relation to Adjoining Streets
Adjoining areas shall be continued and tied into the street layout.
(3) Projection of Streets
When adjoining properties are not yet subdivided, the arrangement of streets
shall provide for the proper projection of streets into the adjoining
July 21, 2011 366
unsubdivided areas, and will be required to comply with the neighborhood
pattern or conform to the Comprehensive Plan.
(4) Private Streets
(a) Private streets within the City may be authorized providing all of the
following conditions are met:
1) A HOA is established to maintain and upkeep all streets in a
subdivision in accordance with the City's public street standards, to
include the mowing of shoulders and rights-of-way, removal of weeds
and unclogging of culverts.
2) Private streets are constructed in accordance with the City's
standards for public streets.
3) The following "maintenance agreement" note shall appear on the
subdivision plat:
“Streets within this subdivision shall be constructed in accordance
with the City of Crandall public streets standards. The upkeep and
maintenance, including the mowing of shoulders and rights-of-way,
removal of weeds and unclogging of culverts, shall be the
responsibility of the homeowners association. The City of Crandall is
released from any liability for these streets. Periodic inspection by a
public official who is authorized to enforce complaints about poor
maintenance is permitted.”
(b) Private streets within the City shall provide access for fire protection,
ambulance, police, school bus, garbage service and other utility agencies.
(c) One Residence
A private street or road serving only one (1) residence is exempt from
construction and maintenance standards for public streets.
(d) Ingress/Egress
Private streets shall connect directly to a public street or road.
(5) Dead-End Streets and Cul-de-Sacs
(a) Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as short stubs projected to be
continued in future subdivisions in conformance with this section when
designed as cul-de-sacs. Temporary turnarounds shall be provided on
projected streets until such time as they are extended.
(b) Cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed six hundred feet (600’) in length,
measured from the centerline of the intersecting street to the center of the
cul-de-sac, and shall have a turnaround with a minimum 50-foot radius.
This provision may be modified upon approval of the Fire Chief and City
Engineer.
(6) Alignment
The alignment of all arterial and collector streets shall conform to the
Comprehensive Plan and the requirements of the Development Standards
July 21, 2011 367
and in no case shall street jogs be offset less than one hundred fifty feet
(150’) on centerline.
(7) Intersections
All intersections on arterial and collector streets shall be at ninety (90)
degrees. The curb radius at street intersections shall conform to the
specifications in this UDC.
(8) Street Names and Street Numbers
Names of new streets shall not duplicate the names of existing streets within
the City and its ETJ unless the new street is a continuation of or part of a
future continuation of such existing street. Street names shall be chosen to
avoid similarity or confusion with existing street names. A new street name
shall not differ from an existing street name solely by the addition of a
different auxiliary designation such as "avenue," "way," "boulevard," etc.
Names of all new streets shall be subject to recommendation by the
Commission and approval by the City Council and be coordinated on an areawide
basis. Street names shall have prior approval of the United States Post
Office and Kaufman County. Street addresses should also be coordinated
with present existing addresses. The City will determine street numbers and
advise the subdivider as to the street numbers.
(9) Construction Standards
All streets shall be constructed with reference to base, surfacing, curbs,
grades, horizontal curves and intersection curve radius in accordance with the
standards prescribed in this UDC and any other applicable specifications of
the City.
(10) Reserve Areas are Prohibited
There shall be no reserve areas controlling access to land dedicated or
intended to be dedicated to public use.
(11) Half Streets or Adjacent Streets
(a) No new half streets shall be platted that do not conform to the
Thoroughfare Plan and the Comprehensive Plan. Where the proposed
subdivision abuts upon an existing street or half street not conforming to
the Comprehensive Plan requirements or the requirements of this UDC, the
developer shall be required to dedicate any additional right-of-way to meet
the street width required.
(b) If new development of property that abuts City-maintained roads does not
meet the design or width standards in this UDC, the Developer shall be
required to make the necessary dedication and improvements in
conformance with this UDC or any other applicable code of the City.
(c) The minimum dedication and construction costs shall be equal to one-half
(½) of the minimum ROW and construction costs associated with the
proposed street.
July 21, 2011 368
(d) Improvements shall include right-of-way dedication, paving, curb and
guttering, shoulder improvements and sidewalk as determined by the City.
(e) Should any pavement be laid to widen existing pavement, the existing
pavement shall be saw-cut back a minimum of two feet (2’) to assure an
adequate sub-base and pavement joint.
(12) Public Accesses
All residential subdivisions shall have a minimum of two (2) locations
accessing existing public streets. Access may be provided through the
construction of a public street. The extent and location of all access points is
subject to review and approval by the City. The Commission shall not permit
"island" subdivisions, lots or streets that would be surrounded by the flood
water of a one hundred-year (100-yr) flood unless the area is accessible to
high ground by at least two dedicated streets elevated above the one
hundred-year (100-yr) flood level.
(13) Safety Lanes (Fire Lanes)
(a) Manufactured home parks, recreational vehicle parks, apartments, multifamily
residences, malls, and commercial and business areas shall have
driving surfaces within the site designated and clearly identified as safety
lanes or fire lanes for fire protection, emergency medical services (“EMS”),
etc. These areas must be paved with concrete and be maintained by the
owners. Exits from these sites shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30’) in
width and must exit onto a dedicated street. The pavement width for
interior safety lanes shall be a minimum of twenty-four feet (24’). Additional
width will be required when adequate off-street parking is not provided.
(b) All roadways that serve emergency vehicles are required to have a
minimum clearance of fourteen feet (14’) to any overhead obstructions
including, but not limited to, bridges, trees, canopies, awnings and signs.
(14) Access to Principal and Secondary Arterial Streets
Access to principal and secondary arterial streets should be limited to protect
the flow of traffic from the lots. A one-foot (1’) non-access easement shall be
provided along principal and secondary arterial streets when lots have access
to another public right-of-way.
(15) Street and Traffic Control Signs
(a) All street signs in a new subdivision within the City limits, including street
name, speed limit, stop and yield signs, etc., shall be paid for by the
developer, and shall be provided and installed by the City in accordance
with this UDC. Traffic control devices required within the subdivision shall
be installed in accordance with the latest revision of the Texas Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for streets and highways (“MUTCD”).
(b) Any installation of speed control devices, such as speed bumps or humps,
must also be approved by the fire department to determine potential impact
to emergency response vehicles.
July 21, 2011 369
(c) A required traffic control device must be fitted with traffic preemptioncompatible
devices for activation by emergency vehicles.
(16) Street Improvements
(a) All street improvements shall meet the current requirements of the
Comprehensive Plan and this section, but in no case shall they be less
than the following:
Table 13-1
Street Improvement Standards
Classification
ROW
Width
Pavement
Width
Drainage
Width
Sidewalk
Width
Hike/Bike Trail Width
Principal
Arterial
120 feet 48 feet
with 16-
foot
median
Curb and
Gutter
5 feet One
Side
8 feet other side
from sidewalk
(unless State Hwy,
then both sides)
Secondary
Arterial
85 feet 48 feet Curb and
Gutter
5 feet One
Side
8 feet other side
from sidewalk
Collector 65 feet 44 feet Curb and
Gutter
5 feet Both
Sides
-
Local Street 50 feet 27 feet Curb and
Gutter
5 feet Both
Sides
-
Paved Alley 20 feet 15 feet Curb and
Gutter
None -
(b) Islands in Roadways
Islands in road rights-of-way will be considered on a case-by-case basis.
The street right-of-way will be engineered to accommodate all
emergency and utility vehicles, after coordination by City staff. At a
minimum, all islands shall provide at least twenty-four feet (24’) of
pavement on each side of the island. All islands provided within street
ROW shall be designated on the plat and shall be dedicated by the
developer or its successors and/or assigns. A plat note shall be
provided which identifies maintenance of islands as the responsibility of
the developer or its successors and/or assigns. Any islands that are not
maintained in accordance with this section may be removed by the City
and shall be removed at the expense of the developer or its successors
and/or assigns, after due notice and the written recommendation by the
City Engineer and fire department.
(17) Drainage
The storm drainage for all streets shall be designed on a one hundred-year
(100-yr) flood frequency. Runoff rates shall be computed in all cases on the
basis of ultimate development of the entire watershed contributing runoff
water to the proposed subdivision, on the basis of concrete-lined channels
and streets carrying stormwater in the contributing area. All necessary storm
July 21, 2011 370
drainage improvements shall be in accordance with this UDC and applicable
City of Plano drainage regulations as previously referenced.
(18) Curb and Gutter
Curbs and gutters shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides of all
streets within or forming part of the boundary of the subdivision. Curbs and
gutters shall be constructed in accordance with the Design Standards. The
City Engineer may waive the requirements for construction of curb and gutter
or may approve an alternative curb and gutter construction where
developments result in an overall density of less than one (1) unit per one-half
(1/2) acre.
(19) Street Lights
(a) Developers shall furnish satisfactory easements for installation of services
to street lights as required by the City and any applicable electric utility
provider.
(b) Street light number, type and size shall be determined by the City and any
applicable electric utility provider and shall be designed to maximize the
light directed toward the ground.
(c) The developer shall pay the cost of purchasing and installing all street
lighting equipment and the cost of all street lighting services for a period of
two (2) years or until such time as seventy percent (70%) of the buildings
for which building permits have been issued are completed, whichever is
sooner.
(d) A detailed lighting plan shall be submitted with the public infrastructure
improvement plans for review and approval by the City and any applicable
electric utility provider.
(20) Street Markers (Signs)
Street name, stop and speed limit signs having the following specifications
shall be erected at all street intersections in such subdivisions for street
markers:
(a) The material of the street name signs, the method of attaching the sign to
the post, the details of lettering, painting, and method of installation, as well
as the location of the sign at the intersection shall be in accordance with
this UDC.
(b) The street name signs shall be of the cross-arm type, and shall be
reflectorized on extruded aluminum metal blanks.
(c) Street markers are to be provided by the developer.
B. CRITERIA AND DESIGN
The criteria and specific design standards for transportation-related development
as described in this section are set by this UDC.
C. ADDITIONAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
(1) Purpose and Applicability
July 21, 2011 371
(a) The purpose of this section is to establish additional development
standards applicable to certain streets within the City, thereby ensuring
uniform and quality development that results in an attractive environment
compatible with businesses and residential dwellings, which do the
following:
1) Provide an environment and living conditions favorable to the public;
2) Provide a creative approach to land use and related physical
development;
3) Create a pattern of development which preserves trees and
outstanding natural topography and prevents soil erosion and
pollution;
4) Encourage mixed use development through innovative uses of
modern development concepts; and
5) Produce open space and recreation areas.
(b) The requirements of this section shall be applicable to all roadways
classified as Principal Arterials or Secondary Arterials in accordance with
SECTION 13A.
(2) Permitted Uses
Buildings, structures and land shall be used in accordance with the uses
permitted in the applicable zoning district and shall comply with the
dimensional requirements of that district in accordance with SECTION 5 of
this UDC.
(3) Landscape Buffer
In addition to the requirements of SECTION 9G of this UDC for landscaping,
a minimum twenty foot (20’)-wide landscape buffer shall be provided adjacent
to any public right-of-way. Trees shall be planted at an average density of
one (1) tree per twenty (20) linear feet of street frontage. The landscape
buffer shall require an irrigation system and shall be maintained by the
property owner.
(4) Off-Street Parking
Off-street parking is permitted adjacent to the landscape buffer along the
right-of-way. Parking and vehicular-use areas adjacent to the right-of-way
shall have earthen berms, walls, or a vegetative hedge barrier to reduce
vehicular reflections to the right-of-way. A special exception may be granted
by the BOA which would allow a reduction in the minimum required landscape
buffer when off-street parking is located entirely along the side or rear of the
building or lot.
(5) Building Setback Line
A minimum building setback shall be required adjacent to all rights-of-way as
detailed in Section 5. A special exception may be granted by the BOA which
would allow for a reduction in the minimum required setback when an
July 21, 2011 372
alternative site layout and design provides for additional open space or
landscaping and off-street parking will be located entirely at the rear of the
building or lot. In no case shall the minimum building setback be reduced
less than the minimum required setback for the applicable zoning district in
accordance with SECTION 5.
(6) Driveways and Access (Connectivity)
Access shall be limited to provide for safe traffic flow and the design shall
provide interior drives to limit the number of accesses to the public right-ofway.
Access easements should be utilized to limit the number of driveway
accesses. Right turn acceleration/deceleration lanes shall be required when
driveways are closer than three hundred feet (300’). Access points should be
planned to match existing driveways or street intersections on the opposite
side of the street. All driveways shall have a minimum sight distance of two
hundred forty feet (240’).
(7) Screening
A masonry screening wall a minimum of eight feet (8’) in height shall be
provided where the rear yard of any residential or nonresidential lot abuts a
Principal or Secondary Arterial. Any masonry screening wall constructed as
part of a new residential subdivision shall be constructed of a like and similar
material and color as screening walls in adjacent subdivisions to provide a
consistent streetscape.
D. ALLEYS
(1) Commercial and Industrial Districts
Where provided, paved alleys not less than 15-feet wide shall be provided in
all nonresidential districts to assure adequate provision is made for service
access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with an
adequate plan for the uses proposed. Alleys provided within commercial and
industrial districts shall be privately owned and maintained.
(2) Patio Home (PH) Zoning Districts
Where patio home districts are designated by the developer to require rear
ingress/egress, a 15-foot wide paved alley shall be provided.
(3) Intersections and Turns
Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but
where two (2) alleys intersect, or an alley turns at an angle sharper than one
hundred (100) degrees, a cut-off of not less than ten feet (10’) from the
normal intersection of the property lines shall be provided and shall be
designed in accordance with the applicable Fire Code.
(4) Dead-End Alleys
Dead-end alleys are prohibited.
(5) Construction
July 21, 2011 373
All alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the standards prescribed in
this UDC.
(6) Limitations
Construction of alleys is limited to commercial and industrial districts and
prohibited in residential areas except in the SF-PH district.
(7) Drainage
Drainage design of alleys shall be designed on the basis of 100-year
frequency to carry stormwater from only the lots within the block abutting the
alleys.
E. DRIVEWAYS
The arrangement, placement, spacing, width and return radii of all driveways
connecting to a street, roadway or alley shall be constructed, provided, altered or
repaired in accordance with requirements of this UDC.
F. SIDEWALKS AND HIKE AND BIKE TRAILS
(1) Sidewalks
Sidewalks shall be required along both sides of all streets throughout the City
as required in SECTION 13A except along Highway 175. All lots must have
access to concrete sidewalks or concrete hiking trails.
(2) Curb Ramps
Curb ramps shall be provided at all street intersections at the time of
construction or reconstruction and shall comply with the provisions in the
Federal Register 28, CFR part 36 (“ADA”) and Texas Accessibility Standards
as amended from time to time.
(3) Location and Width
Where sidewalks are required, they shall be installed in accordance with this
UDC and shall be a minimum of five feet (5’) in width. Sidewalks shall be
placed parallel to the street for the entire frontage(s) of the lot and shall be
located a minimum of two feet (2’) behind the curb.
(4) Timing of Construction
Sidewalks shall generally be installed concurrently with the construction of the
primary structure on a lot except on primary or secondary arterials where they
shall be installed concurrently with street construction.
(5) Construction Concurrent with Street Construction
If a street is constructed which shall have no residential lot access points,
sidewalks shall be installed concurrently with street construction.
(6) Corner Lot
Where sidewalks are installed on corner lots, sidewalks shall be installed
along both street frontages and shall be extended to the curb with
handicapped access ramps in accordance with current ADA and Texas
Accessibility standards.
July 21, 2011 374
(7) Waiver or Deferment of Sidewalk Installation
The City Manager may waive the requirements of this section where it finds
that topographical conditions or other unique conditions exist which would
preclude the construction of sidewalks. The Commission may defer the
installation of sidewalks to a time deemed more appropriate. In the event that
the installation of sidewalks is deferred, the developer shall provide a
subdivision improvement agreement guaranteeing the installation of
sidewalks.
(8) Hike and Bike Trails
The City recognizes the need for connectivity and adequate access to and
from public park land areas and to provide for safe bicycling and pedestrian
transportation. All streets subject to this section with at least an eighty sixfoot
(86’) ROW shall be required to construct a minimum eight foot (8’)-wide
hike and bike path located within the ROW five feet (5’) behind the curb. This
hike and bike path is required in lieu of construction of a sidewalk along one
(1) side of the street.
In lieu of construction of sidewalks in accordance with this section, the City
may, at its option, require construction of a hike and bike path adjacent to the
street right-of-way. Any required hike and bike path shall be constructed in
lieu of the minimum sidewalk along one (1) side of the street, unless
otherwise provided under the requirements of SECTION 13C of this UDC.
G. TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS
(1) Application Requirements
Every application for development within the City or its ETJ shall be
accompanied by a Traffic Impact Analysis (“TIA”) Determination Form
provided by the City. The TIA Determination Form shall be utilized to
determine if a TIA is required.
(2) TIA Required
The threshold requirement for a TIA and the level of TIA required shall be
based on a land use or combination of land uses that results in peak hour
trips in accordance with Table 13-2. If the proposed land use does not
exceed the peak hour trip threshold, a TIA waiver shall be noted on the TIA
Determination Form.
Table 13-2
TIA Requirements
Peak Hour Trips Generated TIA Level Required
1,001 or more Level 3 TIA
501 – 1,000 Level 2 TIA
101 – 500 Level 1 TIA
100 or less None Required
July 21, 2011 375
(3) TIA Scope
If a TIA is required, the applicant shall meet with the City Engineer to
determine the scope of the study prior to beginning work on the TIA. The
applicant shall be prepared, prior to the meeting with the City Engineer, to
discuss potential intersections to be evaluated, data assumptions or any other
information required by the City Engineer.
(4) TIA Study Area
The study area required for the TIA shall be based on the level of the TIA
required in Paragraph (2) above. The City Engineer may, at his/her
discretion, require additional area to be included in the study area if deemed
necessary to provide adequate review of the transportation network. The
following table identifies the minimum acceptable study area:
Table 13-3
TIA Study Areas
TIA Level Study Area
Level 1 or 2 TIA The site area and the area within a one-quarter (1/4)-mile
radius from the boundary of the site.
Level 2 TIA At the discretion of the City Engineer, the study area may
be extended up to a maximum of one (1) mile from the
boundary of the site.
Level 3 TIA The site area and the area within a one (1)-mile radius
from the boundary of the site.
(5) TIA Contents
(a) The TIA shall conform to accepted industry standards and shall include a
detailed description of the area street network, a description of proposed
land uses, the anticipated stages of construction, the anticipated
completion date of the various phases of land development, and the trigger
points requiring implementation of necessary improvements. The City
Engineer may require any additional information necessary to ensure
adequate review. The TIA shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
1) Trip generation rates for both the A.M. and P.M. peak periods using
the Institute of Transportation Engineers, Trip Generation Manual for
all of the land uses specified;
2) Trip distribution;
3) Adequacy determination for existing and proposed street crosssections
by phase of development;
4) Intersection level of service analysis for each phase of development,
driveway sizes, locations, and adequacy;
July 21, 2011 376
5) Layout showing lane usage (pavement marking layout) for all
boundary streets including driveway locations and roadway geometry
within the site;
6) Driveways and intersecting streets connecting to boundary streets
including all lane widths, traffic islands, medians, sidewalks, curbs,
traffic control devices and existing pavement conditions;
7) Existing and proposed turning movement counts for the site; and
8) Identification of and timing for transportation improvements, if any,
needed to maintain the same or higher level of service than exists
prior to development during each phase of land development and the
costs of those improvements, including costs of right-of-way
acquisition, utility relocation, design and construction;
(b) The TIA shall:
1) Establish the baseline traffic conditions and peak hour operations prior
to development of the subdivision or site, which baseline shall
establish the existing level of service that is to be maintained or
bettered as the owners develop the subdivision or site over time; and
2) Address streets and street intersections, and driveways on
commercial sites;
(c) For projects adjacent to a TxDOT ROW, the TIA shall be accompanied by a
letter from TxDOT which outlines any agreements between the developer
and TxDOT for planned improvements; and
(d) The TIA shall be certified by a registered engineer with experience in the
field of traffic engineering.
(6) TIA Submittal
Upon completion of the TIA, the applicant shall submit a minimum of three (3)
copies of the report to the City Engineer who will distribute the report to the
appropriate reviewing authorities, including TxDOT.
(7) TIA Review
The TIA shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and any other necessary
review authorities. Review comments shall be provided to the applicant for
response. Response by the applicant shall be in the form of a letter, technical
memorandum, or other appropriate document. The applicant shall submit
final copies of the TIA to the City Engineer containing all modifications prior to
final approval of the application for which the TIA was conducted.
(8) City Assistance in Development
During the course of providing for improvements, the City may cooperate with
the developer in the use of its governmental powers to assist in the timely and
cost effective implementation of improvements. Assistance does not mean
financial aid in actual easement acquisition, construction or engineering costs.
Specifically, the City will:
July 21, 2011 377
(a) Assist in the acquisition of necessary right-of-way and easements;
(b) Assist in the relocation of utilities;
(c) Assist in obtaining approvals from applicable County entities;
(d) Assist in obtaining approvals from TxDOT; and
(e) Assist in securing financial participation for major street improvements from
applicable County entities, TxDOT or the Metropolitan Planning
Organization.
(9) TIA Revisions
It is recognized that the scope of the developer's plans may change from time
to time. The monitoring reports may also demonstrate changes in the area
street conditions and travel patterns within and around the City. Periodic
updates to the TIA may be required to address these issues and identify
changes to the level of service at study intersections and streets. These
updates shall address modifications to the magnitude and timing of
improvements recommended by the original TIA. Any TIA amendments must
be acceptable to the City.
SECTION 14 - Easements and Utilities
A. EASEMENTS
(1) Utility Easements
Utility easements including natural gas shall be provided for the installation of
utilities in accordance with the requirements of the City. In general, these
easements shall be in the front of residential development lots.
(2) Drainage Easements
(a) When a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel,
or stream, a stormwater easement or drainage rights-of-way (ROW) shall
be provided. Said easement or drainage ROW shall substantially
encompass the boundaries of said water course and shall be of sufficient
width, in accordance with the construction standards in the Development
Standards.
(b) Drainage or stormwater easements may be constructed as open earth
channels or concrete drainage structures and shall be maintained by the
developer or his/her assigns.
(c) Drainage ROW shall contain concrete drainage structures or underground
piping and shall be dedicated to the City or other applicable jurisdictions.
(d) Access Easements
In an effort to reduce the congestion created by a number of driveways
along street rights-of-way while maintaining adequate access to
developments, the City shall require access easements to be dedicated
within and across developments of similar use. These easements shall
July 21, 2011 378
be twenty-four feet (24’) in width and meet the minimum construction
requirements for streets as required by this UDC and the Development
Standards.
B. WATER SYSTEMS
(1) Installation of Water Facilities
All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall be
connected to the public water system, which has capacity to provide water for
domestic use and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection.
Where water is to be provided through the City system, the developer shall
install adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, in accordance with all
applicable regulations of the State, the City and any other agency regulating
public water systems.
(2) Alternative Water Sources
An alternative source of water within a development may be used for irrigation
or other similar purposes, subject to City approval and the obtaining of all
appropriate permits from the City, State and any other applicable agency. An
alternative water source may not be used for potable water supply under any
circumstances. The design and construction of water system improvements
and alternative water sources shall comply with the rules and regulations of
the City, State or any other applicable agency.
(3) Location and Cost of Installation
The location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements and the
boundary lines of special districts, private systems and certified water service
areas, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on
the construction plans. The cost of installing all water supply improvements to
be made by the developer, including off-site improvements, shall be included
in the performance guarantees furnished by the developer.
(4) Extension of Lines
Extension of water and wastewater lines shall be made along the entire
frontage of the subdivision adjacent to a street or thoroughfare. If the
subdivision is not adjacent to a thoroughfare, the extension of utilities shall be
accomplished in such a manner as to allow future connections to said utilities
by new subdivisions. If new subdivisions will never be constructed beyond a
developing subdivision due to physical constraints, the City Manager may
waive the requirement for adjacent utility line construction at the time of final
plat approval and prior to construction of the subdivision.
(5) Fire Hydrants
(a) Fire hydrants are to be properly located so there will be a fire hydrant every
three hundred feet (300’) in commercial and industrial areas and every five
hundred feet (500’) in residential areas.
(b) Any new fire hydrant is required to have a hydrant locater reflector (blue
bump) installed in the roadway perpendicular to the hydrant.
July 21, 2011 379
(6) Individual Wells
(a) Within the City Limits
A new development served by individual wells within the City limits is
prohibited.
(b) Within the ETJ
Individual wells within the ETJ shall be subject to approval by the City.
The developer must submit with the plat application a certificate from a
professional engineer registered in this state or a geoscientist licensed to
practice in Texas verifying the adequacy of the proposed source of well
supply prior to plat approval.
(c) Compliance with Other Regulations
Installation, operations and maintenance of individual wells shall comply
with City standards, regulations of the TCEQ, any other applicable State
rules and regulations, and applicable regulations of groundwater
conservation districts. In the event of conflict among these regulations,
whichever is the most stringent shall apply.
(7) Design and Construction
All water facilities within a subdivision shall be designed and constructed to
the standards set forth in the Development Standards. Said facilities shall
meet all State and federal regulations pertaining to approved public water
systems including regulations regarding the preparation, submittal and
approval of plans and specifications for water systems. Design of water
facilities shall also conform to all laws, policies, standards, rules and
regulations for establishing the fire insurance key rate for the City.
(8) Other Water Systems
For water systems other than the City system, the following shall apply:
(a) At the time of preliminary platting the applicant shall provide the City with a
letter of approval from the TCEQ certifying that the water system serving
the development complies with the rules and regulations of the TCEQ and
that the public water system provider holds a current valid Certificate of
Convenience and Necessity (“CCN”) for the area proposed for
development. The letter of approval from the TCEQ shall be accompanied
by a map delineating the boundaries of the CCN in the vicinity of the
development.
(b) For developments in the ETJ, the developer shall obtain the approval and
signature of the appropriate county health official on the water system
statement as shown on the preliminary plat prior to Commission approval.
The water system statement as shown on the plat indicates that the
development will be served by a water system meeting City standards, as
stated in SECTION 14B of this UDC. and the applicable standards of the
water purveyor.
July 21, 2011 380
(c) Plans and specifications for all water systems to serve the development
shall be submitted as part of the subdivision construction plans.
C. WASTEWATER SYSTEMS
(1) Wastewater Connection Required
All lots within a subdivision shall be provided with a connection to an
approved public wastewater system unless otherwise approved by the City.
Establishment of a private wastewater utility district within the City or within
the City’s ETJ shall be prohibited.
(2) Installation of Wastewater Facilities
All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall be
connected to a public wastewater system which has adequate capacity to
provide water for proper disposal and treatment of wastewater. Where
wastewater is to be provided through a centralized system, the developer
shall install adequate facilities, subject to the standards and specifications of
the City and State design criteria for wastewater systems. Where insufficient
capacity exists downstream of a proposed connection, the replacement and
upsizing of the existing main is required of the developer. The installation of a
parallel main shall be subject to approval by the City.
(3) Location and Cost of Installation
The location of all wastewater improvements and the boundary lines of
special districts, private systems and certified areas, indicating all
improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on construction plans.
The cost of installing all wastewater improvements to be made by the
developer, including off-site improvements, shall be included in the
performance guarantees furnished by the developer.
(4) Future Extension of Lines
Pipe stub-outs shall be located in manholes to facilitate the future extension
of wastewater lines. The City Engineer will determine the location and size of
the stub-outs.
(5) On-Site Sewage Facilities (OSSF)
The use of on-site sewage facilities (“OSSF”) for the treatment and disposal
of wastewater shall be subject to the approval of the City. The minimum lot
area for residential subdivisions shall be a minimum one-half (1/2) acre
(21,780 square feet). OSSF shall be installed on each lot concurrent with any
development thereon and the design of such system and the method of
installation shall conform in all respects to the standards and specifications of
the City, county and state design criteria for OSSF.
D. UTILITIES
All utilities, including, but not limited to, electrical wiring, natural gas, telephone,
cable, internet and security systems, shall be located in the front yard, shall be
installed underground and shall be maintained in accordance with all applicable
City codes and regulations for such systems. Any utilities required to be placed
July 21, 2011 381
above ground must be placed on steel poles meeting the requirements of the City
and the applicable utility provider.
SECTION 15 - Definitions
For the purposes of this UDC, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the singular number
include the plural number; and words in the plural number include the singular number.
The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory, while the word "may" is merely
discretionary.
Any term not expressly defined in this section shall be defined by a common planning
definition from A Planners Dictionary, published by the American Planning Association.
The City Planner, upon the recommendation of the City Manager or his/her designee,
shall determine the appropriateness of a definition.
Accessory Building or Use: One which:
Is subordinate to and serves a principal building or principal use;
Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or principal use
served;
Contributes to the comfort, convenience and necessity of occupants of the
principal building or principal use served;
Is located on the same building lot as the principal building or principal use served;
or
May be part of the principal building.
Advertising: To convey information, to seek the attraction of or to direct the attention of
the public to any location, event, person, product, good, service, activity, institution or
business.
Agriculture: The use of land for the production and primary processing of food and fibers
for sale, including cultivating, dairying, horticulture, pasturing, floriculture, silviculture,
viticulture, animal and poultry husbandry, and such incidental accessory facilities as
greenhouses and nurseries, provided that the operation of such accessory facilities
shall be clearly secondary to normal agricultural activities. Agriculture includes, but is
not limited to, the related activities of tillage, fertilization, pest control, harvesting, and
marketing. It also includes, but is not limited to, the activities of feeding, housing, and
maintaining of animals such as cattle, dairy cows, sheep, goats, hogs, horses, and
poultry, and handling their by-products.
Airport, Heliport or Landing Field: A facility for the landing of fixed or rotary wing
aircraft.
Alley: A public right-of-way which provides a secondary means of vehicular access to
abutting property and which is used primarily for vehicular traffic to the rear or side of
properties which otherwise abut a street. Specifically authorized in garden home
subdivisions for access to rear-entrance garages.
July 21, 2011 382
Alternative Tower Structure: Clock towers, steeples, light poles and similar alternativedesign
mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers. See also the definition of “stealth facility.”
Amateur Radio Antenna: A radio communication antenna used by a person holding an
amateur radio station license from the Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”).
Annexation: The act of incorporating an area into the domain of the City.
Antenna: A device used in communications, which transmits or receives radio signals,
television signals, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar
signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other communication signals.
Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Commercial: An antenna and its support
structure used for commercial broadcasting or telecommunication purposes and the
transmission, retransmission, and/or reception of electromagnetic radio, television, or
microwave signals. All radiating equipment must comply with FCC, Environmental
Protection Agency (“EPA”), Occupational Health and Safety Administration (“OSHA”),
and all other applicable State and federal regulatory agency requirements and
guidelines for human safety, as they exist or may be amended. The antenna may be a
tower, mast, pole, tripod or box frame. Preferably the antenna will be in stealth form,
designed to be unobtrusive, virtually transparent or invisible to the surrounding
neighborhood. Stealth antennas include, but are not limited to:
Antennas within a building's attic space;
On the roof of a minimum three (3)-story building and not visible from the property
line of the lot in which the antenna is located;
A public utility structure, such as a water tower or high transmission support tower;
A flagpole;
A church steeple;
A clock tower; or
An athletic field light pole.
Antenna, Building Attached: An antenna attached to an existing structure in two (2)
general forms: (1) roof-mounted, in which antennas are placed on the roofs of buildings,
or (2) building-mounted, in which antennas are placed on the sides of buildings. These
antennas can also be mounted on structures such as water tanks, billboards, church
steeples, electrical transmission towers, etc.
Antenna Facility: The mast, pole, structure, tower, building, equipment and other
supporting material used to mount the antenna and equipment, equipment storage
buildings and equipment concealing or screening structures needed to operate an
antenna.
Apartment: A dwelling unit in an apartment building.
Apartment Building: A building or portion thereof housing three (3) or more dwelling
units.
Appliance, Furniture and Home Furnishings Store: Retail establishments selling goods
used for furnishing the home, including, but not limited to, furniture, floor coverings,
July 21, 2011 383
draperies, domestic stoves, refrigerators, and other household electrical and gas
appliances.
Approved Plat: The plat of a subdivision which has been approved in accordance with
the requirements of this UDC and which has been filed for record with the Kaufman
county clerk.
Art Gallery/Library/Museum: A building serving as a repository for a collection of natural,
scientific, artistic, or literary objects of interest, open and designed to be used for
viewing, with or without an admission charge, and which may include as an accessory
use the sale of goods.
Assisted Care or Living Facility: A facility which provides residence and care to ten (10)
or more persons, regardless of legal relationship, who are:
Elderly;
Disabled;
Orphaned;
Abandoned;
Abused or neglected children;
Victims of domestic violence;
Convalescing from illness;
Terminally ill; or
Temporarily homeless due to fire, natural disaster, or financial setback, together
with supervisory personnel.
This definition shall also include a facility providing health care or rehabilitative services
over a long period of time to persons chronically ill, aged, or disabled due to injury or
disease.
Automobile Parts Sales: The use of any building for the display and sale of new or used
parts, including tires.
Automobile Repair, Major: General repairs or reconditioning of engines, air-conditioning
systems, and transmissions for motor vehicles; wrecker or towing service with on-site
storage of vehicles; collision services including body, frame, or fender straightening or
repair; customizing; painting; vehicle steam cleaning; tire retreading; muffler services;
upholstery shop; insurance estimations with on-site storage; undercoating and rust
proofing; and other similar uses.
Automobile Repair, Minor: An establishment used for the dispensing or sales of
automobile fuels, lubricants, and automobile accessories; the minor repair or
replacement of parts and performing State inspections and making minor repairs
necessary to pass said inspection; automobile detailing; and the sales and installation of
automobile radios. Uses listed under "Automobile Repair, Major," or any other similar
uses, are not included.
Automobile Sales: Sales, rental, and/or lease of new or used automobiles or light-load
vehicles, including as an accessory use: Automobile Repair, Major.
July 21, 2011 384
Bakery: A place where products such as bread, cake, candy or pastries are prepared
and sold.
Bandit Sign: Any temporary ground sign announcing a subdivision, new development or
builder.
Bank, Savings and Loan, Credit Union: An establishment for the custody, loan,
exchange or issue of money, the extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission
of funds, including automated teller machines (“ATMs”).
Banner Sign: A temporary sign constructed of a natural or man-made flexible material
including, but not limited to, cloth, canvas, vinyl, or fabric which can be easily folded or
rolled that is mounted with or without an enclosing framework that is attached or
tethered to the building or structures.
Base Flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
Beauty Salon/Barber Shop: An establishment dealing with cosmetic treatments for men
and women.
Bed and Breakfast Inn: An owner (or operator)-occupied residence with up to five (5)
bedrooms available for overnight guests. A Bed and Breakfast Inn may provide for
guest stays up to fourteen (14) consecutive days; however, it shall not offer weekly
rental rates. Kitchen and dining facilities may be included to provide meals for guests
only; however, no food preparation shall be permitted in guest bedrooms. A Bed and
Breakfast Inn shall not include restaurants, banquet facilities, or similar services.
Billboard: Any sign erected and used for, or designed to be used for, the display of
advertising material for the purpose of advertising a location, event, person, product,
good, service, activity, institution or business not located on the same premises as the
billboard. Mobile advertising and hand-carried signs shall not be considered billboards.
Block: A tract of land bounded by streets or a combination of streets and public parks,
or corporate boundaries of the City.
Board of Adjustment (“BOA”): The board established by the City Council under the
Texas Local Government Code that reviews and acts upon requests for variances,
special exceptions or appeals and whose duties and responsibilities are specifically
provided for in SECTION 3D of this UDC.
Boundary Street: A public street which is adjacent to and abutting one (1) or more sides
of the proposed site.
Building: A structure for the support or shelter of any use or occupancy.
Building Area: The total square footage on a lot covered by a building measured on a
horizontal plane at mean grade level.
Building, Detached: A building which is surrounded by yards or open space on its own
building lot.
Building Height: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping
of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean height level between
eaves and ridge for a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
July 21, 2011 385
Building Materials and Hardware Store: An establishment where building materials,
fittings, cutlery, tools, utensils, or part of machines are sold at retail.
Building Mounted Sign: A sign attached to, or supported by any part of the building that
encloses or covers usable space and is related to the business within, including but not
limited to wall signs, signage on awnings, canopies, or marquees, and projecting signs.
Building Official: The officer or other designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of the building codes of the City.
Building Setback Line: A building limit fixed at a specific distance from the front, rear or
side boundaries of a lot beyond which a building cannot lawfully extend.
Building Sign: Any sign identifying the name or title of a specific building.
Cabinet or Upholstery Shop: An establishment for the production, display, and sale of
cabinets, furniture, and soft coverings for furniture. This use does not include
automobile upholstery.
Car Wash, Automated: A facility where a customer can have a motorcycle, automobile
or light-load vehicle washed in exchange for financial consideration.
Car Wash, Self Serve: A facility, typically coin-operated, used by customers to wash
motorcycles, automobiles and light load vehicles.
Cemetery or Mausoleum: Property used for the interring of the dead.
Church, Temple, Synagogue, Mosque, or Other Place of Worship: A building designed
and used primarily for religious assembly and worship and those accessory activities
which are customarily associated therewith, and the place of residence for ministers,
priests, nuns, rabbis, or other religious personnel on the premises.
City: The City of Crandall, Texas.
City Council: The City Council of the City of Crandall, Texas.
City Engineer: A licensed professional engineer employed or designated by the City to
provide professional engineering services for and on behalf of the City.
Civic Club or Lodge: A non-Greek letter group of people organized for a common
interest, usually for cultural, religious, civic, or entertainment purposes, with regular
meetings, rituals, and formal written membership requirements.
Civic or Convention Center: A building or complex of buildings used for cultural,
recreational, athletic, convention, or entertainment purposes.
Clinic: An establishment of offices in which a group of physicians, dentists or other
practitioners of the healing arts and allied professional assistants are associated for the
purpose of diagnosing and treating ill or injured persons. A clinic may include a medical
or dental laboratory, but may not include facilities for providing room or board for
patients, nor may a clinic include offices or facilities for veterinarians.
Civic Club or Lodge: An association of persons for the promotion of some nonprofit
common objective, such as literature, science, politics, good fellowship and similar
objectives, which meets periodically and which is limited to members.
July 21, 2011 386
College or University: An educational institution authorized by the State to award
associate, baccalaureate or higher degrees.
Co-location: The act of locating wireless communications equipment for more than one
(1) telecommunications carrier on a single Antenna Facility.
Commercial Amusement, Indoor: An enterprise providing for indoor recreational
activities, services, amusements, and instruction for an admission fee. Uses include, but
are not limited to, bowling alleys, ice or roller skating rinks, bingo parlors, amusement
arcades, and/or practice areas.
Commercial Amusement, Outdoor: An enterprise providing for outdoor recreational
activities, services, amusements, and instruction for an admission fee, including, but not
limited to, batting cages, miniature golf, go-kart tracts, and carnivals.
Common Area: An area within a subdivision not used for development which is usually
owned and maintained by subdivision homeowners associations.
Community Center: A building or portion of a building owned and/or operated by a
government entity or not-for-profit agency in which facilities are provided for civic,
educational, political, or social purposes.
Comprehensive Plan: The Comprehensive Plan of the City, as approved by the City
Council and including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any
amendments to such plan or parts thereof.
Concrete or Asphalt Batching Plant: A permanent manufacturing facility for the
production of concrete or asphalt.
Convalescent Home: Any structure used or occupied by three (3) or more persons
recovering from illness or receiving geriatric care for compensation.
Convenience Store with Gas Pumps: A retail establishment that sells food and other
consumable and non-consumable products for off-premise use or consumption. This
definition shall also include the dispensing or sale of motor vehicle fuels, lubricants, and
accessories, but shall not include automotive repair or the sale of replacement parts.
Court: An open, unoccupied space bounded on more than two (2) sides by walls. An
inner court is entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has
one (1) side open to a street, alley, yard or other permanent open space.
Cul-de-sac: A street having but one (1) outlet to another street, and terminated on the
opposite end by a vehicular turn around.
Damaged Sign:
Any sign where any portion of the finished material, surface or message area of
the sign is visibly faded, flaked, broken off, missing, cracked, splintered, defective
or is otherwise deteriorated or in a state of disrepair so as not to substantially
appear as it was intended or designed to appear when originally constructed; or
Any sign whose elements or the structural support or frame members are visibly
bent, broken, dented, torn, twisted, leaning or at angles other than those at which it
was originally erected.
July 21, 2011 387
Day Care Center: A commercial institution or place designed for the care of children or
adults that is subject to registration with the Texas Department of Family and Protective
Services, or its successor agency. This use shall not include overnight lodging, medical
treatment, counseling, or rehabilitative services and does not apply to any school.
Dead-end Street: A roadway, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one (1) outlet.
Density: The number of units per acre that may be placed on a tract in a particular
zoning district under specified development conditions.
Development: Any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment.
Development Permit: Any permit, license, authority, order, approval, certificate,
endorsement, or permission, required from the City prior to the commencement or
completion of any phase of development.
Development Sign: A temporary freestanding sign which, by means of symbol or name,
identifies a shopping center, commercial or industrial park, residential subdivision or
other development that may contain a mixture of residential, commercial, or industrial
uses.
Directional Sign: Any sign designed to provide direction to pedestrian and/or vehicular
traffic.
Distribution Center: A warehouse or storage facility where the emphasis is on
processing and moving goods on to wholesalers, retailers, or consumers rather than on
storage.
Dry Cleaning: A custom cleaning shop or pick-up station not exceeding six thousand
(6,000) square feet of floor area, including, but not limited to, dry cleaning plants having
no more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area for dry
cleaning equipment.
Dwelling: Any building or portion thereof which is designed or used for residential
purposes.
Dwelling, Duplex: A building designed for or occupied exclusively, but separately, by
two (2) families. Also referred to as “Duplex”.
Dwelling, Multi-Family: A building or portion thereof containing three (3) or more
dwelling units. Also referred to as “Multi-Family”
Dwelling, Single-Family: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1)
family. Also referred to as “Single-Family”
Dwelling Unit: A room, or suite of two (2) or more rooms, designed or intended for use
by an individual or family in which culinary and sanitary convenience are provided for
the exclusive use of such individual or family.
Easement: An acquired privilege or right-of-way use which one (1) person, business,
entity and/or public agency has across, over or under the land of another person,
business, entity and/or public agency.
July 21, 2011 388
Electronic Sign: A digital or other electronic sign composed of lights, LEDs, or other
form of illumination that uses alternating electronic data control components to display
messages, changeable messages and/or pictures, and includes features such as
moving or flashing text or other display, intermittent lighting, changing colors, beacons,
or items that revolve, blink, vary in intensity or brightness, grow, melt, scroll, travel, roll,
or present pictures or animation. Electronic signs include all signs that appear animated
or projected or are intermittently or intensely illuminated or of a sequential light type.
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (“ETJ”): The ETJ of the City is the portion of the
unincorporated area that is contiguous to the corporate boundaries of the City and not
already in the incorporated area or ETJ of another city as set out in Section 42.021 of
the Texas Local Government Code.
Family: Two or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit where all members are
related by blood, marriage or adoption. No single dwelling unit shall have more than four
unrelated individuals residing therein, nor shall any “family” have, additionally, more
than four unrelated individuals residing with such family. The term “family” does not
include any organization or institutional group that receives federal or State funding for
the care of the individual.
Family Home: A community-based residential home operated by either the State of
Texas, a nonprofit corporation, a community center organized pursuant to State statute,
or an entity certified by the State as a program provider for the mentally retarded.
Family homes provide care for persons with mental and/or physical impairments that
substantially limit one (1) or more major life activities. To qualify as a family home, a
home must meet each of the following requirements:
Not more than six (6) disabled persons and two (2) supervisory personnel may
reside in a family home at the same time;
The home must provide food and shelter, personal guidance, care, rehabilitation
services, or supervision; and
All applicable licensing requirements must be met.
Farmers Market: An area containing individual vendors who offer fruits, vegetables,
herbs, spices, edible seeds, nuts, live plants, flowers, and honey for sale.
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Fire Lane: A concrete driving surface identified for use by fire, EMS and other
emergency vehicles within and maintained by the owners of a manufactured home park,
recreational vehicle park, apartment complex, mall/shopping center, commercial or
business area.
Flag: A piece of cloth, varying in size, shape, color, and design, usually attached at one
edge to a staff or cord, and used as the symbol of a nation, state, or organization, or as
a means of signaling.
Flea Market: An outdoor site where space is rented to vendors on a short-term basis for
the sale of merchandise. The principal sales shall include new and used household
goods, personal effects, tools, art work, small household appliances, and similar
merchandise, objects, or equipment in small quantities. The term flea market does not
July 21, 2011 389
include wholesale sales establishments or rental services establishments, but does
include personal services establishments, food services establishments, retail sales
establishments, and auction establishments.
Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of areas not ordinarily covered by water due to:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or
The usual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (“FIRM”): The official maps of the City and its ETJ on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium
zones applicable to the areas mapped.
Flood Management: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency
preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
Flood Management Regulations: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building
codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as the floodplain
ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of
police power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
Flood Protection System: Those physical structural works for which funds have been
authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically
to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within the City and its ETJ
subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding.
Such a system typically includes dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering
standards.
Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing
the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Freestanding Sign: A sign that is not attached to a building and which is self supporting
by use of a pole, mast, pylon or other similar vertical support structure and has a
minimum of thirty-six inches (36”) of ground clearance.
Frontage: All the property on one (1) side of a street between two (2) intersecting
streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if the street is
dead-ended, then all the property abutting on one (1) side between an intersecting
street and the dead end of the street.
Furniture Store: A facility used principally for the display and retail sale of new furniture
and appliances.
Garage: A building designed or used for the storage of personally owned motor-driven
vehicles used by the occupants of the building.
July 21, 2011 390
Garden Home: An individually owned single-family home, separated from its neighbor
by a minimum of ten feet (10') on a lot having a minimum of five thousand (5,000)
square feet.
Gasoline Station/Fuel Pumps: A facility, equipment, or fixture used for retail dispensing
of motor vehicle fuels.
General Manufacturing/Industrial Uses: Manufacturing of finished products and
component products or parts through the processing of materials or substances,
including basic industrial processing. Such operations shall be determined by Health,
Fire, and Building officials not to be a hazard or nuisance to adjacent property or the
community at large, due to the possible emission of excessive smoke, noise, gas,
fumes, dust, odor, or vibration, or the danger of fire, explosion, or radiation.
Golf Course and/or Country Club: A land area and buildings used for golf, including
fairways, greens, tee boxes, driving range, putting green, and associated maintenance
and retail facilities. This definition also includes clubhouses, dining rooms, swimming
pools, tennis courts, and similar recreational or service uses available only to members
and their guests.
Government Facilities: A building, owned or operated by a city, county, state, federal
government or school district, which is open for use by the general public.
Governmental Sign: Any sign indicating public facilities, public work projects, public
services, or other places, events, persons, products, goods, programs, activities or
institutions conducted by the federal, State or any local government.
Health/Fitness Center: A public or private facility operated to promote physical health
and fitness. Activities may include exercise, dance, physical therapy, training, and
education pertaining to health and fitness. Uses or combination of uses or facilities
typically include, but are not limited to, game courts, weight lifting and exercise
equipment, aerobics, swimming pools and spas, and running or jogging tracks.
Historic Structure: Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the Natural Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by
the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing in the National
Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing
to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on the State inventory of historic places with historic preservation
programs that have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
By any approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.
July 21, 2011 391
Home Occupation: Any occupation or activity, carried on by a member of the immediate
family who resides on the premises, where no sign or display is used relating to the
business that indicates from the exterior that the building is being utilized in part for any
purpose other than that of a dwelling, and there is no commodity sold upon the
premises; no person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing
on the premises; and no mechanical equipment is used except of a type similar in
character to that normally used for purely domestic or household purposes.
Homeowners Association: An organization formed for the maintenance and operation of
the common areas of the development. The membership in the association must be
automatic with the purchase of a dwelling unit or other property in the development.
Hospital: A building or portion thereof used or designed for the housing or treatment of
the sick, aged, mentally ill, injured, convalescent or infirm persons; provided that this
definition shall not include rooms in any residential dwelling, hotel, or apartment hotel
not ordinarily intended to be occupied by said persons.
Hotel: A building used or intended to be used as living quarters for transient guests, but
not excluding permanent guests, and may include a cafe, drugstore, clothes pressing
shop, barbershop or other service facilities for the guests for compensation. This
definition does not include Bed and Breakfast Inns and boarding houses.
Household Appliance Service and Repair: The maintenance and rehabilitation of
appliances customarily used in the home, including, but not limited to, washing and
drying machines, refrigerators, dishwashers, trash compactors, ovens and ranges,
countertop kitchen appliances, and vacuum cleaners.
Illegal Sign: A sign erected without a required permit or without the property owner’s
permission, or any sign not meeting the requirements established in this UDC.
In-Home Day Care: A home occupation that provides care for less than 24 hours a day
to no more than six (6) children under the age of fourteen (14), plus no more than six (6)
additional elementary school-age children (ages five (5) to thirteen (13)). The total
number of children, including the caretaker's own children, shall be no more than twelve
(12) at any time. This use is subject to registration with the Texas Department of Family
and Protective Services, or its successor agency.
Landscape: Covering, adorning, or improving property with living plants (such as trees,
shrubs, vines, grass or flowers), loose natural materials (such as rock, wood chips or
shavings), decorative manmade material (such as patterned paving materials, fences,
walls, fountains, or pools), or land contouring. "Landscape" does not include improving
property with artificial trees, shrubs, turf or other artificial plants.
Laundromat: A facility where patrons wash, dry, or dry-clean clothing and other fabrics
in machines operated by the patron.
Limited Access Highways: Highway 175.
Livestock: Domestic animals used, raised or bred on a farm, especially those kept for a
profit, including, but not limited to, horses, ponies, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, rabbits,
sheep, or fowl, regardless of age, sex or breed. Persons who possess, own or
otherwise keep livestock within the City in a residential zoned district where livestock is
being kept, shall follow each of these restrictions:
July 21, 2011 392
Livestock shall be kept on a parcel of land that is at least one (1) acre in size.
There shall be no more than one (1) head of livestock for the first acre of land. For
every additional 1/2 acre, a person may have two (2) additional head of livestock.
Livestock shall be kept in a stable, shed, pen or other enclosure wherever located
within the City, which shall be a distance of at least 100 feet for every
building/structure (other than the owner of such livestock) used for sleeping, dining
and living, and shall be kept in such a manner as will be reasonably calculated not
to be offensive to neighbors or to the public.
Swine are prohibited.
Livestock is only allowed on property zoned for agricultural purposes.
Lot: A physically undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street or
other approved access and which is, or in the future may be, offered for sale,
conveyance, transfer or improvements; which is designated as a distinct and separate
tract; and/or, which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved
subdivision plat which has been properly recorded.
Lot Depth: The distance of a line connecting the midpoints of the front and rear lot
lines, which line shall be at right angle to the front lot or radial to a curved lot line.
Lot Width: The distance of a line (drawn perpendicular to the lot depth line) connecting
the side lot lines at the building setback line or at a point no farther than thirty-five feet
(35') from the front lot line.
Lot Area: The area of a lot between lot lines, including any portion of an easement
which may exist within such lot lines.
Lot, Corner: A lot which has an interior angle of less than 135 degrees at the
intersection of two (2) street lines. A lot abutting upon a curved street shall be
considered a corner lot if the tangents of the curve at the points of the intersection of the
side lot lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
Lot, Double Frontage: A lot having a frontage on two (2) nonintersecting streets as
distinguished from a corner lot.
Lot, Interior: A building lot other than a corner lot.
Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded
in the office of the County Clerk of Kaufman County; or a parcel of land, the deed of
which was recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Kaufman County.
Manufactured Home: A structure constructed after June 15, 1976, according to the rules
of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (“HUD”),
transportable in one (1) or more sections which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body
feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site,
is three-hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
foundation designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems and bears a
seal issued in accordance with State law. All references in this UDC to manufactured
housing or manufactured home(s) shall be references to HUD Code Manufactured
Housing, unless otherwise specified.
July 21, 2011 393
Manufactured Home Park: A contiguous parcel or lot which is owned by an individual,
firm, trust, partnership, or public or private association or corporation and on which
individual portions are leased for the placement of manufactured homes as a primary
residence.
Manufactured Home Subdivision: A subdivision of land planned and improved for the
placement of manufactured homes for residential use on single lots with each lot
individually owned and meeting all requirements of this UDC.
Medical, Dental or Professional Office/Clinic: A building used for the provision of
executive, management, or administrative services. Typical uses include, but are not
limited to, administrative offices and services including real estate, property
management, investment, insurance, medical, dental, legal, architect, engineer, travel,
secretarial, accounting, auditing and bookkeeping organizations and associations, and
vehicle rental office without on-site storage of fleet vehicles.
Menu Board Sign: A permanent freestanding sign displaying the type and price of food,
beverages or other products sold in connection with permitted outdoor dining or in
connection with a restaurant with drive-through service.
Mini-Warehouse/Public Storage: A building(s) containing separate, individual selfstorage
units for rent or lease. The conduct of sales, business, or any activity other than
storage shall be prohibited within any individual storage unit.
Mobile Food Vendor - Any person or persons who operates or sells prepared food from
a vehicle, stationary cart, or trailer mounted on chassis. This definition does not include
food vendors associated with a special event.
Mobile Home: A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in
one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in
width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is three-hundred
twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis designed
to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical
systems.
Modular Home: A structure that is manufactured in two (2) or more modules at a
location other than the home site and which is designed to be used as a structure when
the modules are transported to the home site and joined together and installed on a
permanent foundation system in accordance with the appropriate Building Codes of the
City including plumbing, heating/air conditioning and electrical systems to be contained
in the structure. The term modular home shall not mean or apply to a mobile home as
defined in the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act, nor is it to include building
modules incorporating concrete or masonry as a primary component.
Monopole Tower: A self-supporting tower facility composed of a single spire used to
support telecommunication antennas. Monopole towers cannot have guy wires or
bracing.
Monument Sign: A permanent, freestanding ground sign whose base is directly on the
ground or has a maximum of twelve inches (12”) of clearance from the adjacent grade.
July 21, 2011 394
Mortuary/Funeral Home: A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or
cremation, or a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the
display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or
cremation.
Motel: A building or group of buildings including either separate units or a row of units
used or intended to be used as living quarters for transient guests, and providing offstreet
parking space on the same building lot for use of its occupants.
Multi-Tenant Sign: A sign that identifies the names and locations of tenants in a multitenant
building or in a development made up of a group of buildings.
Non-Access Easement: The limitation of public access rights to and from properties
abutting a highway or street, by restricting curb cuts and access to the rear or side of
property or to an area abutting a developed area that may have a deprecating and/or
potentially dangerous effect on the developed properties.
One-foot non-access easement: The limitation of public access rights to and from
properties abutting a highway or street by restricting curb cuts and access to the
rear or side of property when the property has another dedicated access to a
public right-of-way.
One-foot partial-access easement: The limitation of public access rights to and
from properties abutting a highway or street only by use of portable ramps, and
restricting curb cuts when the property has another dedicated access to public
right-of-way.
Non-access easement: A designated area abutting a development which may be
considered to have a deprecating and/or potentially dangerous effect to the
property because it backs up to a railroad right-of-way, gas line, etc.
Nonconforming Sign: A sign that was legally installed or modified in accordance with
local laws, ordinances and approvals in effect at the time of installation or last significant
modification, but which does not comply to laws or ordinances enacted subsequent to
that time.
Nonconforming Use, Structure or Lot: The use of land or a building, or a portion
thereof, which use does not conform with the regulations of the zoning district in which it
is situated and which was in existence prior to the effective date of this UDC and/or prior
to being annexed into the City.
Off-Premise Sign: Any sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business,
person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not principally located or
primarily manufactured or sold on the premises on which the sign is located.
Office-Warehouse: A building primarily devoted to the storage, warehousing, and
distribution of goods, merchandise, supplies, and equipment. Accessory uses may
include retail and wholesale sales areas, sales offices, and display areas for products
sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing areas.
On-Premise Sign: Any sign relating to the premises on which it is located referring to
events, persons, products, goods, services, activities, institutions or businesses on or
offered on such premises, or the sale, lease, or construction of such premises.
July 21, 2011 395
Open Space: The part of the countryside which has not been developed and which is
desirable for preservation in its natural state for ecological, historical or recreational
purposes, or in its cultivated state to preserve agricultural, forest or urban greenbelt
areas.
Parking Spaces: A surfaced area, enclosed or unenclosed, sufficient in size to store
one (1) motor vehicle, with a surfaced driveway connecting the parking space with the
street or alley and permitting ingress and egress of a motor vehicle.
Pavement Width: The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic between the face
of curbs and gutters.
Pawn Shop: An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal
property pledged and retained by the owners (pawnbroker).
Peak Hour Trips (“PHT”): The number of traffic units generated by and attracted to the
proposed development during its heaviest hour of use, dependent on type of use.
Pennant: Any long, narrow, usually triangular flag composed primarily of cloth, paper,
fabric or other similar non-rigid material which may be used as a temporary sign to
announce grand openings and/or special events.
Permit: An official document or certificate issued by the authority having jurisdiction
authorizing performance of a specified activity.
Person: Any individual, association, firm, corporation, governmental agency or political
subdivision.
Planning and Zoning Commission: The body established by the City Council under
State law and the LGC whose duties and responsibilities are specifically provided for in
SECTION 3C of this UDC.
Plat: The map, drawing or chart on which a subdivider's plan of a subdivision is
presented and submitted for approval.
Political Sign: A sign pertaining to any national, state, county or local election or issue
and erected for the purpose of announcing a political candidate, political party or ballot
measure, or a position on a political issue.
Portable Sign: Any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved from one location
to another or designed to be mounted upon a trailer, wheeled carrier, or other nonmotorized
mobile structure. A portable sign which has its wheels removed shall still be
considered a portable sign under this UDC.
Porte-cochere: A structure attached to a residence and erected over a driveway, not
exceeding one story in height, and open on two or more sides.
Preexisting Towers and Preexisting Antennas: Any Tower or Antenna for which a
building permit or Special Exception has been properly issued prior to the effective date
of this UDC, including permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed
so long as such approval is current and has not expired.
Prohibited Sign: Any sign that does not meet the requirements established in SECTION
11, any sign specifically prohibited in this UDC or any type of sign not specifically
identified as permitted in this UDC.
July 21, 2011 396
Real Estate Sign: A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises, or a portion of
the premises, on which the sign is located.
Recreational Vehicle: A bus conversion, Class A camper, Class C camper, travel trailer,
fifth wheel trailer, or pop-up camper.
Recreational Vehicle Park: Any premise where recreational vehicles are parked for
living and sleeping purposes, which includes any buildings, structures, vehicles, or
enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such park.
Recycling Facility: A building or site that is not a salvage yard and in which recoverable
resources, such as newspapers, magazines, books, and other paper products, glass,
metal cans, and other products are collected, stored and recycled, reprocessed, and
treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used for
production.
Rehabilitation Care Facility: A facility which provides residence and care to persons who
have demonstrated a tendency toward alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or
antisocial or criminal conduct.
Restaurant or Cafeteria: An establishment where food and drink are prepared and
consumed primarily on the premises. Drive-up windows are permitted.
Restaurant, Drive-In: An eating establishment where food or drink is served to
customers in motor vehicles or where facilities are provided on the premise which
encourage the serving and consumption of food in automobiles on or near the
restaurant premises.
Retail Food Store: A retail establishment selling meats, fruits, vegetables, bakery
products, dairy products, light hardware and other similar items which are purchased for
use and/or consumption off the premises; may be a drive-in or supermarket type.
Retail Stores and Shops: An establishment engaged in the selling of goods and
merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and
rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
Right-of-Way: The right of passage acquired for or by the public through dedication,
purchase or condemnation and intended to provide pedestrian and vehicular access to
abutting lots, tracts or areas which may also be used for utilities and to provide for
drainage ways.
Road: See the definition of “street.”
Roof Sign: Any sign wholly erected on, affixed to or supported by a roof of a building.
Safety Lanes: Paved easements granted to the City and to the public generally, the
purpose of which is to provide access for emergency vehicles. These easements at
times may be referred to as fire lanes. Safety lanes also may be used as ingress and
egress to the property.
Satellite Antenna: An antenna, greater than one (1) meter in diameter, which enables
the transmission of signals directly to and from satellites. Such an antenna is commonly
known or referred to as a satellite dish, dish antenna, parabolic antenna, or satellite
earth station antenna.
July 21, 2011 397
Satellite Receive-Only Antenna: An antenna, one (1) meter or less in diameter, which
enables the receipt of television signals transmitted directly from satellites to be viewed
on a television monitor. Such an antenna is commonly known or referred to as a
satellite dish, television receive-only antenna, dish antenna, parabolic antenna, or
satellite earth station antenna.
School, Private: A school, operated by a private or religious agency or corporation other
than an independent school district, which has a curriculum generally equivalent to a
public elementary or secondary school.
School, Public: A school, operated by an independent school district or charter school,
which provides elementary or secondary curriculum.
Secured (Gated) Community: A residential area, surrounded by a masonry or wrought
iron fence with one (1) or more entrances, that include electrically or manually controlled
gates, which is administered by a homeowners association.
Setback: The minimum distance specified by this UDC from the front, rear, and side lot
lines, and extending across the full width of the lot, on which no building or structure
may be erected.
Sexually Oriented Business: An adult arcade, adult audio or video center, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter
center or other commercial enterprise a principal business of which is the offering of a
service or the selling, renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to
provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. Sexually oriented
businesses do not include: (i) a bookstore, movie theater, or video store, unless that
business is an adult bookstore, or adult movie theater or adult video store; (ii) a
business operated by or employing a licensed psychologist, licensed physical therapist,
licensed athletic trainer, licensed cosmetologist, or licensed barber engaged in
performing functions authorized under the license held; or (iii) a business operated by or
employing a licensed physician or licensed chiropractor engaged in practicing the
healing arts. A commercial establishment may have other business purposes that are
not a sexually oriented business or related to a sexually oriented business. Such other
business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being
categorized as a sexually oriented business so long as one of its business purposes is a
sexually oriented business.
Shopping Center: A development containing a grouping of retail, service, and/or other
commercial establishments in one (1) or more buildings on one (1) or more legally
platted lots and constructed and designed to utilize shared parking and access.
Sign: A name, identification, description, display, or illustration, which is affixed directly
or indirectly upon the exterior of a building or structure or upon a piece of land, which
directs attention to an object, location, event, person, product, good, service, activity,
institution, or business.
Sign Area: The area of any sign shall be the sum of the area enclosed by the minimum
imaginary rectangles, triangles, or circles which fully contain all extremities of the sign,
including the frame, and all words, numbers, figures, devices, designs, or trademarks by
July 21, 2011 398
which anything is made known, but excluding any supports. To compute the allowable
square footage of sign area, only one (1) side of a double-face sign shall be considered.
Sign Height: The vertical distance between the highest part of a sign or its supporting
structure, whichever is higher, and the average established ground level beneath the
sign.
Sign, Subdivision: Any sign used to mark the entrance to a specific subdivision or
neighborhood. Usually a low profile monument sign designed in such a way as to
indicate the name of the specific community and placed at the main entry to such
community.
Site Plan: A development plan, drawn to scale, showing uses and structures proposed
for a parcel of land required by this UDC. This includes, but is not limited to, existing
and proposed conditions of the lot and major landscaping figures, the location of all
existing and proposed buildings, lot lines, streets, driveways, parking spaces, walkways,
means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility service, landscaping, structures
and signs, lighting, screening devices and other information that may be reasonably
required to make an informed determination as opposed to a subdivision plan, which
relates to the layout of lots and parcels, platting of lots and parcels and the provision of
public facilities necessary to build a subdivision.
Stable, Commercial: A stable used for the rental of stall space or for the sale or rental of
horses or mules.
Start of Construction (includes substantial improvements): The date the building permit
was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement occurred within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction or a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation
for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages
or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
State: The State of Texas.
Stealth Facility: “Stealth” is a generic term describing a method that would hide or
conceal an antenna, supporting electrical or mechanical equipment, or any other
support structure that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the
supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible to the surrounding neighborhood. Stealth facilities may include
totally enclosed antennas, wireless facilities that replicate or duplicate the construction
of common structures such as flagpoles, alternative tower structures, and camouflaged
wireless facilities that are constructed to blend into the surrounding environment.
July 21, 2011 399
Storage or Wholesale Warehouse: A building used primarily for the storage of goods
and materials.
Story: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between the surface
of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
Street: A strip of land comprising the entire paved area between the face of curbs and
gutters and within the right-of-way, intended for use as a means of vehicular and
pedestrian circulation to provide access to more than one (1) lot.
Street, Collector: A roadway which collects traffic from local streets and connects within
major/minor arterial streets.
Street Line: A dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous
street.
Street, Major/Minor Arterial: A designated principal traffic thoroughfare more or less
continuous across the City, which is intended to connect remote parts of the City or
areas adjacent thereto, and act as a principal connecting street with state and federal
highways.
Street, Private: Any street right-of-way not dedicated to public use.
Street, Public: Any roadway for use of vehicular traffic dedicated to public use and/or
owned, controlled and maintained by the City, a county, or the State.
Street Width: The shortest horizontal distance between the lines which delineate the
street.
Structural Alterations: Any change of a supporting member of a structure such as
bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.
Structure: Anything constructed or built, the use of which requires permanent location
on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground.
Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost
of restoring the structure to its prior condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%)
of the market value of the structure before damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of
the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This
includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
A project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of State or
local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
conditions; or
Any alteration of a "historic structure provided that the alteration will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a ‘historic structure’.”
Subdivider or Developer: Synonymous terms that include any person, partnership, firm,
association, corporation (or combination thereof), or any officer, agent, employee,
July 21, 2011 400
servant, or trustee thereof, who performs, or participates in the performance of, any act
toward the subdivision of land within the intent, scope and purview of this UDC.
Subdivision: The division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots,
tracts or parcels of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or
rebuilding development, situated within the City’s corporate limits or within the ETJ. It
also includes the vacation and resubdivision of land or lots.
Surveyor: A licensed state land surveyor or registered public land surveyor, as
authorized by State statute, who practices the profession of surveying.
Tax Certificate: A certificate from the Kaufman County Tax Assessor’s office confirming
that all City ad valorem taxes levied on a property that are due have been paid or that
the property owner is lawfully contesting such taxes. If such taxes are being contested,
the property owner must establish, to the satisfaction of the City Manager, in his/her
sole discretion, that such contest is being conducted by the property owner with
reasonable speed.
Telecommunications Equipment Storage Building: An unmanned, single-story
equipment building or structure used to house telecommunications equipment
necessary to operate a telecommunications network.
Telecommunications Tower: Any structure designed and constructed to support one (1)
or more antennae used to provide commercial wireless telecommunications services.
This definition includes monopole towers, alternative mounting structures or any other
vertical support used for wireless telecommunications antennae. This definition does
not include commercial radio or television towers; nor does it include such things as
Satellite Receive Only Antenna or Amateur Radio Antennas.
Telecommunications Tower Facility: A facility that contains a telecommunications tower
and equipment storage building or structure.
Temporary Sign: Any sign identified by this UDC which is intended to be displayed for
seasonal or brief activities including, but not limited to, sales, specials, promotions,
holidays, auctions, and/or business grand openings.
Temporary Structure: A structure that is manufactured off-site and brought to the site. It
is to be temporary in nature and used only until a permanent structure can be
constructed or refurbished.
Theater, Outside: An open lot devoted to the showing of motion pictures or theatrical
productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles.
Theater, Indoor: A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of motion
pictures or for dramatic, musical, or live performances.
Tier One: Any property that lies within three hundred feet (300’) of the right-of-way line
for a highway or a major thoroughfare, shown as Type “B” or above on the
Thoroughfare Plan, and any non-residentially zoned property that adjoins, or has some
portion of the property within, the 300-foot distance from a highway or major
thoroughfare.
Tier Two: Any non-residentially zoned property that is not located within Tier One, as
well as any other nonresidential or institutional use or structure (e.g., school, day care
July 21, 2011 401
facility, church, hospital, civic building, etc.) that is located within a residential zoning
district.
Townhouse: A single-family dwelling unit in a row of such structures and attached by
one (1) or more common walls.
Trade School: A secondary or higher educational facility primarily teaching skills that
prepare students for jobs in a trade and/or meeting the state requirement for a
vocational facility such as barber/beauty college, or electrical training.
Travel Trailer: A structure designed for temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and
vacation, and which can be readily towed over the road by a motor vehicle.
Truck Sales, Heavy Equipment: The display, storage, sale, leasing, or rental of new or
used panel trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, heavy equipment or buses in
operable condition.
TV Antenna: An antenna that enables the receipt of television signals transmitted from
broadcast stations.
Use: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereby is designed,
arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and shall include any
manner of performance of such activity with respect to the performance standards of
this UDC.
Utility Easement: An interest in land granted to the City, to the public generally, and/or
to a private utility corporation, for installing utilities across, on, over, upon or under
private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles
necessary for the maintenance of said utilities.
Variance: Permission to depart from the standards set forth in this UDC when, because
of special circumstances applicable to the property, strict application of those standards
deprives such property of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same
vicinity.
Veterinarian Clinic and/or Kennel, Indoor: An establishment, with no outside pens,
where animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment, or where
domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold for
commercial purposes.
Veterinarian Clinic and/or Kennel, Outdoor: An establishment with outside pens, where
animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment, or where
domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold for
commercial purposes.
Visibility Triangle: The triangular sight area from the corner of converging streets to a
distance of twenty-five feet (25’) along each street with the triangle completed by
drawing a line through the property from both 25-foot (25’) points on the converging
streets.
Wall Sign: Any sign painted on, attached to or projected from the wall surface of a
building, including window signs and signs on awnings and/or marquees.
July 21, 2011 402
Water Surface Elevation: The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
Welding/Machine Shop: A workshop where metal fabrication tools, including, but not
limited to, welders, lathes, presses, and mills are used for making, finishing, or repairing
machines or machine parts.
Wrecking or Salvage Yard: An open-air place where waste, discarded or salvage
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, baled, packed, disassembled or handled. This
definition includes automobile wrecking yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber
yards, and places for storage of salvaged materials of house wrecking, automobile
scrap metal, and structural steel materials and equipment.
Xeriscape: Environmental design of residential and park land using various methods for
minimizing the need for water use.
Yard, Front Setback: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot
lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line
and the main building or any projections of the usual uncovered steps, uncovered
balconies, or uncovered porch. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered a
parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension.
Yard, Rear Setback: A yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the required
minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building
or any projections thereof, other than the projections of uncovered steps, unenclosed
balconies, or unenclosed porches.
Yard, Setback: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward,
except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard to determine the width of a
side yard, or the depth of a front yard or a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance
between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
Yard, Side: A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, extending
from the required front yard to the required rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal
distance between a side lot line and the side of the building.
Zoning District: Any area of the City for which the zoning regulations, which govern the
use of land and buildings, the height of buildings, the size of lots and the intensity of
use, are uniform pursuant to this UDC.

PLANNING AND ZONING FEE SCHEDULE
The following fees are for the processing of development/subdivision applications, as governed by the Development Standards, as amended, of the City of Crandall, Texas.
Land Study:
Single-Family Residential $150 plus $2 per lot
Multi-Family Residential $150
Non-Residential $150
Preliminary Plat
(Requires engineering/construction plans, including, but not limited to, those for paving, drainage, water, sanitary sewer, screening/retaining walls, landscaping, etc.):
Single-Family Residential $350 plus $5 per lot
Multi-Family Residential $300 plus $10 per acre
Non-Residential $300 plus $10 per acre
Final Plat:
Single-Family Residential $150 plus $2 per lot
Multi-Family Residential $150
Non-Residential $150
Development Plat:
Single-Family Residential $150 plus $2 per lot
Multi-Family Residential $150
Non-Residential. $150
Replat:
Single-Family Residential $200 plus $2 per affected lot
Multi-Family Residential $200
Non-Residential $200
Amended Plat: $150
Plat Vacation: $100 plus County fees
Minor Plat: $150
Plat Filing (i.e., at the County): $50 plus County fees
Infrastructure Inspection Fee: 3% of infrastructure cost
Change Street Name (after preliminary plat approval; each name): $100
Landscape/Irrigation Plan
(for required landscaping and living screens, subdivision entrance landscaping, landscaping in the right-of-way and on medians, etc.): $100
Rezoning/SUP Request
Base Fee $250
Property Owner Notification (all properties within 200 feet of request) $2.00 per property owner
Maximum Fee $1,500
Site Plans
Base Fee $200
Property Owner Notification (all properties within 200 feet of request) $2.00 per property owner
Maximum Fee $1,500
Variance Requests
Base Fee $200
Property Owner Notification (all properties within 200 feet of request) $2.00 per property owner
ZONING FILING FEES:
$250.00 for three (3) ret acres or less, plus $10.00 per each additional acres or an/ part thereof. In addition, a $2.00 fee for each property owner within 200 feet of the property requesting zoning change for notifcation by the City of Crandall. The maximum fee will be $1,500.00.
VARIANCE REQUEST:
$200.00 plus $2.00 for each property owner notified within 200 feet of the request.
PLATTING FEES J
Preliminary Plats
$200.00 plus $2.00 per lot for all subdivisions or $2.00 per acre for commercial, industrial not subdivided into lots.
Final Plats -
$250.00 plus $2.00 per lot for all subdivisions or $2.00 per acre for commercial, industrial not subdivided into
lots.
SITE PLANS - requiring Planning and Zoning and/or City Council approval other than those required to be part of a zoning application.
$200.00 for first three (3) acres, plus $10.00 for each additional acre or any part thereof. In addition, a $2.00 fee for each property owner within 200 feet of the property requesting site plan approval for notification by the City of Crandall.
OTHERS;
$250.00 for certificate of correction, plat adjustment in boundaries, building lines, or other minor features. (NOTE: Plats shall be submitted in its final format.)
FEES ABOVE COVER
one (I) initial review and one (I) revised review.
Subsequent reviews will be charged at the same rate as the first initial review allowing for one (I) revised review. All subsequent charges must be paid prior to engineering review.
EXHIBIT A